
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05766/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2019                          |On 4th April 2019             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                             MR DARKO JALAL ALI
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Schwenk (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Pickup, promulgated on 19 June 2018, following a hearing at  Manchester
    on 7 June 2018.  In the determination, the judge dismissed  the  appeal
    of the Appellant, whereupon the Appellant subsequently applied for, and
    was granted, permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and  thus  the
    matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Iraq, and was born on 12th  March
    1995.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent,  dated  18th
    April 2018, refusing his application for asylum, and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is of Iraqi  Kurdish  ethnicity,  from
    southern Kurdistan, and that he comes from the Kirkuk  area,  which  is
    outside the IKR.  He could not be returned there  directly.   He  would
    have to make his way there from Baghdad.  His claim to protection arose
    from the fact that his  brother  had  expressed  anti-Kurd  sentiments,
    speaking against Kurdish leaders and political parties and posting them
    on Facebook.  He also claimed a fear  of  Farouk  Ahmed,  the  security
    commander in  the  area.   For  the  purposes  of  this  hearing,  this
    background information is not directly relevant.

The Judge's Findings

 4. What is important for this determination, is that the Judge  found  the
    Appellant's claim to be lacking in  credibility.   However,  the  Judge
    made the following four findings that were of material consequences  to
    him.  These were that the Appellant was an Iraqi Kurd from the area  of
    Kirkuk, outside the IKR.  Second, that Kirkuk remains a contested  area
    so that there is a risk of  indiscriminate  violence  in  that  region.
    Third, ISIS is no longer a force to be reckoned  with,  but  there  are
    other conflicts undergoing there between the Iraqi government sponsored
    militia and the Kurdish forces.  Fourth, that this may render the  area
    unsafe for humanitarian protection standards (paragraph 79).

 5. Nevertheless, the judge went on to conclude that the Appellant could be
    returned back to Iraq, because he would go in  the  first  instance  to
    Baghdad, and from there,  on  the  basis  that  he  had  once  been  in
    possession of a CSID card, and that he had knowledge  of  his  father's
    presence at home, that he would then be able to make  his  way  to  the
    IKR.

 6. The appeal was dismissed on this basis.

Grounds of Application

 7. The grounds of application state that the judge's  conclusion  in  this
    regard was unsustainable.  The judge had held that it was feasible  for
    the Appellant to obtain a CSID card.  The Appellant, however, contended
    that the judge had entered into speculation in this regard.  There  was
    no evidence to suggest that the appropriate civil  registration  office
    was operational in Kirkuk.  A laissez-passer should not be counted  for
    the purposes of the CSID card.  These are  in  any  event,  confiscated
    upon arrival in Baghdad.

 8. On 25th October 2018, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had found that the  Appellant  was
    from Kirkuk but could return to the IKR.  The absence of family members
    in the IKR was an adverse factor.  It had to be considered in the light
    of the more recent country guidance case of AAH (Iraq) CG  [2018]  UKUT
    0012.  However, the presence of family nearby who  can  give  financial
    support may be sufficient.

 9. A Rule 24 response was entered on 4th December 2018.  This stated  that
    AAH, was promulgated on 26th June 2018, which  was  a  week  after  the
    judge had  promulgated  his  determination  in  the  Appellant's  case.
    Nevertheless  (at  paragraph  84)  the  judge  considered  whether  the
    Appellant would be able to establish himself within the IKR.  The judge
    found that the Appellant would be able to do so.  The judge gave weight
    to the Appellant's ability to obtain a CSID card in the UK or in  Iraq.
    Consideration   was   given   to   the   Appellant's   resilience   and
    determination.   There  was  also  the  presence  of  the   Appellant's
    immediate and wider family, as a means of support.  They lived not very
    far from the border with the  IKR.   Accordingly,  there  could  be  no
    error.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 25th January 2019, Mr Schwenk, appearing on
    behalf of the Appellant, submitted that there would be no challenge  to
    the judge's credibility findings.  The challenge  was  to  the  finding
    that the  Appellant  could  return  back  to  Iraq  and  find  internal
    relocation, following entry into  the  country  in  Baghdad,  and  then
    making his way to Kirkuk from there.  The judge had  wrongly  concluded
    (at paragraph 83) that the Appellant could obtain a CSID card to enable
    him to return.  This was because the earlier country guidance  case  of
    AA (Iraq) [2017] demonstrates why this  would  not  be  possible.   The
    relevant  provisions  here  were  paragraphs  173  to   177   of   that
    determination.  What was important to note here was that the process of
    obtaining a CSID card from Iraq was likely to be severely  hampered  if
    the person wishing to obtain such a document came from  an  area  where
    serious harm was taking place, and this was the case in  Kirkuk,  which
    was a contested area (see paragraph 177 of  AA  (Iraq)).   Second,  the
    Appellant also could not succeed under the more recent country guidance
    case of AAH [2018].  This is because head note  4,  of  that  decision,
    makes it clear that "P is unable to board  a  domestic  flight  between
    Baghdad and the IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport".  Third,
    the judge wrongly attaches weight to the fact that "the Appellant would
    have to make his way to the IKR, if he is returned on, say an emergency
    travel document or laissez-passer  issued  by  the  Iraqi  authorities"
    (paragraph 84).  This was because a laissez-passer is not a CSID  card.
    He would not be able to do precisely that  which  the  judge  suggested
    because the latest country guidance case of AAH [2018] makes  it  clear
    at paragraph 1(i) that "a laissez-passer  should  not  be  counted  for
    these purposes" because it is "confiscated upon  arrival  at  Baghdad".
    If it was confiscated upon arrival,  submitted  Mr  Schwenk,  then  the
    Appellant would not be able to travel on this basis to the IKR.

11. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that what paragraph 177 of  AA  (Iraq)
    [2015] UKUT 00544 made clear, was that

         "it is possible for an Iraqi national living in the UK to obtain  a
         CSID through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy  in  London,
         if such a person is able to produce a current or  expired  passport
         and/or the book and  page  number  for  their  family  registration
         details".

12. This the Appellant was able to do.




13. Second, the Appellant's family were only  just  over  the  border.   He
    would be able to elicit their help.  The judge was  clear  about  this,
    because he observed (at paragraph 84) that "the Appellant's  home  area
    is not very far from the border with the IKR and I  am  satisfied  that
    from within the IKR he will be able to make further  contact  with  his
    family in his home area ..." (paragraph 84).  Third, and in any  event,
    the latest  country  guidance  case  of  AAH  (Iraq)  [2018]  was  only
    promulgated a week after the judge's determination,  and  therefore  it
    could not be a material error of law, as far as that determination  was
    concerned.

14. In reply, Mr Schwenk submitted that the judge had made no  findings  as
    to whether the Appellant's family were contactable in Iraq.  This could
    not be speculated upon.  There had to  be  a  clear  finding  on  this.
    Second, there was no finding as to whether they had the money  and  the
    means to help him to approach the authorities in Kirkuk.  Third, it was
    not even clear, as was being suggested in AA (Iraq)  [2017],  that  the
    Appellant's family would be able to elicit the help  of  other  people,
    such as an attorney, to get a CSID card for him.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied, that there  is  no  error  of  law.   I  come  to  this
    conclusion despite Mr Schwenk making clear and  well-crafted  arguments
    before this Tribunal,  suggestive  of  there  being  a  case  for  real
    concerns about the ability of this Appellant  to  return  back  to  his
    country in a place of safety.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, the judge was in no doubt that "the Appellant admits that he had
    a CSID and that this is with his father at home" (paragraph 83).   This
    was a far cry from somebody not having a CSID, or claiming that it  had
    been lost or misplaced.  The judge had also stated that,

         "I find that on his own account he has been  in  contact  with  his
         family by telephone from France and there is thus no reason why the
         details  of  his  CSID  cannot  be  forwarded  to  him  in  the  UK
         electronically or by mail to the Appellant from this father".

17. In the circumstances, therefore, the judge concluded that

         "the Appellant will be at the very least able to  obtain  the  book
         volume and page number information from his CSID to be able to make
         application for replacement either from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK
         or shortly after return to Iraq" (paragraph 83).

18. Second, such a conclusion is entirely consistent with what was said  in
    AA (Iraq) [2015] UKUT, namely, that

         "we conclude it is possible for an Iraqi national living in the  UK
         to obtain a CSID through the Consular Section of the Iraqi  Embassy
         in London, if such a person is able to produce a current or expired
         passport  and/or  the  book  and  page  number  for  their   family
         registration details" (paragraph 177).

19. Third, and  importantly,  it  needs  to  be  recognised,  that  such  a
    conclusion is subject to what was also stated in AA (Iraq) [2015]  UKUT
    00544, namely, that, "at the present time the process  of  obtaining  a
    CSID from Iraq is likely to be severely hampered if the person  wishing
    to obtain the CSID is from an area when Article 15(c) serious  harm  is
    occurring" (paragraph 177).  This was repeated in this same case  later
    on in the determination as well (see paragraph  187).   However,  there
    are two observations to be  made  in  relation  to  this.   First,  the
    Appellant already has a CSID.  It is with his  father,  it  is  in  the
    home.  As the judge rightly observed, the Appellant could  contact  his
    family, with whom he is already in touch, and asked them to forward the
    essential details electronically or by mail so that he  could  approach
    the authorities in the UK (rather than in Iraq itself)  to  obtain  the
    necessary documentation, on the basis  of  the  book  volume  and  page
    number information, so as to enable him to have  the  documentation  to
    return back to Iraq.  Second, however, it is also the case, as found by
    the judge, that the Appellant's family is very close to the border.  It
    was a matter for the judge to make a finding in this  regard.   He  was
    clear that "the Appellant's home area is not very far from  the  border
    with the IKR" and that "he will be able to make  further  contact  with
    his family in his home area" so that he will be able  to  "arrange  for
    documents to be brought, sent or collected" (paragraph 84).  All things
    considered, therefore, I  come  to  the  conclusion  that  the  judge's
    determination was meticulous in the care and  attention  given  to  the
    necessary detail and there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law.
The determination shall stand.

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 3rd April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss
