
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05675/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2018                          |On 6th February 2018          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                   mr m O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Moghal (instructed by Montague Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant who is a Turkish man of Kurdish origin who had claimed asylum
    on that basis that he would be perceived as  a  PKK  sympathiser.   The
    appeal was heard at Taylor House on 13th July 2017  by  Judge  Farrelly
    and in a Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  9th  August  2017  he
    dismissed the appeal.  The grounds  assert  that  the  judge  erred  in
    failing to make findings and in failing to consider  the  risk  factors
    set out in the country guidance case of IK (Returnees - Records -  IFA)
    Turkey CG [2004] UKAIT 00312 and as further set out in the case  of  IA
    and Ors. (Risk - Guidelines - Separatist) Turkey CG [2003] UKAIT 00034.



 2. Mr Kotas accepts that he is  in  some  difficulties  in  defending  the
    Decision and Reasons on the basis that it is  so  very  brief.   It  is
    indeed brief.  The Decision and Reasons runs to essentially four  pages
    and the consideration and findings are just four paragraphs  the  first
    paragraph of which does not contain findings; in fact it just sets  out
    what has to be established.  There are no findings on  the  Appellant's
    claim itself; whether what he has claimed is credible or not  credible.
    Even if it could be said that the judge considered  the  appeal  taking
    the case at its highest there is still no  engagement  whatsoever  with
    the country guidance even though it is referred  to  at  paragraph  15.
    There is no consideration of this Appellant's  possible  risk  factors.
    There is no assessment of risk on the basis of his background and  what
    he says happened.  Therefore I  find  the  Decision  and  Reasons  does
    contain material errors of  law  on  the  basis  of  an  inadequacy  of
    reasoning and a failure to engage with country guidance.

 3. For that reason the decision has to be set aside in its  entirety.   It
    is appropriate, as no findings are preserved, for it to be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing before a different  Judge.
    The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to that extent.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal for a full rehearing on all issues.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date 2nd February 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

