
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05188/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 1 March 2018                     |On: 23 March 2018                    |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                    [D L]
                        anonymity direction NOT made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P Bonavero, counsel (instructed by Kilby Jones
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Albania, born on [ ] 1990.  She  appeals
    with permission against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    who dismissed her appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights grounds, in a decision promulgated on 24 July 2017.

 2. In granting permission to appeal, Upper Tribunal Judge Allen found that
    it was arguable, as contended in  the  grounds,  that  the  credibility
    findings are flawed bearing  in  mind  the  minimal  reference  to  the
    relevant country guidance.

 3. Mr Bonavero, who did not appear for the appellant before the First-tier
    Tribunal, adopted the grounds of appeal.

 4. The Judge made an erroneous approach to the plausibility  findings.  He
    made no reference to the country guidance cases and  in  particular  TD
    and AD (Trafficked Women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092. Nor did he have  regard
    to the decision in AM and BM (Trafficked Women) Albania CG [2010]  UKUT
    80 or any of the "objective evidence."

 5. The credibility findings are in the main founded upon an assessment  of
    the plausibility of the appellant's account. The Judge found  that  the
    account did not ring true at [28]. Mr Bonavero submitted that this  was
    not a case in which any significant discrepancies were identified.  The
    appellant had given a consistent account.

 6. At [29] he found that her account of having remained with the  man  she
    met in a cafeteria who forced her into prostitution was  not  true  and
    was "frankly incredible." It was wholly  inconsistent  that  she  would
    have been left alone in a pharmacy, having been  subjected  to  heinous
    mistreatment. She could have made her  escape  relatively  easily.  The
    Judge  stated  that  this  is  just  not  credible  and  represents   a
    remarkable, casual approach by her enslavers. It  just  does  not  ring
    true - even for Albanian sex traffickers [31].

 7. Mr Bonavera submitted that the appellant would be at risk if she was  a
    woman trafficked for the purpose of sexual exploitation,  as  noted  by
    the Judge at [24]. It is highly significant  that  there  had  been  no
    reference at all to the country guidance cases  albeit  that  they  had
    been referred to the Judge as he noted at [4]. He was accordingly aware
    of the country guidance cases.

 8. In particular, he submitted that  the  Judge  had  not  looked  at  the
    plausibility of the appellant's  account  through  the  lens  of  these
    country guidance cases.

 9. Mr Bonavero referred to paragraphs 10-13 of the grounds which relied on
    decisions such as Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 at [27]. The  Court  of
    Appeal held that  cases  must  be  looked  at  through  the  spectacles
    provided by the information that the Judge has about conditions in  the
    country in question. In HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ  1037,  Lord  Justice
    Neuberger, as he then was, warned at [28] against the danger of relying
    on  plausibility  findings  as  a  determinative  factor  in  assessing
    credibility. The ingredients of the story and the story as a whole have
    to be  considered  against  the  available  country  evidence  and  the
    reliable expert evidence and other familiar factors such as consistency
    in what the appellant has said before and with other factual  evidence,
    (where there is any).

10. Mr Bramble accepted in respect of paragraph 29 and 30  that  the  Judge
    had not had regard to the country guidance in TD and  AD.  The  failure
    however was not material because of the 'pertinent' findings  at  [31].
    This was particularly with regard to evasive answers that the appellant
    gave when confronted with probing questions and her knowledge as to the
    destination when her sister arranged for her departure.  This  was  not
    related to the country guidance cases. These were "outside TD's remit."
    These were clear credibility issues which went  to  the  heart  of  her
    claim. These are "compartmentalised" findings which cannot be  said  to
    be infected by any erroneous approach.

11. In reply Mr Bonavero submitted that it  cannot  be  argued  that  these
    paragraphs would 'save the decision'. If they were the only credibility
    findings made it might be arguable that  there  was  a  sufficiency  of
    reason. However  there  are  significant  problems  with  each  of  the
    paragraphs relied on. With regard to [33] the Judge  erred  in  placing
    weight on the respondent's references to Home Office records  referring
    to the appellant's husband when he was encountered in the UK  in  2014.
    As noted in the grounds, those records are only  briefly  mentioned  in
    the NRM decision and had not been served upon either the  appellant  or
    the Tribunal. The appellant  had  no  way  of  assessing  the  apparent
    accuracy or veracity  of  those  records  and  had  no  opportunity  to
    challenge it in any meaningful way.

12. Mr Bonavero  submitted  that  this  constituted  an  assertion  by  the
    respondent without  any  evidence  substantiating  the  allegation.  He
    submitted that the Judge also made unsubstantiated  references  to  the
    appellant's demeanour, beginning at [28]. The alleged  evasive  answers
    were not specified. If that were enough, this should have been properly
    made out.

13. Nor was there any substantiation by any proper reasons for his  finding
    at [31] that the appellant's claim of being left in a  pharmacy  alone,
    did not ring true.  This paid no  regard  to  the  context  as  to  how
    Albanian slavery works.

14. Mr Bonavero also submitted that the Judge failed properly  to  consider
    medical evidence. At [28] he noted that the appellant had complained of
    stress and had adduced some evidence of headaches. He was not convinced
    as to how this medical condition related to the  circumstances  of  her
    account, nor of the effect this had on her evidence.

15. That did not properly take into account very significant evidence  that
    was produced, namely the general practitioner's letter  dated  20  June
    2017 which noted that the appellant is  a  registered  patient  at  the
    practice. She has been a frequent attender at the practice, complaining
    of severe headaches. She was referred to a neurologist who thought  the
    headaches sounded like chronic headaches, possibly linked with  a  head
    injury six years ago in Albania. She had a CT scan of the brain and  it
    came back  normal.  She  was  diagnosed  with  chronic  daily  headache
    syndrome.

16. She also complained  of  low  mood,  anxiety,  sleep  difficulties  and
    feeling hopeless about her future, worrying about her safety  and  that
    of her children and is always in  a  hypervigilant  state.  She  is  on
    sertraline anti depressants and anxiety treatment and takes 50mg daily.
    She was also referred to a mental health team for further help with her
    management. She will continue to have regular monitoring of her  mental
    health and medication with the practice.

17. Mr Bonavera submitted that the fact that the appellant had low moods is
    explicable on the basis of what happened to her. The link was clear and
    obvious. He submitted that the failure to have  proper  regard  to  her
    mental state affected the Judge's 'points regarding her credibility'.

18. Mr Bramble in further reply submitted that the  GP  letter  was  not  a
    psychiatric report. The Judge had considered the claim of vulnerability
    and was mindful of her assertions.

    Assessment

19. It is accepted that the Judge made no reference in his findings to  the
    relevant country guidance cases to which I have referred.  It  is  also
    accepted that he did  not  approach  the  appellant's  account  of  her
    credibility through the lens provided  by  the  information  concerning
    conditions in Albania.

20. The country guidance evidence in TD and AD informed the approach to  be
    taken of the appellant's account of the  traffickers'  modus  operandi.
    This was consistent with that guidance, namely,  that  some  women  are
    lured to leave Albania with false promises of  relationships  or  work.
    Her account of having been raped and threatened by her  traffickers  is
    also consistent with AM and BM [148].

21. I have also had regard to the submissions regarding grounds 2 and 3. It
    is evident that the Judge placed weight on the respondent's  references
    to Home  Office  records.  However  those  records  were  only  briefly
    mentioned in the NRM decision but had not been served on the  appellant
    or the Tribunal. The appellant had thus  not  had  the  opportunity  of
    assessing those records or  challenging  them  in  any  way.  That  was
    procedurally unfair in the circumstances.

22. I also find that there is force in Mr Bonavera's  submission  that  the
    appellant was not merely suffering from headaches but had complained to
    her GP who reduced this to a report that she  had  low  mood,  anxiety,
    sleep difficulties and the like. Significantly, she was also  on  anti-
    depressants and anxiety treatment and that she  had  been  referred  to
    mental health services for further support.

23. That report should have  been  taken  into  account  in  assessing  the
    appellant's account as a whole, which included the manner in which  she
    gave her evidence. The Judge did not  therefore  properly  substantiate
    the findings regarding the appellant's demeanour.

24. In the circumstances  I  find  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the  making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  I
    accordingly set it aside.

25. The parties agreed that should the decision be  set  aside  the  matter
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  decision  to
    be made.

26. I have had  regard  to  the  President's  Practice  Statement  in  this
    respect. I am satisfied that the  effect  of  the  error  has  been  to
    deprive the appellant of a fair and proper opportunity for her case  to
    be properly put and considered by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Further,
    there will be  a  significant  amount  of  evidence  and  fact  finding
    involved.

27. I accordingly agree that the appeal should  be  remitted  for  a  fresh
    decision to be made.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. I set aside the decision.

    The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Stoke on Trent) for  a
    fresh determination to be made by another Judge.

    Anonymity direction not made.




    Signed   Date 20 March 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer
