
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05571/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2018                   |On 24 October 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     s k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms R Kotak of Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen  of  Pakistan  born  in  February  1984
    making him 34 years of age.  He appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge
    Wilsher (the judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on
    13th July 2018.

 2. The Appellant arrived in the UK as a student in January 2010.   He  was
    subsequently granted leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-Study)  Migrant
    until 2014.  A subsequent application to extend his leave on that basis
    was refused.  The Appellant then made an asylum claim which was refused
    on 15th April 2018.

 3. The claim for international protection was  based  on  risks  that  the
    Appellant claimed to face  from  militia  groups  in  Pakistan  due  to
    accusations of blasphemy and apostasy, which accusations had originated
    from family members, in particular his step-uncle, who objected to  the
    Appellant's perceived liberal western attitudes.

 4. The appeal was heard on 31st May 2018 and the judge heard evidence from
    the  Appellant  and  the  Appellant's  sister.   The  judge  found  the
    Appellant and his witness to be "highly credible witnesses".  The judge
    therefore accepted that the risk to the  Appellant  emanated  from  his
    step-uncle who in November 2011 (when the  Appellant  was  in  the  UK)
    visited the Appellant's family home armed with a gun, demanding to  see
    the Appellant.  The Appellant's sister who was living in  the  UK,  was
    visiting at the time  and  witnessed  what  occurred.   The  step-uncle
    demanded that the Appellant be produced and  a  gun  was  fired  and  a
    visiting relative was shot.

 5. In early 2012 the Appellant's father advised him that he had received a
    letter from a militant group wanting to investigate  an  allegation  of
    blasphemy.  The Appellant returned home and took place in a jirga  with
    village elders.  The Appellant, following the jirga made  a  report  to
    the police who stated they could not guarantee his safety  because  the
    Taliban were involved.

 6. After five  weeks  the  Appellant  returned  to  the  UK.   His  father
    continued to receive threatening  letters  left  or  delivered  to  the
    family  home.   His  father  stopped  the  Appellant's  siblings   from
    attending  college  because  of  the  risk.   In  November   2013   the
    Appellant's father was stopped by men  in  the  street  and  threatened
    because he had not delivered his son up to  meet  the  militants.   The
    family moved to a different home in Pakistan but the threats continued.
     The family then moved back to their initial home.

 7. The Appellant's sister returned to Pakistan in December  2017  and  was
    given copies of letters from the militants.   The  originals  had  been
    lodged with the police.

 8. The above was  accepted  by  the  judge  who  also  accepted  that  the
    Appellant feared to return to his home area because of the demand  that
    he appear before the militants to prove that he had not  abandoned  his
    faith.

 9. The judge found that a fatwa had been issued against the Appellant  and
    at paragraph 7 made a finding that he was "quite satisfied  that  there
    is a real risk the Appellant may be killed if he returned to  his  home
    area".

10. The judge  felt  there  was  an  insufficiency  of  protection  in  the
    Appellant's home area which is Peshawar.

11. The judge found that there was a  risk  that  the  Appellant  would  be
    attacked if he  returned  to  his  home  area  for  religious/political
    reasons.  He had displayed liberal tendencies towards some other faiths
    such as Christians, Sikhs and Hindus, and had been wrongly labelled  an
    apostate.  The judge therefore found that the Appellant had  an  actual
    liberal  political/religious  opinion  and  an  imputed  political   or
    religious opinion.

12. The judge did not however allow the appeal because it  was  found  that
    the Appellant had a reasonable internal relocation option to an area of
    Pakistan away from his  home  area.   The  judge  found  that  the  two
    militant groups said to  have  sent  the  threatening  letters  to  the
    Appellant's family, the TKN and the JSTS were linked to the  TTP.   The
    judge found that there would be no risk that  the  Appellant  would  be
    attacked or assassinated outside his home area, noting that the  expert
    report relied on by the Appellant  indicated  that  the  TTP  had  only
    carried out one targeted attack which was in 2014 which was  against  a
    military officer.  The judge found that the only  incidents  of  actual
    violence towards the Appellant's family took place in  2011  and  2013,
    and he was of modest interest to the groups concerned.  The judge found
    that there was no real risk that the TTP had either  the  incentive  or
    the means to seek the Appellant out.  There was no real risk  that  the
    Appellant would be targeted in any major city away from his home area.

13. The appeal was therefore dismissed on refugee, humanitarian protection,
    and human rights grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

14. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    In brief summary it was submitted that  the  judge  had  erred  in  his
    consideration of whether the Appellant could internally relocate.

15. It was argued that the judge had failed to take into  account  material
    evidence when considering the level of risk that  the  Appellant  would
    face if he relocated.  The judge had  found  the  Appellant  to  be  of
    moderate interest, but had erred by failing to consider the  continuous
    nature of the threats and  violence  that  the  Appellant  faced.   The
    evidence which was accepted, was that threatening letters continued  to
    be received by the Appellant's family, even when  they  moved  address,
    and it was submitted that the last letter received was in 2018.

16. It was submitted that the judge had erred by misinterpreting the expert
    evidence that being the report prepared by Dr Giustozzi dated 28th  May
    2018.  The judge had found that the TTP  had  only  made  one  targeted
    attack in Islamabad, but had not referred to other  evidence  contained
    within the report, which  confirms  that  the  TTP  has  27,000  active
    members, and had carried out 79 targeted killings in 2015.  The  expert
    had given the opinion that there would be no sufficiency of  protection
    for the Appellant, and in the concluding paragraph had found that  "his
    only chance of evading the TTP would be to  relocate  regularly  around
    Pakistan, but this would be very disruptive of his working  and  social
    life and would not completely  protect  him  from  the  TTP".   It  was
    submitted that the judge had not taken this evidence into account.

17. In addition it was submitted that the judge had  erred  by  failing  to
    take into account that the Appellant's family  members  would  be  very
    motivated to find the Appellant if he returned, and  it  could  not  be
    said that the Appellant would only  be  of  modest  interest  to  those
    family members.

18. The Appellant would need to access treatment for  his  diabetes  if  he
    returned to Pakistan and it was submitted that the TTP would be able to
    locate him through the use of medical services.  It was submitted  that
    the judge had erred in finding at paragraph 8 that  the  Appellant  had
    not provided background evidence as  to  how  his  uncle  could  access
    medical data.  The Appellant's point was that it would be the TTP,  not
    his uncle who would be trying to access the medical data.

Permission to Appeal

19. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer  of  the  FtT  in  the
    following terms;

         "3.  I am satisfied that it is arguable  that  the  judge  did  not
             adequately  assess  the  evidence   regarding   the   internal
             relocation option.  All grounds may be argued."

20. Directions were issued that there should be an oral hearing before  the
    Upper Tribunal to ascertain whether the FtT had erred in law such  that
    the decision should be set aside.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

21. At the commencement of the hearing Ms Pal confirmed that the Respondent
    had not lodged a response pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules, but  would  contend  that  the  judge  had  not
    materially erred in law.

22. I heard oral submissions from Ms Kotak who relied and expanded upon the
    grounds contained within the application for permission to appeal.

23. Ms Pal in making oral submissions contended that  the  judge  had  made
    adequate findings, having considered the expert  report,  and  provided
    sustainable reasons for those findings.

24. Ms Kotak submitted that the decision of the FtT should be set aside and
    initially suggested that there should be a remittal  to  the  FtT.   On
    reflection Ms Kotak submitted that that would not be  appropriate,  and
    the appropriate course of action would be for  the  Upper  Tribunal  to
    remake the decision based upon the evidence that was  before  the  FtT.
    There would be no need for a further hearing.  Ms Pal agreed, that if a
    material error of law was found, the decision could be  remade  without
    the need for a further hearing.

25. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

26. There has been no challenge to the credibility  findings  made  by  the
    judge and those findings stand.  There has been  no  challenge  to  the
    conclusion that the Appellant would be at risk  in  his  home  area  as
    there would be no sufficiency of protection for him, and those findings
    stand.

27. The issue that I have to decide is whether the judge erred  in  law  in
    finding that there would be a reasonable internal relocation option for
    the Appellant.

28. It is evident that the FtT decision has been prepared with care.  I  am
    however persuaded that the judge erred in law materially,  in  relation
    to consideration of the expert report, as contended in the grounds upon
    which permission to appeal was granted.

29. I find that the judge misinterpreted the expert  report,  and  did  not
    analyse and take into account opinions given by the  expert  indicating
    that the Appellant would be at risk even if he relocated.  I also  find
    that the judge erred in concluding  that  the  Appellant  would  be  of
    moderate interest to the TTP, without considering the high interest  of
    his step-uncle, who had demonstrated that he would use violence towards
    the Appellant, and as accepted by the FtT, had involved the militia  in
    this matter.

30. I therefore set aside the decision of the FtT in relation  to  internal
    relocation and will now remake that decision.

31. I place significant weight upon the expert report.  At paragraph 4  the
    expert  concludes  that  there  were  two  organisations  which  issued
    threatening letters, I will refer to them  as  TKN  and  JST.   TKN  is
    described as a radical Barelvi group and JST is an unknown group, which
    should be presumed to be  one  of  about  300  radical  Islamic  groups
    operating in Pakistan.

32. At paragraph 5 the expert gives  the  opinion  that  these  groups  are
    likely  to  have  close  relations  with  larger  groups  endowed  with
    extensive military structures, the main such group being the TTP.   The
    FtT at paragraph 9 accepted to the lower standard of proof that TKN and
    JST were linked to the TTP.

33. The expert at paragraph 6 confirms that the TTP carried out 79 targeted
    killings in 2015 and operates in a way similar to that  of  the  Afghan
    Taliban,  once  two  or  three  warnings  have  been  issued,  and  the
    threatened  individual  fails  to  respond,  he  is  considered  to  be
    sentenced.  The Appellant was warned directly  or  indirectly  multiple
    times, and therefore in the expert's view he  would  be  considered  as
    sentenced.

34. At paragraph 9 the expert records that several  hundred  tribal  elders
    had been executed by the TTP because of a refusal to  collaborate  with
    that  organisation  or  for  collaborating  with  the  government.   At
    paragraph 10 the Peshawar school attack in 2014  is  described  as  the
    most indiscriminate attack by the TTP.

35. At paragraph 11 the expert gives the opinion that it is plausible  that
    the Appellant who advertised liberal, social and religious views  could
    be reported to the TTP, and the TTP has a record  of  targeting  social
    activists of various types.  The expert considers the police  force  in
    Pakistan commencing at paragraph 12 of his report.  I take into account
    that AW (sufficiency protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 (IAC)  decided
    that there was a systemic sufficiency of State protection in  Pakistan,
    but the particular circumstances of an individual must  be  taken  into
    account.  Dr Giustozzi at paragraph 12  emphatically  states  that  the
    Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  rely  on  Pakistan's  police   for
    protection, due to a lack of capacity and lack of will.   Dr  Giustozzi
    comments that the police are rarely seen to confront terrorist groups.

36. At paragraph  17  of  the  expert  report  comment  is  made  that  law
    enforcement in Pakistan is strongest in Islamabad, "but it  is  obvious
    that the TTP has infiltrated Islamabad and is able to operate there, as
    it carried out a few  attacks.   Terrorist  attacks  in  Islamabad  are
    relatively frequent".  Later in the paragraph Dr Giustozzi states  that
    the main source of terrorist attacks in Islamabad is the TTP and  lists
    a number of incidents in 2014 in which the TTP were involved.

37. The opinion is given that if the Appellant's case has been referred  to
    the TTP, "he might be at risk in almost every urban area of  Pakistan".
    The opinion is also given in paragraph 17 that as the Appellant's step-
    uncle has been a source of information for the radical groups about the
    Appellant, there would be a risk that he would be tracked down  through
    his family.

38. It is in paragraph 19 of the expert report that it is stated  that  the
    only known plan to  assassinate  an  individual  in  Islamabad  was  in
    November 2014, although in the same paragraph it is stated that  it  is
    obvious the TTP has infiltrated Islamabad and is able to operate there,
    and so far TTP attacks in Islamabad have been high profile operations.

39. At paragraph 20 the expert gives the opinion that the TTP would be able
    to operate virtually anywhere in  Pakistan  and  in  paragraph  24  the
    expert gives his concluding opinion which is that there is little doubt
    that the Appellant has the typical profile of a TTP target.   The  type
    of threats made to the  Appellant  and  his  family  are  described  as
    standard practice for the radical groups of  Pakistan.   The  Pakistani
    authorities do not normally provide  close  protection  to  individuals
    with the Appellant's profile.  The Appellant's only chance  of  evading
    the TTP would be to relocate regularly around Pakistan but  this  would
    not completely protect him.

40. I find having placed significant weight upon what I consider  to  be  a
    well-balanced expert report, that the report  proves  to  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that the Appellant would  remain  at  risk  if  he
    returned to Pakistan and relocated to an area away from his home  area.
    I do not find that he  would  have  a  reasonable  internal  relocation
    option and do not find that he would have a sufficiency of  protection.
    I take into account the concluding paragraph of the report in which the
    expert describes the Appellant's only chance of evading the  TTP  would
    be to relocate regularly around Pakistan, but take the view  that  this
    would not be reasonable, as it suggests that the Appellant would  never
    be able to settle in one place and would have to continually move  from
    one area to another.  In addition the expert  gives  the  opinion  that
    even if the  Appellant  regularly  moved,  this  would  not  completely
    protect him.

41. For the reasons given above, I find that  as  there  is  no  reasonable
    internal relocation option, there is a reasonable degree of  likelihood
    that the Appellant would be at risk if returned to  Pakistan,  and  his
    appeal must therefore be allowed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds and on  human  rights  grounds  with
reference to Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

I have decided to make an anonymity  direction  because  the  Appellant  has
made a claim for international protection.  Unless and until a  Tribunal  or
court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of
these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member
of his family.   Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 17th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I make no fee award.  The appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal that was not before the initial  decision  maker.



Signed                              Date: 17th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


