
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05255/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th February 2020                         |On 27th April 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    A k s
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Bassi, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Aujla promulgated on 12 December 2019 in which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim dated 19 July 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan who arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom in September 2016 and claimed asylum on 3 January 2017.  He had
    previously travelled through Bulgaria, Hungary and  Italy  and  claimed
    asylum in each.  The Appellant had previously claimed to be a minor but
    this was not accepted.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Applicant's
    claim was not credible because of a lack of detail and  consistency  in
    his account and because his credibility was damaged  by  section  8  of
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  as  his
    asylum claim was made only after he had been arrested for ABH  and  had
    made claims  for  the  asylum  in  three  other  safe  countries.   The
    Respondent concluded that there was no risk on return for the Appellant
    and in any event there would be a sufficiency of protection for him  on
    return and the option of internal relocation.   The  Appellant  had  no
    established family life in the United Kingdom and he did not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraph 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules,  nor  were
    there any exceptional circumstances to warrant  a  grant  of  leave  to
    remain.  The Appellant's medical condition was acknowledged but did not
    meet the high threshold for a grant of leave to remain on  that  basis,
    given that treatment would be available on return and the Appellant had
    family in Kabul.

 4. Judge Aujla dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12
    December 2019 on all grounds, the detailed reasons for which  I  return
    to below.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on four  grounds.   First,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal failed to consider  whether  the  Appellant  was  in  need  of
    humanitarian  protection  under  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into
    account evidence of the Appellant's poor mental health.  Thirdly,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its  credibility  assessment  of  the
    Appellant and in particular relied on speculation.  Finally,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in continuing to apply AS  (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) despite recognising  that
    the Court of Appeal had allowed an appeal  against  this  decision  and
    remitted the matter to the Upper Tribunal for rehearing.

 6. At the oral hearing, it was accepted on behalf of the  Respondent  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had materially  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    determine the appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  and  also  in
    adopting an inconsistent approach to whether the Appellant was  or  was
    not a vulnerable witness such that the Joint Presidential Guidance Note
    No  2  of  2010:  'Child,  vulnerable  adult  and  sensitive  appellant
    guidance' (the "Joint Presidential Guidance") should or should  not  be
    applied.  Further, it was accepted that the First-tier Tribunal Judge's
    continued reliance on AS (Safety of Kabul) was an error of law, but not
    a material one because on the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal,
    there was no risk on return to the Appellant's home area.

 7. In light of this, the parties were in agreement that  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and the matter remitted  or
    relisted for a de novo hearing, at which updated  medical  evidence  is
    likely to be needed for the Appellant.

Findings and reasons

 1. The  Respondent's  acceptance  of  errors  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision was entirely appropriate and correct in  this  case
    and I therefore deal only relatively  briefly  with  the  decision  and
    grounds of appeal.

 2. First, it is clear  that  the  Appellant  appealed  on  all  protection
    grounds, including asylum, humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
    grounds and the First-tier Tribunal makes specific reference to this in
    paragraph 7 of the decision and  refers,  at  least  in  part,  to  the
    requirements for a grant of humanitarian protection  in  paragraphs  14
    and 15 of the decision.  However, there are no findings nor any express
    consideration of whether the  Appellant  is  in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection anywhere else in the decision and only a simple statement as
    a conclusion  that  the  Appellant  is  not  in  need  of  humanitarian
    protection in paragraph 45.  No reasons  at  all  are  given  for  this
    conclusion.  I find that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  simply  failed  to
    determine this element of the Appellant's appeal and/or gave no reasons
    for dismissing the appeal on this basis, which amounts to a clear error
    of law.

 3. Secondly, in relation to the Appellant's mental health and  whether  he
    was a vulnerable witness, the First-tier Tribunal took an  inconsistent
    approach to this.  In paragraph 10 the decision  records  that  at  the
    oral hearing, the Judge agreed to treat the Appellant as  a  vulnerable
    witness for the purpose of  the  hearing  on  the  basis  of  evidence,
    primarily from the Appellant's GP,  that  he  was  under  pressure  and
    suffering from anxiety.  However, at paragraph  32,  the  Judge  stated
    that although he had agreed to treat the Appellant as vulnerable at the
    hearing, with hindsight, the decision was not justified as there was  a
    lack of relevant evidence about his  mental  health.   There  was  some
    discussion about the limited nature of the evidence before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, that  the  Appellant  was  suffering  from  anxiety  and
    depression and had a diagnosis of anxiety  disorder  and  acute  stress
    disorder,  but  no  comprehensive  analysis  or  medical  report  by  a
    psychiatrist  or  psychologist.   Whilst  that  may,  with  appropriate
    reasons, have led to a rational  conclusion  that  applying  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance, the relatively recent diagnosis did  not  affect
    the assessment of the Appellant's earlier evidence; what the First-tier
    Tribunal did was simply dismiss the evidence in its entirety  and  then
    not apply the Joint Presidential Guidance at all, only saying  that  it
    would not be unexpected that a person  be  worried,  anxious  and  feel
    under stress in the context of an appeal against a refusal  of  asylum.
    That ignores  the  albeit  limited  medical  evidence  entirely,  which
    arguably still suggests  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  should  be
    followed (particularly in the context that it was also not  in  dispute
    that the Appellant was a minor at the time of  the  claimed  events  in
    Afghanistan) and is inconsistent with  the  approach  at  the  hearing,
    without full reasons being given for the change.   This  is  a  further
    error of law in the approach of the First-tier Tribunal  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance and assessment of the Appellant's credibility.

 4. Thirdly, in paragraph 30 of  the  decision,  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    having immediately above stated that in particular the  latest  country
    guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul) has been  considered  and  taken  into
    account; stated that "... until any fresh guidance  is  issued  by  the
    Upper Tribunal, the  guidance  mentioned  above  must  in  my  view  be
    followed and that is precisely what I have done. ...".  That amounts to
    a clear error of law.  As recognised by the First-tier Tribunal  Judge,
    the decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) was the subject  of  a  successful
    appeal to  the  Court  of  Appeal  and  had  been  remitted  for  fresh
    determination before the Upper Tribunal.  In these  circumstances,  the
    decision does not stand as country guidance and the First-tier Tribunal
    should not have followed it, let alone stated that it was bound  to  do
    so.

 5. However, there is no material error of law in the First-tier Tribunal's
    approach to AS (Safety of Kabul) given the finding that  the  Appellant
    would not be at risk in his home area  and  could  return  there,  such
    that, as confirmed in paragraph 40, there  was  no  need  to  make  any
    findings on internal relocation.  In  these  circumstances,  there  was
    not, on the facts of this case, any actual application of AS (Safety of
    Kabul).  The point may be relevant when the appeal is considered afresh
    if the Appellant is found to be at risk in his home area for asylum and
    humanitarian protection reasons.

 6. For these reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
    making of material errors of law and as such it  is  necessary  to  set
    aside the decision.  It is not necessary to make any  further  findings
    on the remaining ground of appeal.  Given that the errors of law  which
    have  been  found  included  matters  affecting   the   assessment   of
    credibility which could infect  all  of  the  findings,  there  are  no
    findings which can or should be preserved  and  the  appeal  should  be
    reheard de novo in the First-tier Tribunal, given the extensive  nature
    of the further facts to be found.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) to be heard de novo by any Judge except Judge Aujla.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed   [pic]         Date         25th March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


