
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05052/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2018                           |On 10 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     jg
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Azmi, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This appeal comes back before the Upper  Tribunal  ("UT")  following  a
    hearing before Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kebede  on  13  September  2018,
    whereby she found an error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT"), which itself allowed the appellant's appeal against a
    decision to refuse a protection claim.

 2. The further background to the appeal and the context  of  my  re-making
    the decision is best informed by my quoting in full from Judge Kebede's
    decision as follows:

         "1.  This is an appeal by the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             allowing JG's appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  to
             refuse his asylum and human rights claim.


         2.   For the purposes of this decision, I shall hereafter refer  to
             the Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  JG  as  the
             appellant, reflecting their positions  as  they  were  in  the
             appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.


         3.   The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran born on 24  March
             1994.  He claims to have left Iran on 18 September 2015 and to
             have entered the UK on 16 November 2016.  He claimed asylum on
             17 November 2016.  His asylum claim  was  refused  on  17  May
             2017.  He appealed against that decision and  his  appeal  was
             heard in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  16  November  2017  and
             allowed in a decision promulgated on 7 December 2017.


         4.   The basis of the appellant's claim is as  follows.   He  is  a
             national of Iran, the son of a  Hazara,  Afghan,  father  from
             Baghlan Afghanistan who died when he was ten years of age  and
             an Iranian mother.  He is an  Ismaeli  and  his  mother  is  a
             Zoerastrian.  He was beaten up after asking his mosque, at his
             mother's request, to lower the volume as the noise  upset  her
             due to her illness and depression.   He  was  arrested  on  29
             August 2015 and taken to the  Seppah  building  and  held  for
             around ten days/two weeks, during which time he was told  that
             there was a hefty case against him and he would be executed if
             he went to court unless he agreed  to  go  to  Syria  for  six
             months.  He agreed to do that  and  was  given  a  letter  for
             recruitment and told that he had one week before going  there.
             He fled the country.  If he returned to Iran the police  would
             kill him.  He would be hanged.  The appellant also claimed  to
             be stateless.


         5.   In refusing the appellant's application,  the  respondent  did
             not accept the appellant's account of being  beaten,  arrested
             and detained and volunteering to go to Syria.  The  respondent
             considered that the appellant met  the  relevant  criteria  to
             apply for and be granted Iranian citizenship,  given  that  he
             was born in Iran, that he lived there for 21 years from  birth
             and for more than a year after the age of 18, and  given  that
             his mother had  an  Iranian  passport.   The  respondent  also
             considered that the appellant met the relevant criteria to  be
             granted Afghan citizenship as the son of an  Afghan  national.
             The respondent did not, therefore, accept that  the  appellant
             was stateless.  Neither was it accepted that he was Ismaeli or
             that he had been persecuted on account of  his  religion.   It
             was not accepted that the appellant was at any risk on  return
             and  it  was  not  accepted  that  his  removal  to  Iran   or
             Afghanistan would breach his human rights.


         6.   The appellant appealed against that decision.  His appeal  was
             heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Birk who found him to be  a
             credible witness as to the core elements of  his  claim.   The
             judge accepted that the appellant's account of  his  complaint
             to the mosque and his arrest and detention.  She found that he
             would be at risk on return to Iran as a result of his  illegal
             escape from the conditions imposed upon him.   The  judge  did
             not accept that the appellant would be able  to  establish  an
             entitlement to Afghan nationality.  The  judge  accepted  that
             the appellant was Ismaeli but  did  not  accept  that  he  was
             persecuted or would be persecuted  because  of  his  religion.
             She found that he was at risk on return  due  to  his  imputed
             political opinion  and  that  his  removal  would  breach  his
             Article 2 and 3 rights.  She allowed the appeal on asylum  and
             human rights grounds.


         7.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought  by  the
             respondent to the grounds that the judge had failed  to  apply
             relevant caselaw and engage with the reported guidance  in  MW
             (Nationality; Art 4 QD, duty to substantiate)  Eritrea  [2016]
             UKUT 00453 in assessing the appellant's entitlement to  Afghan
             nationality, which in turn impacted upon her findings on  risk
             on return.


         8.   Permission to appeal was granted in the First-tier Tribunal on
             5 January 2018, on the  basis  that  the  judge  had  arguably
             failed to consider the guidance in MA (Ethiopia)  v  Secretary
             of State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289.


         9.   At the hearing before me both parties made submissions.


         10.  Mrs Aboni relied on the  grounds  of  appeal.   She  submitted
             that, whilst there was no challenge to  the  judge's  findings
             that the appellant was at risk on return to  Iran,  the  judge
             had failed properly to resolve the matter of  the  appellant's
             ability to obtain Afghan nationality.  The judge had failed to
             apply the guidance in MW (Eritrea) and had erred by failing to
             consider the lack of  evidence  of  any  steps  taken  by  the
             appellant to approach the  Afghan  authorities  in  regard  to
             obtaining Afghan citizenship and failing to consider  that  he
             could then safely return to Afghanistan.   Mr  Azmi  submitted
             that the appellant had provided evidence of  an  inability  to
             obtain Afghan citizenship, in an expert report, and the  judge
             had made findings  on  that  evidence.   The  judge  had  been
             entitled to conclude that that it was unlikely  the  appellant
             would be able to establish that he was an Afghan national.


         11.  I advise the parties that in my view the judge had  erred  in-
             law by  failing  to  consider  the  relevant  guidance  in  MW
             (Eritrea) and MA (Ethiopia)  in  considering  the  appellant's
             ability to  obtain  Afghan  citizenship.   She  had  therefore
             failed to provide full and proper reasons for  concluding,  as
             she did at [24], that it was unlikely that the appellant would
             be able  to  establish  that  he  could  become  a  member  of
             Afghanistan.


         12.  Accordingly I set aside the judge's decision in  that  matter.
             Her finding on risk on return to Iran are to be preserved.


         13.  The case will be listed for a resumed  hearing  in  the  Upper
             Tribunal for consideration of the questions of the appellant's
             ability to obtain Afghan nationality and  to  return,  without
             risk to that country.


         Anonymity


         The First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity order and I maintain that
         order.


         Directions


         Any further evidence relied upon by the appellant in regard to  the
         matter of Afghan nationality and risk on return to  Afghanistan  is
         to be filed with this Tribunal and served on  the  opposing  party,
         not less than 14 days before the date of  the  resumed  hearing  in
         compliance with  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
         Tribunal) Rules 2008."


 3. Thus, one can see that the issue to be  determined  is  the  extent  to
    which the appellant is entitled to the surrogate protection of  the  UK
    if it is the case that he is entitled to citizenship of Afghanistan and
    where no protection claim arises in respect of Afghanistan.

 4. Before me there was a supplementary bundle of documents  consisting  of
    26 pages which, to  summarise,  deal  with  the  efforts  made  by  the
    appellant and his solicitors  to  secure  confirmation  by  the  Afghan
    authorities of his entitlement to Afghan citizenship.

 5. I now summarise the submissions made on behalf of both  parties  before
    me at the resumed hearing.  My summary of the submissions  encapsulates
    the party's responses to the various issues I raised.

    Submissions

 6. Both parties before me agreed that the FtJ, at least implicitly,  found
    that the appellant was a citizen of Iran.  Mr Bates confirmed  that  it
    was the respondent's position that the appellant was indeed  a  citizen
    of Iran and Mr Azmi accepted that that was what the FtJ found.  Indeed,
    in the first sentence of Mr Azmi's skeleton argument dated 23  November
    2018 (although wrongly titled as relating to the First-tier  Tribunal),
    it expressly states that the FtJ found the appellant to be  an  Iranian
    national.

 7. I asked  Mr  Bates  about  the  background  material  set  out  in  the
    respondent's decision letter which states that dual citizenship is  not
    recognised in Afghanistan (subject to certain  exceptions).   Mr  Bates
    suggested that his  understanding  was  that  the  Afghan  Constitution
    requires a person  to  renounce  Afghan  nationality.  He  provided  an
    extract from RefWorld setting out the Afghan law  on  citizenship.   He
    suggested that in any event, it was not the appellant's  argument  that
    he would not be entitled to dual citizenship.

 8. I informed the parties that I had viewed  online  the  source  material
    from which the Citizenship Laws for Iran and Afghanistan are  drawn  in
    the respondent's decision, and had noted that the material  appears  to
    date from 2000 or 2001.  Both parties were given  the  opportunity  for
    themselves to view the website but neither availed themselves  of  that
    opportunity and raised no objection  to  my  having  seen  the  website
    (Citizenship Laws of the World).  Indeed, its first page  was  produced
    by Mr Bates which confirmed  the  date  which  I  had  noted.  He  also
    provided a document entitled "Law on Citizenship of the Islamic Emirate
    of Afghanistan (English translation)" chapters one to five,  consisting
    of eight  pages,  which  appears  to  be  a  complete  version  of  the
    citizenship law of Afghanistan.

 9. Mr Bates also submitted that the appellant would be  able  to  renounce
    his Iranian citizenship, thus the issue of dual citizenship  would  not
    in any event apply to him in respect of  Afghanistan's  prohibition  of
    dual citizenship.  He  accepted  however  that  he  did  not  have  any
    information  on  the  basis  upon  which  one  may   renounce   Iranian
    citizenship or the process for doing so.

10. Mr Bates otherwise relied on the decision letter, submitting  that  the
    appellant had accepted that his father was an Afghan  national.   Thus,
    he would be able to obtain Afghan nationality.  Reference was  made  to
    MW (Nationality; Art 4 QD; duty to substantiate)  Eritrea  [2016]  UKUT
    00453 (IAC) to the effect that the appellant in this case had not taken
    reasonable steps to establish that he is not a national of Afghanistan.
     Although the appellant says that he has no documents  in  relation  to
    Afghanistan and has never had them, there was no evidence that  he  had
    taken reasonable steps to obtain a tazkira, for example  by  contacting
    his mother there.  It was not surprising that the Afghan Embassy  would
    want documents from the appellant.  He had not exhausted all avenues.

11. Mr Azmi accepted that the expert evidence before the FtJ did  not  deal
    with the issue of renouncing Iranian nationality.  However, as set  out
    in  the  skeleton  argument  it  was  clear  that  the  FtJ  found  the
    appellant's father to be Afghan and his mother  Iranian  and  that  the
    appellant's core account was credible, including that his father passed
    away 13 years ago.  The FtJ also accepted that  the  appellant  had  no
    documentation in relation to his father, and no documentation  relating
    him to his father.  In  those  circumstances,  considerations  of  dual
    citizenship and renunciation of Iranian citizenship are not  applicable
    to him.

12. I was referred to the appellant's supplementary bundle in  relation  to
    the contact by way of correspondence between the appellant's solicitors
    and the Afghan Embassy, and  the  appellant's  visit  to  the  embassy.
    There was proof in the bundle that he attended there, in terms  of  the
    coach ticket and photographs.   He  was  told  that  he  would  not  be
    provided with any documents by the embassy.

13. Given that  the  Afghan  Embassy  required  the  appellant  to  provide
    documents to show that his father was of Afghan nationality, and it was
    found by the FtJ that the appellant's father had died 13 years ago, the
    situation was different from MW.  The appellant does not have a tazkira
    and has no identity documents at all.

    Assessment and Conclusions

14. The guidance in MW concerning  an  individual's  duty  to  substantiate
    nationality states as follows:

         "1.  Article 4(1) of the Qualification Directive does not impose  a
         shared duty of cooperation on the Member State to  substantiate  an
         applicant's nationality.


         2. Article 4(2) refers to  documentation  (including  documentation
         regarding nationality(ies)) "at the applicant's disposal"  -  which
         must include documentation which is not in the applicant's  present
         possession but is within his or her power to obtain.


         3. The terms of Article 4(3) are consistent with the position  that
         an applicant who denies he is a national  of  a  country  where  he
         could obtain protection can be expected to take reasonable steps to
         establish that he is not such a national."


15. In particular, at [10] the UT said this:

         "10. Nor is  it  just  that  the  Directive  regards  the  duty  of
             substantiation of nationality to rest  on  the  applicant  (by
             virtue of the Member State in question - the UK -  considering
             it the applicant's duty to substantiate his application). When
             setting out the basis on which assessment  of  an  application
             (what the MM judgment terms the second stage of assessing  (or
             evaluating)  the  application)   Article   4(3)   specifically
             identifies the steps that have to be taken in the  context  of
             assessing nationality/citizenship as being for the applicant:

             '3.   The  assessment  of  an  application  for  international
                  protection is to be carried out on an individual basis and
                  includes taking into account:

                  (e)  whether the applicant could reasonably be expected to
                      avail himself of the protection  of  another  country
                      where he could assert citizenship.'

             (emphasis added in bold)

             In our judgement, the terms of  Article  4(3)  are  consistent
             with the position  that  an  applicant  who  denies  he  is  a
             national of a country where he could obtain protection can  be
             expected to take reasonable steps to establish that he is  not
             such a national."

16. In addition, at [11] it quoted from MA (Ethiopia) v Secretary of  State
    for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 289 where the court  said  this
    at [50] - [54]:

         "50. In my judgment, where the essential issue before  the  AIT  is
             whether someone will or will not  be  returned,  the  Tribunal
             should in the normal case require the applicant  to  act  bona
             fide and take all reasonably  practicable  steps  to  seek  to
             obtain the requisite documents to enable her to return.  There
             may be cases where it would be unreasonable to  require  this,
             such as if disclosure of identity might put the  applicant  at
             risk, or perhaps third  parties,  such  as  relatives  of  the
             applicant who may be at risk in the home state if it is  known
             that the applicant has claimed asylum. That is not this  case,
             however. There is no  reason  why  the  appellant  should  not
             herself visit the embassy  to  seek  to  obtain  the  relevant
             papers. Indeed, as I have said, she did so  but  wrongly  told
             the staff there that she was Eritrean.

         51.  I am satisfied that there is no injustice to the appellant  in
             this approach: it does not put her at risk. The real risk test
             is adopted in  asylum  cases  because  of  the  difficulty  of
             predicting what will happen in the future in another  country,
             and because the consequences of reaching  the  wrong  decision
             will often be so serious for the applicant. That  is  not  the
             case here. As Ms Giovannetti pointed out, there is no risk  of
             ill treatment if an application to the embassy  is  made  from
             the United Kingdom, even if it is refused.

         52.  Furthermore, this approach to the issue of return is  entirely
             consistent with the well-established principle that, before an
             applicant for asylum can claim the protection of  a  surrogate
             state,  he  or  she  must  first  take  all  steps  to  secure
             protection from the home state. That was the approach  adopted
             in Bradshaw, to which I have made reference. It can be seen as
             an aspect of the duty placed on an applicant to co-operate  in
             the asylum  process.  Paragraph  205  of  the  UNHCR  handbook
             expressly  states  that  an  applicant  for  asylum  must,  if
             necessary, make an effort to procure  additional  evidence  to
             assist the decision maker. Bradshaw is an example  of  such  a
             case. The issue was whether the applicant was stateless.  Lord
             MacLean held  that  before  a  person  could  be  regarded  as
             stateless, she should make an application for  citizenship  of
             the countries with which she was most closely connected.

         53.  Any other approach leads, in my view, to  absurd  results.  To
             vary an example given by my Lord, Lord Justice Stanley Burnton
             in argument: the expert evidence might show that three out  of
             ten in the appellant's position were not allowed to return. If
             that evidence were accepted it  would  plainly  be  enough  to
             constitute a  real  risk  that  the  appellant  would  not  be
             successful in seeking authorisation to return. But it would be
             strange if  by  the  appellant's  wilful  inaction  she  could
             prevent the Tribunal from having the best evidence there is of
             the state's attitude to her return. She could refuse to put to
             the test whether she might be one of the seven  who  would  be
             successful. It would in my view be little short of  absurd  if
             she could succeed in her  claim  by  requiring  the  court  to
             speculate on a question which she was in a  position  actually
             to have resolved.

         54.  It is clear that the Tribunal did not approach matters in this
             way. In the absence of evidence as to how she would have  been
             treated had she made a  proper  application,  they  sought  to
             resolve the  issue  by  considering  whether  someone  in  her
             position was likely to be allowed to be returned  or  not.  In
             adopting this approach they were  apparently  approaching  the
             matter  in  line  with  the  submissions   of   the   parties.
             Nevertheless, for the reasons I have  given,  in  my  judgment
             this means that they erred in law.  They  ought  not  to  have
             engaged on this inquiry without first  establishing  that  the
             appellant had taken all reasonably practicable steps to obtain
             authorisation to return."

17. In his decision the respondent provides extracts from "Citizenship Laws
    of the World" in relation to Iran and Afghanistan.  There, it states as
    follows in relation to Iran:

           "IRAN


           CITIZENSHIP: Based upon the Iranian Civil Code.


           BY BIRTH: In general, birth within the territory of Iran does
           not automatically confer citizenship. The following are
           instances where birth within the territory of Iran does confer
           citizenship: Child born to unknown parents. Child born to non-
           citizens, one of whom was born within Iran. Child born to non-
           citizens, who, after reaching the age of 18, continues to reside
           within Iran for at least one year.


           BY DESCENT: Child born to an Iranian father regardless of the
           child's country of birth.


           MARRIAGE: Foreign woman who marries an Iranian man is entitled
           to citizenship.


           BY NATURALIZATION: Iranian citizenship may be acquired upon
           fulfillment of the following conditions: Person must be at least
           18 years of age, have resided in Iran for five years, not be a
           military service escapee, and not have been convicted of a major
           crime in any country.


           The wives and minor children (under 18) of naturalized Iranian
           citizens are also considered Iranian citizens.


           DUAL CITIZENSHIP: NOT RECOGNIZED. Exceptions: Child of an
           Iranian father, who acquires citizenship due to birth in a
           foreign country. A foreign woman who marries an Iranian is
           automatically granted Iranian citizenship, whether it is
           requested or not.


           LOSS OF CITIZENSHIP:


           VOLUNTARY: Person seeking to voluntarily renounce Iranian
           citizenship must have reached the age of 25, have performed
           military service, have settled all affairs in the country, and
           acquired the permission of the Council of Ministers. Though the
           rules for renunciation of citizenship are stated in Iranian Law,
           practical experiences have shown that Council permission is
           difficult to obtain, thus hindering legal renunciation of
           Iranian citizenship.


           INVOLUNTARY: Voluntary acquisition of a foreign citizenship does
           not lead to automatic loss of Iranian citizenship. According to
           Iranian law, any Iranian national who acquires foreign
           citizenship without due observance of legal procedures will not
           have a renunciation of citizenship recognized by the government
           of Iran. In the eyes of the government, a male (and, in some
           cases, his wife and children) is still considered a citizen of
           Iran, regardless of the individual's status in the new country
           of citizenship."


18. In relation to Afghanistan it says this:

          "AFGHANISTAN


          CITIZENSHIP: Citizenship laws are based upon the Official Gazette
          of the Ministry of Justice for the Republic of Afghanistan dated
          March 19, 1992.


          BY BIRTH: Birth within the territory of Afghanistan does not
          automatically confer citizenship. Exception is a child of
          unknown/stateless parents.


          BY DESCENT: Child whose mother or father is a citizen, regardless
          of the country of birth.


          MARRIAGE: Foreign national who marries a citizen of Afghanistan is
          granted citizenship upon application.


          BY NATURALIZATION: Afghan citizenship may be acquired upon
          fulfillment of the following conditions: Person was born in
          Afghanistan and has resided continually in country for at least
          five years.


          DUAL CITIZENSHIP: NOT RECOGNIZED. Exceptions: A former citizen of
          Afghanistan, who fled the country due to political instability or
          war and has acquired new citizenship, may still hold "unofficial"
          Afghan citizenship. This is recognition that those who fled the
          country might some day want to return as Afghan citizens without
          losing new citizenship.


          The Afghani spouse of a foreign national is not required to
          renounce Afghan citizenship unless demanded by the spouse's
          country.


          LOSS OF CITIZENSHIP:


          VOLUNTARY: Voluntary renunciation of Afghan citizenship is
          permitted by law. Contact the Embassy for details and required
          paperwork. The following persons are not allowed to renounce
          citizenship: Person who has continuing financial obligations to
          the government or other institutions. Person who has been
          convicted of a crime and sentenced to jail. Persons involved in
          national security, whose loss to the country might endanger Afghan
          security.


          INVOLUNTARY: The following is grounds for involuntary loss of
          Afghan citizenship: Person voluntarily acquires foreign
          citizenship and does not fall under the exempted status described
          under "Dual Citizenship." Persons concerned with dual citizenship
          should not assume their Afghan citizenship was lost by default.
          Embassy should be contacted and citizenship formally renounced."


19. It is accepted by the parties that the appellant is a citizen of  Iran.
    That is the respondent's position and so it was found by  the  FtJ,  as
    agreed by the parties.  Whilst it is true that the  appellant  has  not
    hitherto  raised  the  issue  of  dual  citizenship  in   relation   to
    Afghanistan, one cannot simply ignore the country material relied on by
    the respondent in relation to citizenship. From that material it  would
    seem that the appellant would not be  entitled  to  Afghan  citizenship
    because dual citizenship is not recognised and the appellant is already
    a citizen of Iran.  The exception set out there does not apply to  him.
    That is in fact consistent with the law on citizenship  document  which
    in its entirety was produced on behalf of  the  respondent  before  me.
    Article seven states that "Anyone who, according to the orders of  this
    law, is citizens (sic) of the  IEA  [Islamic  Emirate  of  Afghanistan]
    cannot hold a double citizenship position".

20. The website, Citizenship  Laws  of  the  World,  in  relation  to  Iran
    explains the basis upon which a person may voluntarily renounce Iranian
    citizenship.  On the face of it, the appellant would  not  be  able  to
    renounce Iranian citizenship voluntarily because he has not reached the
    age of 25 and has not performed military service, quite apart from what
    else is said in that document as to the renouncing  of  citizenship  of
    Iran and its difficulty.

21. As I have indicated, this is  the  source  material  for  the  extracts
    provided by the respondent in the respondent's decision and the parties
    were given the opportunity to explore it further at the hearing  before
    me but both declined.

22. In any event, even if the appellant  would  be  able  to  renounce  his
    Iranian citizenship or for some reason  would  not  fall  foul  of  the
    Afghan 'no-dual citizenship' restriction, he nevertheless relies on the
    evidence of his contact with the Afghan  Embassy  as  set  out  in  the
    supplementary bundle of documents before me.  I shall summarise it.

23. There is a statement from a solicitor, Mr Humaira Kanwal Ali, from  the
    firm of solicitors representing the appellant.  The statement is  dated
    7 November 2018.  It states that he contacted the Iranian Embassy on  1
    November 2018 and spoke  to  an  individual  who  he  names.   Previous
    contact was confirmed by that  individual.   The  arrangements  for  an
    interview  were  discussed.   The  solicitor  was  informed  that   the
    appellant should provide various documents and  information  so  as  to
    establish his identity.  It was confirmed that in the  event  that  the
    embassy was not able to assist the appellant, no further  action  would
    be taken by the embassy.  No formal letter refusing the application for
    identity documents or a passport would be issued.   The  solicitor  was
    also informed that  the  embassy  would  not  be  forwarding  an  email
    confirming the position.   If  the  embassy  was  able  to  assist  the
    appellant then they would  proceed  with  making  their  enquiries  and
    notify him of their decision.

24. Copies of correspondence between the  appellant's  solicitors  and  the
    embassy are also in the bundle, as well as an attendance note  from  an
    individual from the solicitors.

25. There is a statement from the appellant dated 9 November 2018 in  which
    he says that he  went  to  the  embassy  on  Monday  5  November  2018,
    describes his purchase of the tickets for travel and his  stay  with  a
    friend the night before.  It describes how he found the embassy and his
    interactions with staff there.  The statement continues that he told  a
    member of staff in Farsi that his mother was Iranian and his father was
    Afghani and he asked if he would be  able  to  obtain  a  passport  for
    Afghanistan.  He was told to go upstairs and wait.

26. After about 15 minutes he was approached and taken to an  office  where
    he repeated his circumstances.  The statement  continues  that  he  was
    told that he could not get a passport from the embassy in  the  UK  and
    that he would need to go to Afghanistan to make an application.  He was
    also told that  if  he  did  go  to  Afghanistan  to  make  a  passport
    application it would not be possible without his father's consent.   He
    was further told that as he did not have anything to  identify  himself
    he would not get a passport.

27. The appellant's witness statement  continues  that  the  individual  he
    spoke to did not take any details from him and did not ask  him  to  do
    anything further.  After speaking to him he  was  told  to  leave.   He
    asked for a letter to say that he came to the embassy but was told that
    such confirmation is not provided.  He was not given any  documents  or
    papers from the embassy.

28. He then describes his journey home  and  his  efforts  to  contact  his
    representatives whilst he was at the embassy.

29. The bundle also contains a copy of the appellant's return coach tickets
    from Birmingham to London, and photographs of  various  stages  of  his
    journey and his presence at and departure from the embassy.

30. Before me there was no challenge to the evidence in  the  supplementary
    bundle in terms  of  the  efforts  made  by  the  appellant  to  obtain
    confirmation of his entitlement to Afghan citizenship or his efforts to
    obtain a passport.  It was not suggested on behalf  of  the  respondent
    that in terms of his and his solicitor's interactions with the  embassy
    there was anything further that could or should have  been  done.   The
    only suggestion made on behalf of the respondent was that the appellant
    would be able to obtain documentary evidence from family  (his  mother)
    in Iran.

31. The appellant's oral evidence before the FtJ recorded at [9]  was  that
    he last spoke to his sister eight months prior to the  hearing  but  he
    had been asked not to contact "them" again although  he  did  not  know
    why.  He said that he had not called them before  because  he  did  not
    want to cause any danger, presumably to them.  He said that he had  not
    spoken to his mother but that he understood that she was  still  living
    in the house [10].

32. At [21] the FtJ said that he found  that  the  appellant  was,  on  the
    whole, a credible witness as to the core elements of  his  claim.   The
    FtJ did not suggest that any credibility issue arose in relation to the
    evidence he gave about contact with his family.

33. More to the point however, is that the FtJ accepted at  [24]  that  the
    appellant's father passed away  about  13  years  ago  and  he  has  no
    documentation in relation to his father and no  documentation  relating
    him to his father.  Quite apart then from the issue of whether there is
    any  documentation  in  existence,  the   appellant's   evidence,   not
    challenged before the FtJ it would appear,  is  that  his  family  have
    asked him not to contact them.  That is all consistent with  the  FtJ's
    findings in relation to events that befell the appellant in Iran.

34. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant  has  taken
    reasonable steps to establish his entitlement to Afghan citizenship and
    to obtain documents confirming  the  same,  but  without  success.   To
    reiterate, the evidence in relation to his efforts in this respect  was
    not challenged before me. I am satisfied that the efforts he  has  made
    accord with the guidance to be found in MW and MA (Ethiopia).

35. For the foregoing reasons I am not  satisfied  that  there  is  another
    country in  respect  of  which  the  appellant  would  be  entitled  to
    citizenship such that he is not entitled to the surrogate protection of
    the UK.

36. Accordingly, I re-make the decision, allowing the appeal on asylum  and
    Article 3 grounds.

    Decision

37. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, I  re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal on asylum and Article 3 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                        20/12/18
