

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA054962016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 6 June 2017                             |On 7 June 2017                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between


                                     SMA
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The brevity of the decision is due to the commendable focus  displayed
      by both representatives, and  the  lack  of  clarity  of  the  Judge's
      decision.


    2. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 (SI 2008/269) I make  an  anonymity  order.  Unless  the  Upper
       Tribunal  or  a  Court  directs  otherwise,  no  report   of   these
       proceedings or any form of publication  thereof  shall  directly  or
       indirectly identify SMA or any of his family members. This direction
       applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with
       this direction could give rise to Contempt of Court  proceedings.  I
       do so in order to preserve the anonymity  of  SMA  whose  protection
       claim, for reasons that will become clear, remains outstanding.


 Background


    3. The Respondent refused SMA's application  for  asylum  or  ancillary
       protection on 17 May 2016. His appeal was  dismissed  by  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Fox ("the Judge") following a hearing on 29 September
       2016.

The grant of permission


   4. Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission to appeal  (19  December
      2016) on the basis that it is arguable that the Judge materially erred
      regarding SMA's ability to  obtain  documentation  that  would  permit
      internal relocation.


The Respondent's position


   5. Reliance was placed on the rule 24 notice (5 January 2017) which noted
      that a decision had not been made by the Upper Tribunal  allowing  SMA
      to appeal out of time. It was noted that the Judge had found that  SMA
      had family  and  friends  who  could  assist  him  obtaining  relevant
      documentation and/or provide accommodation and assistance.

Discussion

   6. I grant permission to appeal out of time as the decision was  so  poor
      that it would be unjust not  allow  it  to  be  considered,  and  this
      plainly what Judge Smith had  in  mind  when  granting  permission  to
      appeal.


   7. At [6] the decision makes no sense where it states "the burden lies on
      the  Appellant  to  show  that  by  returning  him  on  foot  of   any
      subsequently issued directions to Iraq...". The confused test SMA  was
      required to establish was probably a result of poor proofreading, this
      by chance being the second decision from this Judge I had in  my  list
      today which had exactly the same incomprehensible phrase. Of itself  I
      would not have been satisfied that it was a material error of law.


   8. At [13 and 14] the Judge extensively considered  section  117  of  the
      Nationality Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  and  make  findings  upon
      that prior to considering the asylum claim. The consideration  out  of
      turn of section 117 shows a structural misunderstanding of the thought
      processes involved in determining such appeals and is a material error
      of law.


   9. It was perverse that  the  Judge  should  state  at  [22]  that  "Isis
      therefore cannot  be  construed  as  actors  of  persecution".  It  is
      inconceivable that anyone would think that  Isis  are  not  agents  of
      persecution. That is a material error of law.

  10. The Judge had recorded at [40] "that there are substantial grounds for
      believing that he faced a real  risk  of  suffering  serious  harm  on
      return to Iraq and he does qualify for  humanitarian  protection".  He
      then goes on to dismiss  the  appeal.  The  confused  findings  as  to
      whether SMA was or was not at a real risk of suffering serious harm on
      return to Iraq is a material error of law.


  11. It was accepted that SMA was from Diyala. It was conceded this is in a
      contested area. The Judge found that  he  could  rely  on  family  and
      friends from there to assist in obtaining relevant documentation. This
      is out of step with AA (article 15 (c)) (Iraq) CG  [2015]  UKUT  00554
      (IAC) and the Judge  did  not  quote  from  AA  the  relevant  extract
      regarding the difficulty in obtaining the required documentation  from
      a contested area to make internal relocation a reasonable option. This
      amounts to a material error of law.


   12. Both representatives agreed  that  if  I  found  that  there  was  a
       material error of law, which I have, I should remit the matter to be
       reheard de novo as the errors go beyond those contained  within  the
       Presidential Guidance for retention in the Upper Tribunal.


Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    not before Judge Fox.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
6 June 2017
