
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05745/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                  Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant  to  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego (the judge), promulgated on  20  June  2018,  by
    which he dismissed his appeal against the Respondent's refusal  of  his
    protection and human rights claims.

 2. The essence of the Appellant's case was that  he  was  a  convert  from
    Islam to Christianity and would be at risk  on  return  to  Iran  as  a
    result.  The Respondent had not accepted the claimed conversion.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge sets out the evidence before him the case law in some  detail
    before going on to make findings of fact.  The  judge  notes  that  the
    Appellant had a good knowledge of the Christian faith and that some  of
    the points taken against him in the Respondent's  reasons  for  refusal
    letter were misconceived.  At [62] he sets  out  a  number  of  matters
    adverse to the  Appellant's  general  credibility  as  regards  claimed
    events in Iran.

 4. The judge then turns to the evidence of three  witnesses  who  attended
    the hearing and had given oral evidence.  One of these, Rev Heron,  had
    been a pastor at the Appellant's church.  The judge accepted  that  the
    evidence of this witness, his wife and  another  individual,  had  been
    "sincere" and "truthful".  However, the judge found that the absence of
    the then current pastor at the church, Rev Scott, was "fundamental"  to
    the Appellant's case.  Having directed himself to Dorodian 01/TH/01537,
    the judge appears to either disregard entirely or  place  virtually  no
    weight upon the other evidence in support of  the  Appellant's  claimed
    conversion (see in particular [67]).  There is a  specific  finding  at
    [68] that the Appellant was not a Christian convert and the appeal  was
    duly dismissed.




The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 5. The grounds of appeal criticised  the  judge's  approach  to  the  core
    issues in the case including the reliance on the case of Dorodian.   It
    is said that in light of a fairly  recent  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Session in Scotland, TF and MA  [2018]  CSIH  58,  Dorodian  should  no
    longer be followed  and  the  judge  had  erred  by  relying  upon  its
    guidance.

 6. Permission to appeal was refused by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  (in  a
    decision which appears  to  bear  little  if  any  resemblance  to  the
    Appellant's case, but was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins on  7
    December 2018.







The hearing before me

 7. Following a pre-hearing  discussion  between  the  representatives,  Mr
    Bramble informed me that he accepted that the judge  had  committed  an
    error of law with particular relevance to [67].  He suggested that  the
    judge should really have adjourned the appeal in order that  Rev  Scott
    could attend on a future occasion.




Decision on error of law

 8. I conclude that there  are  material  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
    decision.  Mr Bramble has conceded as much and I will state my  reasons
    fairly briefly.

 9. I have considerable doubt that the Dorodian guidance still  holds  good
    in  light  of  developments  over  recent  times  in  the  approach  to
    credibility in general and matters of faith in particular.  It seems to
    me as though the correct approach is for the Tribunal of fact  to  have
    regard to all relevant evidence in  the  round,  whether  or  not  this
    includes oral evidence from a specified  source  such  as  the  current
    pastor in any given church at which an individual attends.

10. In my respectful view, the conclusions of the Court of  Session  in  TF
    and MA, particularly paragraph 58, hold considerable persuasive  value.
    In addition, this is consistent with the principle that evidence should
    be looked at holistically and  with  anxious  scrutiny.   There  is  no
    general requirement for corroborative evidence, and  yet  the  Dorodian
    guidelines,  at  least  in  part,  would  appear  to  impose   such   a
    requirement.  I also bear in mind the contents of Article 4(5)  of  the
    Qualification  Directive,  which  essentially  mandates  the  need  for
    decision-makers to have regard to a wide range of sources  of  evidence
    provided by the applicant.

11. In my view, it might well be time for there to be  a  clear  expression
    from the Upper Tribunal that the Dorodian guidance is no longer  sound.



12. In this case there was "sincere" and  "truthful"  evidence  from  three
    individuals, one of whom, Rev Heron, had in fact been the pastor at the
    church prior to Rev Scott taking over.  This, in conjunction with other
    favourable points, was highly relevant, and could not simply have  been
    put to one side by the simple fact of non-attendance by Rev Scott.

13. There is an error in approach to both credibility and  the  interlinked
    issue of the genuineness of the Appellant's conversion.

14. Even if the Dorodian guidelines are still correct, in my view the judge
    misapplied them in any event.  The first of the guidelines relate to an
    individual's attendance at the church, and not the underlying substance
    of his faith.  In the present case, it  seemed  to  have  not  been  in
    dispute that the Appellant had in fact been a regular attendee  at  the
    church in question and yet the judge links the absence of Rev Scott  to
    the issue of the faith, not simply attendance.

15. This is a further error.

16. The error in approach, on whichever basis set  out  above,  is  clearly
    material.

17. I set the judge's decision aside.




Disposal

18. Mr Gilbert suggested that the matter could be  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal and that  perhaps  this  was  an  appropriate  case  in  which
    guidance on the Dorodian case could be given together with guidance  on
    the risk on return to Iran  of  Christian  converts.   He  did  however
    acknowledge that there was significant fact-finding to be made.

19. Mr Bramble suggested that whether the case was remitted or retained  in
    the Upper Tribunal the adverse credibility finding set out at paragraph
    62 of the judge's decision should be preserved.

20. Having thought about the issue of disposal with care, I  conclude  that
    this appeal should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a
    complete rehearing with no findings of fact preserved.

21. I take on board the views of the representatives, but this  is  a  case
    which requires wholesale findings of  fact  to  be  made  on  all  core
    issues.  It may be that the Dorodian issue and risk on return issue  is
    fully canvassed at the remitted hearing and it may be that  the  matter
    would find its way up to the Upper Tribunal following  this.   However,
    the significant fact-finding exercise will be best carried out  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

22. In respect of the preservation of adverse findings, I disagree with  Mr
    Bramble's position.  It is right that the specific findings set out  in
    [62] were not challenged in the grounds.  Having said that, Mr  Gilbert
    is right to point out that these were one aspect of the  findings  that
    ultimately led to the composite conclusion at [68] that  the  Appellant
    was not a Christian convert.  Given that another very significant  part
    of that composite conclusion has been shown to be flawed, it  would  be
    artificial to preserve the other aspect.  The First-tier Tribunal needs
    to address this appeal on a clean slate.

23. To that end, I issue directions to the First-tier Tribunal, below.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
I set it aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

 1. This appeal is remitted for a  complete  rehearing  with  no  preserved
    findings of fact.




 2. The remitted hearing shall not be heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Housego.


 3. Factual issues will of course include whether or not the Appellant is a
    genuine convert to Christianity.


 4. The First-tier Tribunal  may  wish  to  consider  whether  or  not  the
    Dorodian guidelines are still appropriate.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 16 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor







