
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
pa/05056/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 18 October 2017                         |On 15 December 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY

                                   Between

                                   mrs w l
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms N Ostad Saffar of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, a Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Senegal who was born on 6  January  1988.
    The appellant claims to have married K N, a Senegalese national,  on  a
    date  in  2014,  which  is  illegible  on  the  untranslated   marriage
    certificate supplied.  They have  two  children  together.   The  first
    child S was born on 19 February 2008 in Dakar and the second  child,  A
    N, was born in the UK on 16 June 2015. A N's birth certificate confirms
    that K N is her father. The birth certificate also confirms  that  A  N
    was born in the UK.

2.   The appellant and K N have quite a long immigration  history.  However,
    the application, which resulted in an appeal before  Immigration  Judge
    Buchanan heard  on  2  March  2017,  was  an  application  for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights protection under Articles 2, 3
    and 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights  1950  (ECHR).   That
    application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (Secretary of State).  The Secretary of State  set  out  her
    reasons for refusal in a detailed letter explaining that  she  did  not
    accept that the appellant's second child, who had been born in the  UK,
    would be subjected to female  genital  mutilation  (FGM)  if  she  were
    returned to Senegal.  The principal risk to the child was  said  to  be
    derived from the grandmother but the Secretary of State did not  accept
    that to  be  a  genuine  risk.  Furthermore,  the  Secretary  of  State
    considered that there would be adequate internal relocation alternative
    available to the appellant to avoid seeking  international  protection.
    Even if the appellant's case were accepted the Secretary of State noted
    that Senegal was a country of very substantial size with a quite  small
    population, that the appellant spoke  both  a  tribal  language  called
    Wolof and French, which was widely spoken, and that there were  several
    areas to which she could safely relocate if she desired to do so.

3.   The appeal came before Judge Buchanan, as I have indicated, on 2  March
    2017.   Both  parties  were  represented  at  that  hearing,   in   the
    appellant's case by Ms McCrae and in the respondent's case by Mr  Bell.
    The Immigration Judge heard detailed evidence.  I have had the  benefit
    of reading the notes of evidence.  They are difficult to decipher but I
    have been able to see the broad thrust, at least, of the  evidence  and
    submissions before the Immigration Judge.

4.   The Immigration Judge set  out  fully  the  requirements  of  the  U  N
    Convention relating  to  the  status  of  Refugees  1951  (the  Refugee
    Convention).   He  also  set  out  the  requirements  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights (ECHR) in some detail.   Unfortunately,  the
    Immigration Judge only dealt cursorily with the matter of Article 8  of
    that Convention. He rejected the notion that the younger child would be
    subject to FGM from the grandmother and whilst  he  accepted  that  the
    tribal background of the appellant and her husband did lend  itself  to
    the risk of FGM, in his judgment adequate protection would be available
    to the appellant, if necessary, by removing herself to a different part
    of Senegal. In any event, he was not  persuaded  that  the  appellant's
    account was founded on fact. The Immigration Judge found that there had
    been misrepresentations made by  the  appellant  and  her  witness  and
    neither gave accounts which could be accepted at face  value.   He  did
    not accept that a genuine marriage document had been provided  and  the
    appellant had failed to persuade the Tribunal that the grandmother  had
    actually been responsible for inflicting FGM on the elder daughter who,
    it would appear, was still in Senegal residing  with  the  grandmother.
    He was not persuaded that the mother would in any event leave her child
    in the care of someone who  would  put  that  child  at  risk  of  such
    barbaric treatment. The Immigration Judge was not  persuaded  that  the
    grandmother would have the ability to  trace  and  find  the  appellant
    anywhere else in Senegal.  Accordingly, for those comprehensive reasons
    the Immigration Judge dismissed the appeals on all grounds  argued.  In
    relation to human rights, having effectively dealt with the Articles  2
    and 3 claims under the general head of asylum/human rights  protection,
    the Immigration Judge merely stated that the appellant had been  unable
    to show that the rights of the child would be breached by her return to
    Senegal as this had not been established to the  appropriate  standard.
    However, the Immigration Judge did not embark on a detailed analysis of
    the appellant's human rights protected by Article 8 of the ECHR.

5.    The  Immigration  Judge  also  made  an  anonymity  direction  at  the
    conclusion of his decision, which was promulgated on 4 April 2017.

The Upper Tribunal Proceedings

6.   The appellant appealed the refusal to the Upper Tribunal  on  18  April
    2017, within time.  The grounds are detailed and extensive.   They  did
    receive a degree of criticism by  the  judge  who  granted  permission,
    Designated Immigration Judge  McCarthy,  who  found  a  number  of  the
    references to case law to be out of date.   Judge  McCarthy  mistakenly
    referred to "Judge Cassel", but in fact  intended  to  refer  to  Judge
    Buchanan. I understand that is accepted by both parties.

7.   On 28 August 2017 Judge McCarthy carefully went through the grounds  of
    appeal. He did not give permission to appeal  against  the  refusal  of
    asylum, concluding that the grounds of appeal had  not  identified  any
    arguable error of law.  He considered that the lower standard of  proof
    had been correctly applied by the Immigration Judge.  Having  carefully
    considered all the case law, of which Judge McCarthy was also aware, he
    concluded that the Immigration Judge had reached sound decisions on all
    matters argued before him including the adequacy  of  state  protection
    and the availability of an internal relocation alternative  to  seeking
    asylum  abroad.   However,  Judge  Mc  Carthy  was  critical   of   the
    Immigration Judge in relation to his cursory consideration  of  Article
    8. Noting that the respondent had fully considered the issues of family
    and private life in her refusal, unfortunately, it  appeared  to  Judge
    McCarthy that there was no evidence of  the  Immigration  Judge  having
    done likewise and there was no indication in his decision  and  reasons
    or elsewhere that suggested that  the  ground  of  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision to fail  to  recognise  the  appellant  qualified
    under Article 8 was withdrawn.  Judge  McCarthy  therefore  found  that
    ground to be properly arguable. He limited the  ground  to  considering
    the best interests of the appellant's daughter and the alleged  failure
    to engage with evidence and arguments relating to Article  8.   It  was
    important, in Judge Mc McCarthy's view, to establish whether  the  best
    interests of the child lay in her removal from the UK.

8.   The Secretary of State provided this a Rule 24 response on 4  September
    2017, which opposes the appellant's appeal. In summary, the  respondent
    states the First-tier Tribunal (FTT) directed itself appropriately.   A
    N was not yet 2 years old at the date of the  hearing  and,  given  the
    asylum account had been completely rejected, it had not been shown that
    the  child's  best  interests  outweighed  the  interests   of   proper
    immigration control.  Any error that was made  was  immaterial  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.





The hearing before the Upper Tribunal


9.   The Upper Tribunal was assisted by the helpful oral submissions  of  Ms
    Ostad Saffar. However, with respect  to  her,  no  doubt  in  the  best
    interests of her client as she saw them, she tried to argue a number of
    points which were considered but rejected by the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    I reminded her at the outset of her submissions  that  her  client  had
    been refused permission to appeal on all grounds other than Article  8.
    Nevertheless, she sought to argue that A N would be at risk at risk  of
    female genital mutilation (FGM) if she returned  to  Senegal  with  the
    appellant. I explained to her and reiterate here that  this  issue  had
    been fully considered by the First-tier Tribunal.  There  had  been  no
    application to renew the permission by way  of  a  second  application,
    which could have been made, or by  way  of  challenging  the  grant  of
    permission by applying for judicial review. Therefore, procedurally,  I
    took the view that she was  effectively  barred  from  arguing  matters
    which had already  been  raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but
    rejected.  Notwithstanding this indication, Ms Ostad Saffar then sought
    to argue that the Immigration Judge had applied too high a standard  of
    proof, that there had been too much focus on her relationship with  her
    husband.  She submitted that there was inadequate  protection  for  the
    child in Senegal. The grandmother could not be relied on not to  commit
    female genital mutilation and  the  objective  evidence  had  not  been
    properly considered. She argued that there was a great deal of evidence
    of the extent of the barbaric practice of FGM within Senegal. As far as
    Article 8 was concerned, the correct  avenue  for  her  attack  on  the
    decision of the FTT, she submitted, that very little analysis or  space
    was devoted in the decision to this aspect. There is really no  dispute
    between her and the respondent on this. Ms Ostad Saffar then went on to
    submit that the Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 ("the 2002 Act") had not even been mentioned in the  decision.
    Furthermore, she submitted that there  was  no  justification  for  the
    interference with the appellant's human rights had  been  put  forward.
    There was no safe  place  for  her  to  return  to.   There  were  very
    significant obstacles for her reintegration into life in  Senegal.  For
    example, no monetary support would be available. Although she  accepted
    her  arguments  were  primarily  related   to   economics   they   were
    nevertheless of great practical importance given that her client  would
    be returned to a poor country such as Senegal. She  repeated  that  the
    grandmother was a potential abuser of her child.

10.  In response Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  said  that  the  arguments  Ms  Ostad
    Saffar had raised were an attempt effectively to re-argue points  which
    had been rejected by the FTT. Furthermore,  the  appellant's  husband's
    status was dependent on her own. Her husband did not have any right  to
    stay in the UK. The family would be returning to Senegal as one  family
    unit. In any event, the child had Senegalese nationality by  virtue  of
    her parents' birth there and the Immigration  Judge  had  not  accepted
    that the eldest child had been subject to FGM, that the grandmother was
    a potential abuser or indeed that the younger child would be subject to
    such barbaric treatment.  There was nothing in the  submissions  before
    me, or indeed in the evidence before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    would have enabled the FTT to conclude that the removal of  the  family
    unit would constitute an unlawful interference with their human  rights
    protected by Article 8.  There had simply been no evidence  to  support
    the establishment of a private life in the UK in the short period  they
    had  been  here.   I  was  helpfully  taken  to  two   recent   leading
    authorities, which will be referred to in greater detail  below.  Those
    authorities suggested that very young children tend to  look  to  their
    parents for their support, rather than their peer group. There  was  no
    evidence that this young child would in fact know very much  about  the
    fact that she had been in the UK for her short lifespan.  She was  only
    aged 1 at the time of the hearing and she had only recently turned 2 at
    the date of the hearing before the Upper Tribunal.  Furthermore,  there
    was a family support network in Senegal and I was referred  to  several
    family members including both grandparents. If I  accepted  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's conclusion that the maternal  grandmother  was  not  an
    abuser she would be  able  to  provide  support  for  the  family.  The
    appellant's  husband  also  had  a  sister  who  was  referred  to  the
    appellant's witness statements.   Article  8  hardly  featured  in  the
    evidence at all.  I reminded the parties that, judging from  the  notes
    of the hearing, the rights of the child and Section 55 of the  Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009  had  been  briefly  referred  to.
    However, but I find no reference to any detailed submissions on  either
    Article 8 or the rights of the child. With respect, therefore, I  would
    describe it as something of a "makeweight" to add to the main arguments
    in relations to the various alleged human rights abuses/risk of FGM  on
    return. Also, I noted that the child's Article 8 rights did not did not
    feature in the witness statements to any material degree.

11.  Ms Ostad Saffar responded to  the  submissions  made  by  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe by stating that the support of the  grandmother  could  not  be
    relied  upon  given  her  continued  contention  that  she   had   been
    responsible for abuse of the elder child.  There would  be  significant
    pressure on the appellant to carry out FGM on  the  younger  child  and
    there was no  proper  consideration  of  the  risk  on  return  by  the
    Immigration Judge.   Without  considering  FGM  it  was  impossible  to
    consider  Article  8  in  isolation.  Nevertheless,  Ms  Ostad   Saffar
    suggested that section 117B of the 2002 Act, and the case  of  Rhuppiah
    [2016] EWCA Civ 803, indicated that one  can  establish  a  private  or
    family life precariously. I was invited to look at paragraph 35 of that
    decision.  Although I have not  been  supplied  with  a  copy  of  that
    decision, I have since had an opportunity to remind myself of the facts
    of that case, which has been subject of  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal to the Supreme Court.

Discussion

12.   As  I  have  indicated,  there  was  no  application  to  enlarge  the
    permission to appeal in this case to cover the more  substantial  human
    rights  arguments  presented  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Those
    arguments were rejected by the FTT. Judge McCarthy  refused  permission
    to appeal against those aspects of the Immigration Judge's decision. It
    was incumbent upon the appellant to put forward evidence to support  an
    Article 8 claim. Assuming the appellant had formed a family  life  with
    her husband and children in the UK, the respondent had  the  burden  of
    showing that Article 8(2) was satisfied. However, I  am  not  persuaded
    that any material evidence  was  put  forward  that  the  child's  best
    interests  would  be  advanced  by  remaining  in  the  UK.  Given  the
    nationality of the parents and their children and the  fact  that  they
    would be returning as a family unit, it was plainly open to the FTT  to
    conclude there would be no unlawful interference with  the  appellant's
    or her daughter's protected human rights.  The  interference  with  the
    family life formed between the appellant and her children in the UK was
    justified by the need for effective immigration control. I have  regard
    to recent case law, including the case of Moayed UKUT 00197 before  the
    Upper Tribunal sitting in Bradford. In that case,  where  both  parents
    were to be removed as one family unit, it  was  held  that  exceptional
    factors would be needed to show why  the  economic  best  interests  of
    society would not justify removal.

13.  I was also referred to paragraph 58 of the  case  of  EV  (Philippines)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 874.  An  assessment  of  the  best  interests  of  the
    children must be made based on the facts. In the  "real  world",  where
    one parent has no right to  remain,  but  the  other  parent  does  the
    assessment is to be conducted  against  that  background.   If  neither
    parent has the right to remain then the ultimate question will  be,  is
    it reasonable to expect a child to follow the parents?

Conclusions

14.  The removal of the younger child would not  be  contrary  to  her  best
    interests, given the probable  simultaneous  removal  of  the  parents.
    Accordingly, there is no proper basis for interfering with the findings
    of the FTT. I considered whether the lack of reasoning in  relation  to
    Article 8 might constitute a material  error  of  law.  However,  I  am
    persuaded by the respondent's submissions that in fact there is no real
    basis for finding that a fuller consideration  of  that  Article  would
    make any material difference to the outcome of  the  decision.  If  the
    Immigration Judge had considered the case law on Article 8  in  greater
    detail, it is likely that he would have reached  the  same  conclusion.
    Therefore, the absence of  detailed  consideration  of  Article  8  was
    immaterial to the decision.

15.  Even If I am wrong about that, I have not  been  invited  to  hear  any
    fresh evidence.  The appellant was given notice that if she  wished  to
    refer to any evidence which had not the before the First-tier  Tribunal
    it was necessary for her to make an application indicating  the  nature
    of that evidence and explaining why it was not submitted to the FTT  no
    later than 10 working days before the hearing. I have therefore decided
    this appeal based on the evidence before the FTT.

16.  My conclusion is that the respondent was able to show  before  the  FTT
    that the interference with the appellant's private or  family  life  in
    this case, which had only been recently formed  since  her  arrival  in
    2014, was justified by economic factors and in particular the need  for
    a balanced system of proper immigration control. The  public  interest,
    in my view, outweighed the right to respect for  a  private  or  family
    life in this case.

Notice of Decision

17.  I find there was no material error of law in  FTT  and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    therefore stands.


Anonymity

I continue the anonymity direction  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
direct that no party may in fact report these proceedings

Fee Award

I continue to make no fee award in this matter.







Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




