
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05297/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st August 2020                  |On 29th September 2020               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mr n p
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs F O Mustapha, instructed by Wai Leung Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Steven Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, an Afghan national of Pashtun ethnicity from the  Kunduz
    province in Afghanistan, appealed under Section 82 of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 against the refusal of  his  protection
    claim and claim on human rights grounds.  On 8th January 2020 an  error
    of  law  was  found  in  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Devittie's determination  promulgated  on  12th  September  2019.   The
    absence of any conclusions in relation to Article 8 caused the decision
    to be set aside in that respect only.  The decision by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on the international protection grounds was not challenged.

 2. The appeal was previously dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  R  L
    Walker on 25th September 2018 but that decision was set aside owing  to
    an error of law regarding  the  approach  to  internal  relocation  and
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  of  the  Immigration  Rules,  specifically  in
    relation to the length and qualify of time the appellant had  spent  in
    the United Kingdom ("the UK").   The matter was thus  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and heard again.  This is the second time that  the
    matter has visited the Upper Tribunal  and  owing  to  the  nature  and
    extent of the findings to  be  made  I  directed  that  the  matter  be
    retained in the Upper Tribunal for a resumed hearing on Article 8 only.



 3. The appellant, born on 1st January 2000 entered the UK as  a  minor  in
    2012. The date of the appellant's  birth  was  found  to  be  12  years
    following an age assessment; the appellant  believed  that  he  was  10
    years old on entry.   He claimed asylum on 2nd November 2012 and on 4th
    January 2013 was  granted  discretionary  leave,  as  an  unaccompanied
    asylum seeking minor, until 2nd July 2015.   Again,  on  30th  December
    2015 he was  granted  discretionary  leave  to  30th  June  2017.   The
    appellant's application dated 26th June  2017  for  further  leave  was
    refused on 21st March 2018 following the rejection of  his  asylum  and
    human rights claim.

 4. The appellant had maintained that he was a victim of  persecution  from
    the Taliban and that his life was not safe there.  His  claim  to  fear
    the Taliban because of an old feud in which his father had been  killed
    was rejected for failure to provide any evidence.  It  was  noted  that
    his brother fled Afghanistan for the same reason.  His brother has  now
    been granted Indefinite Leave to Remain in the UK.

 5. In rejecting his claim for asylum the Secretary of State considered the
    appellant had reached the age of majority, he had  the  opportunity  to
    take advantage of the assisted voluntary returns programme and that the
    country guidance and country policy  and  information  showed  that  he
    would be returned to Kabul which is the territory currently  controlled
    by the Afghan government.

 6. The refusal letter noted the appellant claimed that he had  been  fully
    settled in the UK, spent most of his formative years in the UK and  had
    no connection with anyone in Afghanistan.  It was considered,  however,
    he was a healthy male of 17 years and 6 months of age  who  had  gained
    five years of education in the UK and learnt a new  language.   He  had
    picked  up  transferrable  skills  and  would  be  able  to   use   his
    resourcefulness on return.  It was not accepted that the  treatment  he
    feared on return amounted to persecution and he had not shown he  would
    encounter problems amounting to a breach of Article 3 should he return.
     It was accepted he  would  not  have  any  connections  on  return  to
    Afghanistan, but  it  was  not  accepted  he  would  be  vulnerable  to
    exploitation.  There was no indication  he  would  face  indiscriminate
    violence or there were any circumstances which engaged Article 15(c) of
    the Qualification Directive.

 7. Turning to consideration of his private life  the  Secretary  of  State
    noted that at the date of his application, he had not lived in  the  UK
    for twenty years, and when under the age of 18 had not lived in the  UK
    continuously for seven years. In order  to  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(v) an applicant must show that they are age between
    18 and 24 years  and  have  spent  at  least  half  their  life  living
    continuously in the UK.  The applicant could not show that he had spent
    half his life living in the UK continuously.

 8. It was not accepted in relation to  Article  8  that  his  relationship
    between him and his  former  foster  parents  constituted  family  life
    because there were no further  elements  of  dependency  beyond  normal
    emotional ties which amounted to real, committed and effective support.
     He could continue his relationship with them through modern  means  of
    communication and it was not accepted that  his  removal  from  the  UK
    would breach Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

 9. The fact that he had adopted a westernised lifestyle while residing  in
    the UK was considered within the country information and it  was  noted
    at paragraph 2.3.2 of  the  Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  on
    Afghanistan January 2018, that there had been  isolated  reports  of  a
    number of attacks on returnees because of westernisation  or  at  least
    returnees had spent some time in the  west,  but  the  motivations  for
    these attacks were  often  unclear.   Given  the  handful  of  reported
    attacks when compared with a large number of many thousands of  returns
    there appeared to be a very low risk of violent  attack  or  abduction.
    It was not accepted he would be persecuted on return to Afghanistan  on
    account of being westernised.

10. At the hearing before me Mrs Mustapha produced a skeleton argument  and
    submitted that she relied on Article 3 to further the Article  8  claim
    because  she  considered  that  the  appellant  would   be   considered
    westernised  and  would  experience   inhuman   treatment   on   return
    constituting a very significant  obstacle  to  his  return.    At  this
    juncture it was noted that the appeal was confined to Article 8.

11.  Mrs  Mustapha  submitted  that  the  appellant   satisfied   paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules for the grant of leave to remain
    in the UK on the basis of his private life as there was real likelihood
    of the appellant facing very significant obstacle to his integration on
    his return to Afghanistan.

12. It was submitted that the following factors  demonstrated  cumulatively
    or individually that there  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    reintegration.  The appellant left Afghanistan at the age of 12 and  as
    a  result  had  never  lived  in  Afghanistan  or  as   an   adult   or
    independently.  He had been absent from Afghanistan  for  nearly  eight
    years and had adapted to the UK  way  of  life  and  had  become  quite
    westernised, having lived here as a pre-adolescent child.  He  was  now
    only 20.  He was a typically British young man whose adult identity had
    been formed or shaped by an immersion into UK life  and  culture.   His
    position was distinct from  that  of  an  unaccompanied  asylum-seeking
    child who had spent eight years living with a family member because  he
    had been in local authority care and in the care of the state.

13. His position was also distinct from an adult who had spent eight  years
    living in the UK because these were the  appellant's  formative  years.
    Although the appellant could in  time  reacquire  his  native  language
    skills he was at present fluent in English  and  had  lost  ability  to
    communicate properly in Pashtu or Dari.

14. He had lost  all  touch  with  his  family  from  the  moment  he  left
    Afghanistan and all contact with his family  in  Afghanistan  had  been
    severed for more than eight years.  He was unaware of  the  whereabouts
    of his wider family members in that country  and  the  appellant  would
    face  very  significant  obstacles  to  his  integration.   He  had  no
    connection with the cultural way of life in  the  country  and  had  no
    social or economic skills to sustain him there.

15. The background information indicated that young people without  support
    networks faced particular difficulties over and above  those  faced  by
    returnees who had  never  left  Afghanistan,  such  as  employment  and
    housing.  He had missed out on schooling in the Afghan system,  further
    compromising his ability to find work.

16. The matter should also be considered outside the Immigration Rules  and
    his social, cultural and educational connections and  relationships  in
    the UK that he enjoyed with his brother, his ex-foster family  and  his
    friends and neighbours should be addressed.  He could not take with him
    the totality of the ties in the UK.  It was submitted that in the light
    of Huang [2007] UKHL 11 all factors  need  to  be  taken  into  account
    weighing all relevant considerations there can be no justification said
    to exist to remove the appellant.  The  Section  117B  factors  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 should not  weigh  against
    him.   It  was  accepted  that  the  appellant  was   not   financially
    independent as  he  was  being  provided  with  support  by  the  local
    authority, but he would be able to enter gainful  employment  once  his
    immigration status was resolved.  It was further accepted  his  private
    life was developed in the UK at a time when his immigration status  was
    precarious and by reason of Section 117B(5) the Tribunal  was  required
    to attach little weight to this but this factor in themselves were  not
    determinative of the outcome of  the  proportionality  assessment  Kaur
    (children's best interests/public interest interface) UKUT 14.

17. At the hearing before me Mrs Mustapha  submitted  a  report  by  Asylos
    "Afghanistan situation of young male westernised returnees to Kabul 9th
    January 2018" and she marked up sections for reference.

18. At the hearing the appellant confirmed to Mr Walker  that  his  brother
    did not attend his first hearing because he could not take the time off
    work.  It was put to him that the DNA test showed that his brother  and
    he were not full brothers, the appellant did not know why but  he  knew
    his brother was not his agent.  The appellant confirmed to me  in  oral
    evidence that he had no written  evidence  that  he  had  attempted  to
    contact his family with the Red Cross.  He confirmed he  lived  on  his
    own, he had finished his maths and engineering course at  college,  but
    he could not go to university because of his status.  His  brother  was
    working as a taxi driver.

19. When questioned his brother, Mr H, confirmed that he could  send  money
    to Afghanistan for the appellant if required.  Under re-examination  he
    confirmed that he had no family left in Afghanistan.

20. Mr Walker  submitted  that  the  document  Asylos  did  not  paint  the
    conditions for returning westernised Afghanis as in  a  bad  light  and
    that they were given assistance  when  needed  such  as  housing.   The
    appellant had two previous Tribunals.   This  was  not  concerned  with
    asylum but with human rights and his appeal should be dismissed.

21. Mrs Mustapha confirmed the appeal was not in relation to the protection
    claim or Article 3.  There  were  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
    return because he had been westernised.  She referred me to the  report
    "After Return" which confirmed  that  his  educational  and  employment
    skills would not transfer, and the appellant would have  difficulty  in
    finding shelter.  He did not and he would not be able  to  reintegrate.
    He was a vulnerable young adult with no  family  connections.   He  had
    been here for a long time and should be allowed to remain.

Analysis

22. With respect to Article 8 the Immigration Rules are the starting  point
    as they set out the position of the Secretary of State in relation to a
    claim on private life grounds under Article 8.  The requirements to  be
    met under the Immigration Rules by an applicant for leave to remain  on
    the grounds of private life include as follows:


      276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
      remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the date
      of application, the applicant:
           (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in
           Section S-LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in
           Appendix FM; and
           (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
           grounds of private life in the UK; and
           (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (iv) is under the age of 18 years and has lived continuously in
           the UK for at least 7 years (discounting any period of
           imprisonment) and it would not be reasonable to expect the
           applicant to leave the UK; or
           (v) is aged 18 years or above and under 25 years and has spent
           at least half of his life living continuously in the UK
           (discounting any period of imprisonment); or
           (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above,
           has lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years
           (discounting any period of imprisonment) but there would be very
           significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the
           country to which he would have to go if required to leave the
           UK.

23. The findings of First-tier Tribunal Devittie in relation to asylum  and
    humanitarian protection were not set aside and, following Devaseelan  v
    SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702 they are my starting point.   I  address  those
    findings only as they impinge on my findings in Article  8.   Axiomatic
    to much of the credibility findings were the absence before the  First-
    tier Tribunal of the appellant's brother in the UK.   The  brother,  (I
    refer to the DNA evidence below), however, did appear to give  evidence
    before the  Upper  Tribunal,  confirmed  that  he  had  not  previously
    attended owing to work commitments and  confirmed  that  there  was  no
    family in Afghanistan.  That has been the appellant's consistent claim.
     The refusal letter, as I have identified above, acknowledged that  the
    appellant had no  connections  in  Afghanistan.  I  make  this  finding
    afresh. I accept that the appellant will indeed be without  connections
    if returned there.  The Secretary  of  State  proposes  to  return  the
    appellant to Kabul and the appellant has no reason to go to the Kunduz.



24.  When  considering  very  significant  obstacles  the   assessment   of
    integration is considered relevant and Sales LJ in Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department  v  Kamara  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  2016  held  that
    integration called for a:

         "broad evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the  individual
         will be enough of an insider in terms of understanding how life  in
         the society in that other country is carried on and a  capacity  to
         participate in it, so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be
         accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
         society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety of human
         relationships to give substance  to  the  individual's  private  or
         family life."

25. Kamara was decided in the context of a deportation and that is not  the
    case here. The appellant has no criminal record, although that is to be
    expected and not a factor to be identified as showing integration.

26. Parveen v the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]  EWCA
    Civ 932 confirmed that:

         "The task of the Secretary of State, or the Tribunal, in any  given
         case is simply to assess the obstacles of  integration  relied  on,
         whether characterised as hardship or difficulty or  anything  else,
         and to decide whether they regard them as 'very significant'."

27. The appellant  entered  the  UK  on  29th  September  2012  and  almost
    immediately claimed asylum.  He  was  granted  discretionary  leave  to
    remain on 4th January 2013 and made his latest application for  further
    leave in July 2017 which was refused.  The appellant cannot satisfy the
    requirements for long residence under Paragraph 276B nor 276ADE(1)(iii)
    because at  the  date  of  application  his  length  of  residence  was
    insufficient.  He had not lived in the UK for at least seven  years  at
    the date of the application further to Paragraph 276ADE (1)(iv) of  the
    Immigration Rules and nor had he spent half his life living in  the  UK
    further to 276ADE (1)(v).   I turn  to  a  consideration  of  Paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).

28. The appellant is now aged 20 and is an  adult,  although  I  appreciate
    there is no bright line in the assessment of his maturity and thus  the
    impact of his age  on  his  ability  to  return  to  and  integrate  in
    Afghanistan.  He has now remained in the UK  for  almost  eight  years.
    Following Kamara, I must  make  a  broad  evaluative  judgment  of  his
    integrated links in the UK  but  also  consider  the  very  significant
    obstacles that would present to him on return to Afghanistan.

29. I accept the evidence he gave in respect of his private life claim  and
    which I detail below.  He did not  elaborate  his  claim  with  medical
    reports and was candid that he had  no  health  difficulties  including
    mental health difficulties (although he  was  very  distressed  at  the
    hearing at the prospect of being removed).  Following his claim  to  be
    related to his brother he sought DNA documentary evidence which  indeed
    verified they were related.

30. The appellant came to the UK at the age of 12 years  according  to  the
    age assessment conducted by Social Services. He attended primary school
    and then attended Howard School before  attending  MidKent  College  in
    Gillingham in Kent where he studied maths  and  engineering,  a  course
    which he has now completed.  He  told  me  that  he  could  not  attend
    university because he had no immigration status.  The  appellant  hopes
    to have a career in civil engineering and he  wishes  to  dedicate  his
    career to the UK.

31. According to his witness statement the  appellant  did  some  voluntary
    work for the British Red Cross in Gillingham but stopped when told that
    his family in Afghanistan could  not  be  traced  because  he  was  too
    dangerous to undertake tracing.  He worked part time for a while  in  a
    pizza shop in Kent. He has, however, never had full time employment.

32. He is apparently still in contact with his foster carers whom he visits
    regularly and they provided a supporting letter for him confirming that
    he was considered a member of their family and that he  had  integrated
    into the UK 'ie cultural/language/lifestyle'.  A letter from Mr and Mrs
    A who had  also  known  him  for  five  years  confirmed  that  he  had
    integrated very well into society.  He  has  many  friends  within  the
    community and from his previous school.

33. The appellant has consistently stated that he is an orphan and that his
    parents were killed when he was very young whilst  in  Afghanistan  and
    that he was cared for by his  aunt  until  he  left  the  country.  The
    Secretary of State in her  refusal  letter  accepted  that  he  had  no
    connection with anyone in Afghanistan and I do not disbelieve that  his
    parents are deceased. On that he has been consistent.

34. His brother,  Mr  H,  does  not  have  the  same  surname  as  him  and
    consequently the Home Office initially rejected the assertion that they
    were brothers.  The DNA evidence produced showed they were related  but
    did not show that  they  were  full  brothers.   The  report,  however,
    recorded that it was more difficult to verify siblings without parental
    testing. At the hearing the brother stated that it  was  possible  they
    may be half-brothers from a different mother.  I do accept from the DNA
    evidence that the  pair  are  at  least  half  brothers  and  that  the
    appellant's brother is the only family  member  whose  whereabouts  are
    known, and he is in the UK.

35. The challenge to the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge Devittie
    did not entail a challenge on the asylum grounds and despite  the  fact
    that his brother was said to have problems in Afghanistan  and  now  in
    the UK, I am not in a position to factor in the  asylum  background  of
    the brother into the appellant's claim in relation to  difficulties  on
    return.

36. The appellant does not live with his half-brother and only stayed  with
    his half-brother for a short period since his arrival.  His brother now
    works as a taxi driver and confirmed that he would send  money  to  the
    appellant if need be.  There was however no indication of the amount or
    the consistency with which those funds would be transmitted.  There was
    no evidence that he had afforded the appellant financial assistance  to
    date.

37. I accept that the appellant has developed a  private  life  in  the  UK
    because of his connections with his education and work and his  brother
    and friends. I do not accept  that  he  has  a  family  life  with  his
    brother.  Family life is a particular concept and not  made  out  here,
    Kugathas v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2003]  EWCA  Civ
    31. Although  clearly  there  is  some  emotional  support,  I  am  not
    persuaded on the evidence  that  there  is  "real"  or  "committed"  or
    "effective" "support", representing "the irreducible  minimum  of  what
    family life implies."   They live  separately  and  independently,  and
    they are both adults.  It was  confirmed  in  the  statement  that  the
    appellant is financially supported by the state and not at  present  by
    his brother.  There  was  no  indication  that  he  had  hitherto  been
    supported by his brother.

38. Conversely as the appellant has not been supported by a  family  member
    his exposure to the culture, which would assist him on return, has been
    reduced.  He has been in  local  authority  care  and  embedded  in  UK
    culture  and  his  position  is  thus  different  from   that   of   an
    unaccompanied minor who has lived with  a  family  member.  His  foster
    carer was of Afghan heritage but has obtained British  citizenship  and
    he no longer lives with that family. It is a very different  matter  to
    live with a family with Afghan connections in the  UK  to  living  with
    one's own Afghan family in the UK or indeed  in  order  to  absorb  the
    culture.  As it was not accepted that Mr H  was  his  brother,  he  was
    prevented from living with him.

39. The appellant speaks fluent English, spoke Pashtu before his  departure
    at 12 years old, and  some  Dari.  He  relates  he  was  at  school  in
    Afghanistan for only a couple of years and was raised by his aunt there
    until the age of 12 and that his Pashtu is now very poor because he has
    not used it for so long.

40. I accept on the evidence that the appellant has been  fully  integrated
    into the UK.

41. His brother stated that they have no family in Afghanistan and believes
    they may have removed to Pakistan.  From the United Nations Office  for
    the Coordination of Humanitarian Affairs (OCHA) 18th August 2020  which
    documented the ongoing deterioration of the security situation  in  the
    region from where the appellant hails, there is no reason to disbelieve
    that a family from the Kunduz would not have travelled.

42. The two country guidance cases of AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) and AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2020]
    UKUT 00130 (IAC) considered the reasonableness of return and relocation
    to Kabul.  The Upper Tribunal considered whether it was  reasonable  to
    expect a claimant to relocate, or whether it would be unduly  harsh  to
    expect him to do so, rather than very significant obstacles but clearly
    their findings on Kabul have significance for any article 8 findings.

43. AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] acknowledged the  widespread
    and persistent conflict related violence in Kabul but stated  that  the
    proportion of the population affected by  indiscriminate  violence  was
    small and not at a level where a returnee, even one with no  family  or
    other network and who has no experience of living in Kabul would face a
    serious and individual threat to their life  or  person  by  reason  of
    indiscriminate violence.    Safety and security were  factors  but  not
    determinative.  The Tribunal in 2020  reviewed  the  changing  position
    from the 2018 country guidance with regard the reasonableness of return
    and, (save for the specific areas of  challenge),  found  the  position
    largely the same.  There was no reason to  depart  from  the  preserved
    findings  of  the  panel  in  2018  in  relation  to  issues  such   as
    accommodation, family networks and employment.

44. With regards westernisation, AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]
    found no real risk of persecution because of westernisation and held at
    paragraph 187:

        "187. We do not find a person on return to Kabul, or more widely  to
        Afghanistan, to be at risk on the basis of 'Westernisation'.   There
        is simply a lack of any cogent or consistent evidence  of  incidents
        of such harm on which it could be concluded that there  was  a  real
        risk to a person who has spent time in the west being  targeted  for
        that reason, either  because  of  appearance,  perceived  or  actual
        attitudes of such a person.  At most, there is some  evidence  of  a
        possible adverse social impact or  suspicion  affecting  social  and
        family interactions, and evidence from a very small number  of  fear
        based on 'Westernisation', but we find that the evidence  before  us
        falls far short of establishing an objective fear of persecution  on
        this basis for the purposes of the Refugee Convention."

45. In respect of westernisation AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020]
    identified the mere fact of being a returnee did  not  prevent  someone
    from securing accommodation or work but acknowledged the challenges for
    returnees and held:

      "246. The UNHCR, in the 2019 COI UNHCR Report, cites extensively  from
         a recent German study which found  that  returnees  to  Kabul  from
         Germany have faced violence, suspicion and  hostility.  This  study
         (which we have not seen) was based  on  only  55  individuals,  and
         therefore caution must  be  exercised  before  drawing  generalised
         conclusions from it. We  accept  that  some  people  in  Kabul  are
         suspicious of and hostile towards returnees. However, the  evidence
         before us, considered together and as a whole, points to  returnees
         facing challenging circumstances not  because  they  have  returned
         from the west (risk from westernisation was categorically  rejected
         in the 2018 UT decision (at para. 187) and  this  finding  was  not
         appealed), but primarily because of poverty, lack of  accommodation
         and the  absence  of  employment  opportunities,  as  well  as  the
         security situation. The mere fact of  being  a  returnee  does  not
         prevent a person accessing accommodation (the evidence is that  the
         "tea house" accommodation is available to all males) or being taken
         on for day labour work in the informal market. Nor does it  prevent
         a person establishing, or re-establishing, a network, although care
         would need  to  be  taken  to  avoid  people  who  are  hostile  to
         returnees."

46. AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2020]  having  regard  to  the
    security  and  humanitarian  situation  in  Kabul  as   well   as   the
    difficulties faced by the population living there, found it  would  not
    in general be unreasonable or unduly harsh for a single adult  male  in
    good health to relocate to Kabul even if he does not have any  specific
    connections or support network  in  Kabul  but  nonetheless,  that  the
    particular circumstances of an individual applicant must be taken  into
    account.

47. AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020]  remarked  upon  the  socio-
    economic conditions to be experienced with  regard  work,  which  is  a
    critical factor to avoid destitution, as follows:

           '229...Even a person who is unable to form any such connections,
           and who must survive without the  benefit  of  a  network,  will
           ordinarily be able to find inexpensive accommodation in a  "chai
           khana" and (depending on physical abilities,  health  and  other
           individual characteristics) be able work as a  day  labourer  in
           the informal labour market in Kabul.




           230. A returnee with a support network or  specific  connections
           in Kabul may be in a significantly stronger position than others
           and in some cases the availability of a network will  counter  a
           particular vulnerability of an individual on return".


48. That said, secure rather than  temporary  employment  was  said  to  be
    dependant upon connection and

           'Whether a particular returnee would be able to earn  sufficient
           income from this type of work [manual day  labourer  work]  will
           depend on the individual circumstances. As  the  available  work
           would mostly be manual in nature, it is  necessary  to  consider
           whether an individual would be capable (e.g. in the light of his
           age,  health,  physical  capabilities  and  other  factors)   of
           undertaking such work and would be able to present himself in  a
           way  that  would  attract  employers,  who  frequently  will  be
           selecting individuals from a pool of men  (some  bringing  their
           own tools) who congregate at known meeting points'.


49. There was no indication that this appellant had any physical or  mental
    health difficulties. There was no medical report  before  me.  In  that
    respect he has been candid.  I therefore accept, as he stated, that  he
    went to school in Afghanistan for merely a couple of years and that  he
    can only read and write a little in Pashto and  Dari.   He  can  speak,
    read and write in fluently in  English  because  he  was  at  secondary
    school here throughout.  I do not accept that his language is such that
    he would not be able to speak Pashto at all or  for  him  to  exist  in
    Kabul although it will be rusty and his literacy  skills  may  well  be
    more of a problem.

50. Although he has studied maths and engineering  he  does  not  have  any
    practical skills to apply  when  in  Kabul.  He  has  hitherto  been  a
    student. He has demonstrated an ability  to  work  such  as  the  pizza
    restaurant, but may not, having  been  embedded  in  a  very  different
    society for such a length of time at a formative  stage  in  his  life,
    necessarily be able to present himself in a  way  which  would  attract
    employers in a casual day market and in a, no doubt,  very  competitive
    environment.   I accept there are limited options  for  employment  and
    the country guidance cases indicted very high unemployment rates.   His
    brother confirmed that he would provide him with money but there was no
    indication of the size of funds available nor the  consistency  bearing
    in mind he is a taxi driver with his own life to  support  and  as  the
    current pandemic circumstances present themselves.  Indeed, he has  not
    apparently financially supported his brother to date.

51. I do acknowledge the voluntary assistance scheme could be accessed  for
    an interim period but this is  temporary  and  has  been  described  as
    'parachute  support'.   A  person  with  support  network  or  specific
    connections in Kabul is more likely to be in an advantageous  position.
    A person without a network may be able to develop one following  return
    there but in view of his immersion in a very different cultural context
    hitherto and from such a young age, he may well be  distinct  from  the
    other 'returnees' referred to in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2020] who are looking for work  and  this  may  well  l  present  with
    significant difficulties for the reasons given above.   The  employment
    and accommodation conditions must also, at  present,  be  seen  in  the
    light of the Covid 19 global pandemic.

52. Kamara refers being able to develop within a reasonable time a  variety
    of human relationships to give substance to the individual's private or
    family life."   Even if he were to be able to enter the job market  the
    question is how long would it take him to secure work and how  enduring
    would that be?

53. Although I reject the concept of very significant  obstacles  owing  to
    westernisation  alone,  the  Asylos  report  dated  2017:  Afghanistan:
    Situation of young male 'Westernised'  returnees  to  Kabul   (which  I
    accept was considered by AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] but
    worthy of reference here because of the  age  at  which  the  appellant
    entered the UK),  recorded that those returned to Afghanistan without a
    support network will struggle to find shelter and employment and access
    health care. That report identified that Afghanistan is  a  country  of
    ethnic belongings and tribes who provide support in all areas  of  life
    and that,

           'it is  difficult  to  rebuild  a  life  for  these  young  male
           returnees due to  the  absence  of  network  support  in  a  new
           place...this is even truer for minors who are still children and
           need assistance...the consequences are that  returnees  have  no
           access or a[re] restricted to  the  job  market  ,  the  housing
           market and the marriage market. They are aware of it and that is
           why they prefer to leave the country again'.

246. The issue of age is relevant to  all  of  the  above.   AS  (Safety  of
    Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] when  considering  the  reasonableness  of
    internal relocation  to  Kabul  accepted  that  without  a  network  or
    connections returnees of any age could  expect  significant  challenges
    and in relation to age observed as follows:

       246. The Panel in the 2018 UT decision identified that a  returnee's
            age, including  the  age  at  which  he  left  Afghanistan,  is
            relevant to reasonableness. We  agree.  Returnees  of  any  age
            without a network will face significant challenges establishing
            themselves in Kabul. A person who left Afghanistan at  a  young
            age may, depending on individual circumstances,  be  less  able
            than someone who spent their formative years in Afghanistan  to
            navigate the challenges of the city by,  for  example,  finding
            work and accommodation.

         Conclusion on reasonableness


       247.  Taking  a  holistic  view,  and   considering   all   of   the
            circumstances together, we  are  satisfied  that  generally  it
            would not be unreasonable for a single healthy man to  relocate
            to Kabul, even if he does not have any family or network in the
            city  and  lacks  a  Tazkera.  However,   in   all   cases   an
            individualised case-by-case assessment is required, taking into
            account  an  individual's  personal   circumstances   including
            factors such as his age, health, disability, languages  spoken,
            educational and professional background, length of time outside
            of Afghanistan, connections to  and  experience  of  Kabul  and
            family situation and relationships.


248. The panel in AS (Afghanistan) 2018 said this:


          232.  We also consider the age at which a person left Afghanistan
               to be relevant as to whether this included  their  formative
               years.  It is reasonable to infer that the older a person is
               when they leave, the more likely they  are  to  be  familiar
               with,  for  example,  employment  opportunities  and  living
               independently.



          233. Although we find that it is reasonable for a person  without
               a support  network  or  specific  connections  in  Kabul  or
               elsewhere in Afghanistan to internally relocate to Kabul,  a
               person will be in a more advantageous position  if  they  do
               have such connections  depending  on  where  they  are,  the
               financial   resources   of    such    people    and    their
               status/connections.  We have in mind that  the  availability
               of a support network may counter a particular  vulnerability
               of an individual on return.

54. This appellant was removed from Afghanistan at an unusually  young  age
    of 12 years old and when he was pre-adolescent.   His  only  family  is
    with his brother, who has Indefinite Leave to Remain and settled  here,
    and for whom he clearly has affection.  His parents  are  deceased  and
    even though I accept that he does  not  have  an  Article  8  protected
    family life with his brother, he is part of his  private  life  and  an
    element that the appellant will not be able to replicate.

234. The country guidance accepts that there will be difficulties on  return
    for even for those who are young fit males without  family.  I  realise
    that we are now over three years on from the date  of  the  application
    when he had only lived in the UK for nearly five years but he  has  now
    lived here for 8 years. He has not  had  any  experience  of  secondary
    school in Afghanistan which will compromise his ability  to  engage  in
    critical  areas  of  functioning  such  as   employment   and   finding
    accommodation. For someone who has not spent  his  formative  years  in
    Afghanistan, has no family  there,  and  has  never  been  to  Kabul  I
    consider there would be very significant obstacles to his return  there
    and he will struggle to adapt and secure the basic fundamentals such as
    employment.

55. Contrary to the appellant in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020]
    the appellant  has  understandably  identified  beliefs,  attitudes  or
    values that would put him outside the norm in Afghanistan. He confirmed
    in his witness statement  that  although  nominally  a  Muslim  he  had
    changed his belief system comprehensively  having  lived  for  so  many
    years in a secular community.  I have no reason to discount that as  he
    has spent his entire secondary school years in the UK.

56. The latest Home Office guidance in the Country Policy  and  Information
    Note on Afghanistan: Afghans perceived as westernised January 2018,  at
    5.2 under the rubric 'societal views on returnees  and  social  norms',
    cited the EASO report and supports the contention that the age at which
    a person left  Afghanistan  is  relevant.  This  guidance  recorded  as
    follows

           'According to IOM's  Masood  Ahmadi,  not  respecting  community
           norms may cause problems for a person.  He  explained  that  for
           young people who grew up in Europe, the problems  may  not  come
           from society itself, but rather from  the  person's  ability  to
           adjust and reintegrate. He gave the view that the length of time
           a person spends in Europe and the degree to  which  that  person
           has  changed  as  a  result  will  also  affect  the  individual
           likelihood  of   encountering   particular   difficulties   with
           reintegration  in  Afghan  society.  He   stated   that   smooth
           reintegration into society is linked to the duration the  person
           has spent  outside  the  country  and  availability  of  network
           support. According to  Abubakar  Siddique,  the  time  a  person
           spends  outside  Afghanistan  in  this  way  has  an  impact  on
           reintegration:  contrasting   someone   who   internalised   the
           experience, with someone who knows  and  understands  the  local
           culture and customs'

57. AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] held at paragraph 205 that a
    single  person  living  alone  is  outside  of  the  social  norms   in
    Afghanistan and relatively uncommon.  The Tribunal also held  at  [202]
    that there is a significant problem with violent crime  in  Afghanistan
    and that someone who has an understanding of the  culture  and  society
    will be 'more adept at avoiding violence than someone who  is  ignorant
    of societal norms'.  That, in  my  view  is  a  significant  issue  for
    someone who has not lived in Afghanistan since the age of 12 and has no
    family there.

58.  In these circumstances, I am satisfied that the appellant will  be  an
    outsider in the sense that he will not have  an  understanding  of  how
    life is carried on, in order to be able   to  build  relationships  and
    participate in the society within a reasonable period of time and as  a
    result will be unable to navigate  the  important  waypoints  in  Kabul
    within the context of the  precarious  security  situation,  the  socio
    economic challenges and  his  unfamiliarity  with  Kabul  and  lack  of
    experience in the culture at a critical time.

59. The appellant has attended school here and no doubt made many  friends.
    He would also be able to keep in contact with his relatives and  family
    via modern methods on his return but he would  be  separated  from  his
    only known family member.

60. It is the duration, timing and quality of life that the  appellant  has
    spent in the UK and the country to which he must return,  which  render
    his profile distinct for the purposes of my assessment.  The  appellant
    has spent his pre-adolescent years in the UK and even attended  primary
    school here.  He has been in the UK for nearly all of his  teen  period
    which is highly formative; very young children are  focussed  on  their
    parents rather than their peers and  are  adaptable.     The  appellant
    has, according to his witness statement of  his  foster  carers,  fully
    integrated into the UK with friends and has  been  in  local  authority
    care.  A letter from MidKent College dated 17th May 2017  confirmed  he
    had enrolled to complete a study programme and he had  undertaken  work
    experience in the community and that he was a  'valued  member  of  the
    group' and had 'many friends throughout the college'.

61. I conclude overall for the reasoning given above that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles to the appellant's return to Afghanistan.  I
    find that return to Kunduz would be even more problematical than Kabul.

62. If the matter were to be considered outside the rules and in accordance
    with the five-stage test in Razgar v SSHD [2004] UKHL 27  there  is  no
    doubt that the appellant has established a private life in the  UK.   I
    am not persuaded however for the reasons given above that there is  any
    family life in the UK.  The threshold for the interference  is  low  AG
    (Eritrea) [2007] EWCA Civ 801 and would be reached by his removal.   As
    found above the Secretary of State's own decision is in pursuance of  a
    lawful immigration policy,  which  is  necessary  for  the  rights  and
    freedoms of  others  albeit  I  have  found  find  the  appellant  will
    encounter very significant obstacles on return.  Even  if  I  am  wrong
    about that I employ all the reasoning above in relation to the question
    of proportionality.

63. I have taken into account Section 117B of the  Nationality  Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 when assessing the weight to  be  accorded  to  the
    public interest and the proportionality of  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision as follows:

      Section 117B     Article 8: public interest considerations  applicable
                 in all cases

          "(1)   The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in
              the public interest.

          (2)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
              interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,
              that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom are able to speak English, because  persons  who  can
              speak English -

              (a)      are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

              (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

          (3)    It is in the public interest, and  in  particular  in  the
              interests of the economic well-being of the  United  Kingdom,
              that persons who seek  to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United
              Kingdom are financially independent, because such persons -

              (a)      are not a burden on taxpayers, and

              (b)      are better able to integrate into society.

          (4)    Little weight should be given to -

              (a)      a private life, or

              (b)      a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

                   that is established by a  person  at  a  time  when  the
                   person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.

          (5)     Little  weight  should  be  given  to  a   private   life
              established  by  a  person  at  a  time  when  the   person's
              immigration status is precarious.

              (6)      In the case  of  a  person  who  is  not  liable  to
                   deportation, the public interest  does  not  require  the
                   person's removal where -

                 (a)   the person has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
                      relationship with a qualifying child, and

                 (b)   it would not be reasonable to  expect  the  child  to
                      leave the United Kingdom."

64. Further to Section 117(3) he is not financially independent at  present
    because he has been engaged in studies. I accept his English  is  good,
    but that is a neutral factor in allowing him to remain in the UK.

65. I appreciate that the appellant feels that he is now more British  than
    Afghani.  He did spend twelve years of his  life  in  Afghanistan,  but
    this was not in Kabul and not during  the  critical  years  leading  to
    adulthood during which he might learn skills to prepare  him  for  work
    and finding accommodation.   Further  to  Section  117B  (5)  ,  little
    weight should be given to a private life when that has  been  developed
    during a precarious leave in the UK.  That provision is not, however, a
    straitjacket.  The appellant was granted discretionary leave at a  time
    when he had no control over his journey to the UK and although  Section
    117 applies to appellants whatever their age, he was a minor during the
    period of discretionary leave and  would  not  have  control  over  his
    status when very young. He did attempt to regularise his stay in the UK
    prior to attaining his majority.  The importance of the formative years
    is recognised in paragraph 276ADE(1) (v) but even though the  appellant
    is under the age of 24 and he has not spent half his life  here  either
    at the  date  of  application  or  at  the  date  of  the  hearing  his
    appreciation of his precarious status was perhaps not as acute  had  he
    been an adult.

66. The question I must ask in relation to Article  8  is  most  succinctly
    encapsulated in R (Agyarko) [2017] UKSC 11 is whether  there  would  be
    unjustifiably harsh consequences on his removal  to  Afghanistan.   For
    the reasons I  have  given  above  and  not  for  any  one  factor  but
    cumulatively, I find there would.

67. For the reasons given above I find that it would be disproportionate to
    return the appellant to Afghanistan and I allow the appeal on Article 8
    grounds.

Order

Appeal Allowed (European Convention on Human Rights Article 8)




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington             Date 21st September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered making a fee award but  there
appears to have been no fee paid and thus no order is applicable.


Signed      Helen Rimington             Date 21st September 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
