
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/05326/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 29 November 2018                  |On 13 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?
         HH JUDGE EADY QC, sitting as a judge of the Upper Tribunal


                                   Between

                                     H O
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. This appeal comes before us following  the  setting  aside  of  the
         decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Freer dated 23 February  2018
         which  allowed  the   appellant's   asylum   appeal   against   the
         respondent's decision to refuse protection on  22  May  2017.  Full
         reasons were given in the determination of Judge Keki? of 30 August
         2018; no findings were preserved.  The appellant's  oral  evidence,
         however, remains on record.


      2. The appellant is a national of Algeria,  born  in  April  1973.  He
         arrived illegally in October 2008  and  appears  to  have  made  no
         attempt to regularize his stay until 23 February 2017, after he was
         detained and after removal directions were set.  Meanwhile, he  had
         been arrested on suspicion of theft in 2010 and again  in  February
         2011, when removal directions were set for 27 March  but  cancelled
         due to a pending prosecution. He then failed to attend his trial in
         June 2011 and a warrant for his arrest was  issued.  On  1  January
         2016 he was arrested on suspicion  of  handling  stolen  goods  but
         absconded when granted temporary release.  On 28 November  2016  he
         was  convicted  and  sentenced  to  prison  for  three  months  for
         possession and/or use of a  false  instrument.  Removal  directions
         were set once more but suspended when he claimed asylum.


      3. The appellant's claim is that in Algeria, in May 2007, he witnessed
         the killing of an old man whose name he did not know (B14) but whom
         he referred to as  the  sheikh.  The  man  was  a  local  car  park
         attendant and the appellant believes he was killed  by  members  of
         the military disguised as extremists (he called them "terrorists").
         He confided in a friend about his theory which was then  discovered
         by the authorities at the man's funeral when it  was  vocalised  by
         the friend.  The appellant's friend was arrested that  evening  and
         detained for some six months. Upon  his  release,  the  authorities
         returned to arrest him and he jumped  out  of  a  window  to  avoid
         further  detention  and  died.  The  appellant   fears   that   the
         authorities are interested in him as the  source  of  his  friend's
         information. He also claims to fear the family of his dead  friend.




      4. The appeal was previously dismissed by Judge Lal on 29  June  2017,
         but that decision was set aside due to  a  failure  to  assess  the
         issue of illegal exit and an inadequate credibility assessment.  It
         was then heard by Judge Freer.


      5. On 2 February  2018  a  deportation  order  was  made  against  the
         appellant. He has not appealed that decision.


         The Hearing


      6. The appellant attended the hearing before us on  29  November  2019
         and gave oral evidence through an Arabic interpreter.   He  adopted
         his witness statement of 28 June  2017,  which  he  had  signed  in
         English, and confirmed its contents as true. He was  then  tendered
         for cross examination.


      7. In response to questions put by Mr  Deller,  the  appellant  stated
         that he believed that the three men who had come and spoken to  him
         and his group of friends one evening in May  2007,  were  the  same
         people who killed the sheikh, because they were  in  Afghani  dress
         and had gone into the military base in the neighbourhood.  He  said
         that there were between eight and eleven men.  They  had  not  come
         together, but separately. When asked if he had seen the killing, he
         stated that he had been there when the three men came; he then left
         but had forgotten his bag which he returned to  retrieve.  He  then
         saw the sheikh "was killed".  When  asked  to  clarify  if  he  had
         witnessed the actual killing, he confirmed he had. He  stated  that
         the  authorities  in  Algeria  could  kill  anyone  when  they  had
         problems. He said he saw that the  sheikh  had  been  guarding  the
         cars. He confirmed that he recognised the killers as  the  men  who
         had spoken to him. He  said  they  had  exited  from  the  military
         barracks. When asked whether  he  and  his  friend  had  known  the
         sheikh, he replied that his friend had not. They had all gone  home
         as directed.  When asked if he had known  the  sheikh,  he  replied
         that he had. He then added that everyone in the neighbourhood  knew
         him. He said he had attended the funeral because that was what  was
         done in Algeria. He confirmed that it was at the funeral  that  his
         friend announced that he was aware of who had  killed  the  sheikh.
         The appellant claimed to have been surprised when his friend  spoke
         out  and  he  said  he,  himself,  would  not  have  made  such  an
         announcement. He considered that he had made a mistake in confiding
         in his friend.


      8. The appellant was asked what the three men  had  said  to  him.  He
         replied that if terrorists saw people smoking they would tell  them
         not to, because it was prohibited. He confirmed that  he  had  been
         sitting with friends and smoking and these men came up to them  and
         threatened to kill them, "like they had  killed  many  hundreds  of
         others", if they ever saw them smoking  again.  There  had  been  a
         curfew in force at the time. He stated that he believed  they  were
         military personnel masquerading as terrorists. When they  lost  one
         of their members, they could kill anyone. He did not know  why  the
         sheikh had been killed; no one in the neighbourhood could think  of
         a reason, particularly as he was an old man.


      9. The appellant confirmed that it was  after  the  funeral  that  the
         police came to look for his friend. They  went  to  his  house  and
         questioned him. They were concerned that he  had  spoken  out.  His
         family  then  spread  the  news  to  others  and   soon   all   the
         neighbourhood knew that people had come  out  of  the  barracks  in
         Afghani dress. They became aware that the  appellant  had  provided
         this  information  because  his  friend  had  disclosed  this  when
         pressured under questioning. The appellant was aware of  this  from
         his brother and his friend's family. The appellant  then  left  the
         area and went to Ain Difla, a village  where  his  father  used  to
         live.


     10. The appellant stated that he had been stabbed in his  hand  with  a
         bayonet. This occurred three days after the killing. He had  to  go
         to the doctor about it. He could not recall when  the  funeral  had
         taken place. It might have been one or two weeks  after  the  man's
         death. He had been stabbed before that. It was not  the  custom  in
         Algeria to bury bodies quickly.  He  suggested  that  the  Tribunal
         check the internet for confirmation. He stated that many people  in
         Algeria were missing. Human rights organisations came but  achieved
         nothing.  He  confirmed  this  information  was  available  on  the
         internet.


     11. The appellant stated that the stabbing had no connection  with  the
         old man and that incident. The attack  had  occurred  when  he  was
         sitting with others and the military came and beat them up. He  did
         not know why.


     12. The appellant said that he had left Algeria  by  boat.  His  father
         paid for his journey. He did not pass through border  control  when
         exiting.


     13. The appellant said that he  had  delayed  making  an  asylum  claim
         because he  was  not  aware  of  the  procedure  and  thought  that
         reporting to sign on was all that he needed to do. If  he  were  to
         return now, the risk to him would be ongoing.  He  stated  that  in
         2010 his family told him that the authorities  were  still  looking
         for him. After that, he lost contact with them; they moved  and  he
         did not want to create problems for them. His father was elderly.


     14. That completed cross examination. There was no re-examination.


     15. In response to questions from the bench,  the  appellant  confirmed
         that the  incident  described  was  the  first  time  he  had  been
         threatened by terrorists. When asked why he believed they  were  in
         fact military personnel, he replied that he lived very close to the
         military base and they had come out from there. No real  terrorists
         would be able to do that. He saw them again in the morning from his
         window; they were wandering around. They were dressed in long robes
         and  they  had  beards.  He  repeated  that  the  authorities   "do
         everything". They had killed all the people of Baraki.   He  stated
         that he had left Algeria in November, during Independence Day. This
         was 2-3 days after the funeral. The appellant stated  that  he  had
         discovered he could claim asylum when he was in  detention.  If  he
         had known before, he would have claimed  in  2008.  There  were  no
         questions arising. That completed oral evidence.


     16. We then heard submissions. Mr Deller relied on the  refusal  letter
         and argued that the appellant's account was very unclear  not  only
         as to what had happened, but also as to  why  the  incident  should
         constitute a risk. The perceived weaknesses in the claim  were  set
         out in the decision letter. There  had  been  an  inordinate  delay
         between arrival  and  the  claim  for  asylum.  He  had  previously
         absconded.  It  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  exited   Algeria
         illegally. Applying the lower standard,  and  considering  all  the
         evidence as a whole, the appeal should be dismissed.


     17. Mr Eaton urged us to find that the  appellant's  account  had  been
         consistent and had a ring of truth about it. He had  been  able  to
         recognise the killers as the men who had come to tell him  to  stop
         smoking. The risk arose because he confided his suspicions  to  his
         friend and his friend then spoke out about it at the man's funeral.
         The police found out the appellant had disclosed  this  information
         to  his  friend  and  so  they  came  after  him.  There  had  been
         extrajudicial killings in Algeria in the past where the authorities
         committed atrocities in the guise  of  extremists.  We  were  taken
         through sections of the country evidence. Mr Eaton  also  submitted
         that the appellant had exited Algeria illegally. There would be  no
         protection available to  him  on  return  and,  as  he  feared  the
         authorities, relocation was not an option.


     18. That completed the submissions. At the conclusion of the hearing we
         reserved our determination, which we now give with reasons.


         Findings and Conclusions


     19. In reaching our conclusions, we have taken careful account  of  all
         the evidence as a whole and the submissions made by the parties. We
         are mindful of the lower standard to which  the  appellant  has  to
         make out his case.


     20. The outcome of this appeal depends on the credibility of the  claim
         as, if the appellant is wanted by the authorities,  then  we  would
         accept that he has no internal relocation option and  would  be  at
         risk on return to Algeria. We also accept  that  in  the  past  the
         authorities have committed atrocities undercover  and  indeed  that
         they have acted, and continue to act with impunity. However, having
         considered the account and the evidence we find that the claim is a
         fabrication for the following reasons, which are not listed in  any
         order of priority.


     21. Given the appellant's ability to recall the date of  his  departure
         from Algeria (2-3 November 2007:B12), the date of  the  killing  of
         the sheikh (25 May 2007: B8), the date of the death of  his  friend
         (20 August 2007:B11), the date he returned home from hiding in  the
         village (27 August 2007:B12),  the  times  of  various  events  and
         distances involved (B8-9, B11), we do not accept that  the  passage
         of time has impacted upon his ability to  accurately  recall  other
         claimed  events  where  there  has  been  so  much  confusion   and
         inconsistency,  particularly   not   to   the   extent   that   the
         discrepancies can be excused on that basis  and,  in  fairness,  Mr
         Eaton did not seek to argue that.


     22. We find the appellant's account to  be  inherently  incoherent  and
         inconsistent. He maintained that he had left Algeria in November on
         Independence Day. This was also what he  had  said  in  his  asylum
         interview (B12). We take judicial  notice  of  the  fact  that  the
         Algerian Independence Day is in fact celebrated on 5 July.  As  the
         killing of the old man is said to have occurred on 25 May 2007, and
         the appellant claims to have lived in hiding for six  months  after
         the funeral, he could not have left Algeria on Independence Day.


     23. If the appellant meant to refer to the Day of the  Revolution  (the
         date the war for independence commenced), celebrated on 1 November,
         the time scale still does not fit. The appellant told  us  that  he
         fled his home after the funeral and that he left the country two or
         three days later. It is, therefore, unclear why he claimed to  have
         been  in  hiding  for  six  months  as  by  his  own  account,  the
         authorities only came looking for him after  they  had  questioned,
         detained and released his friend and after his friend had fallen to
         his death trying to avoid a second detention. All this was meant to
         have occurred in the space of two or three days, if the appellant's
         oral evidence is to be believed.   Yet  in  earlier  evidence,  the
         appellant claimed that his friend had died  six  months  after  the
         funeral of the sheikh. The appellant told us that the first funeral
         had taken place two weeks after the killing and that,  contrary  to
         Islamic practice of a speedy burial, this was  not  the  custom  in
         Algeria where funerals  might  be  delayed  for  several  weeks  or
         months. His evidence to  the  respondent  was,  however,  that  the
         funeral took place just four days after the killing (B9 and B10).


     24. In oral evidence to Judge Freer, the appellant stated that he  told
         his father about his problems on  their  way  back  home  from  the
         funeral on 20 August 2017 (paragraph 19). If this is a reference to
         the funeral of the sheikh then it contradicts the earlier evidence.
         If  it  refers  to  the  funeral  of  the  appellant's  friend,  it
         contradicts his claim at interview that he  had  not  attended  the
         funeral because he had been afraid. It also  contradicts  his  oral
         evidence to us that he left Algeria two or  three  days  after  the
         funeral (assuming that was a reference to the friend's burial)  and
         his evidence  at  the  asylum  interview  when  he  maintained  the
         friend's burial occurred ten days after his death on 20 August 2017
         (B13).


     25. The appellant claimed in evidence to  Judge  Freer  (paragraph  21)
         that the authorities came to his home two days after  the  sheikh's
         killing on the pretence of recruiting him for military service  but
         he said that he had told them that as he was 35 years old,  he  was
         too old to serve. At his asylum interview he  claimed  he  had  not
         been at home when they came and his father had told him he was  not
         there (B16).


     26. The appellant told us that he had been hiding in the village of Ain
         Defla until he left  Algeria.  This  is  also  what  he  stated  at
         interview and initially in his witness  statement  (paragraph  16).
         Later in his statement, however, he claimed to  have  been  at  his
         home and that his family kept him hidden (paragraph 24).


     27. At interview the appellant stated that he had arrived in the UK  on
         10 January 2008 (B7), yet there is evidence that he was arrested on
         15 October 2008 when he maintained he had  just  arrived  by  lorry
         (paragraph 15: decision letter). He also claimed at that point that
         he had come here to work. In his witness statement  he  claimed  he
         had left Algeria for the UK in 2008 (paragraph 1) which contradicts
         his claim to have left in November 2007.


     28. The appellant claimed at his interview in April 2017 to  have  last
         had contact with his family 4-5 years earlier because they had left
         their home in Algiers (B7) but  he  also  claimed  to  have  ceased
         contact with them in 2010 because he was afraid of the  authorities
         (B16). Although he claimed to have always lived in Algiers (B12) he
         had forgotten his address  (B7).  At  his  screening  interview  he
         claimed to have had no work in Algeria (A3) but at his interview he
         maintained he had been a grocer (B8).


     29. At his interview he claimed to have left his wallet or his ID  card
         behind (B9) when moved along by the 'soldiers' but in oral evidence
         he said it was a bag.


     30. He said in oral evidence that three men had approached him and  his
         friends that night in May, out of a group of 10 or 11. At interview
         he said it was two men (B8). He repeatedly said at  interview  that
         it was around midnight and dark (B8, B10) and that he could not see
         well and thought three men had been involved in the killing  (B10).
         Yet he maintained in oral evidence that he recognised  the  men  as
         being those who had come and threatened his group  of  friends.  He
         also claimed that due to the dark the men had not been able to  see
         him return for his bag/wallet/ID card (B14) yet the Rule 35  report
         records that he claimed he had been seen by them.


     31. The appellant told us that his friend  had  not  known  the  sheikh
         although he  later  appeared  to  backtrack  somewhat  and  claimed
         everyone in the neighbourhood had known him. This does not  explain
         how the appellant does not know the man's  name  (B14)  or  why  he
         initially told us that his friend had not known the  man.  This  is
         even stranger when his evidence to  the  respondent  was  that  his
         friend had been very sad at the funeral when he had started to bury
         him (B10).


     32. The appellant claimed that his friend had been detained for four or
         five months (B10) and was then released after which the authorities
         returned to arrest him. Not only does this not accord with the time
         line, as if the funeral of the  sheikh  took  place  several  weeks
         after the killing on  27  May,  the  friend  could  not  have  been
         detained for that long if he died in August 2007, but  it  is  also
         not credible. There can be no reason the appellant's  friend  would
         be released after a lengthy detention only for the  authorities  to
         return immediately  to  his  home  to  re-arrest  him.  Nor  is  it
         plausible that during such  a  lengthy  detention  the  authorities
         would not have discovered that the appellant had been the source of
         the information. The fact that they took no steps to  approach  him
         until after the death of the friend, or if one account is  believed
         that they came to  recruit  him  for  military  service,  does  not
         disclose any urgent adverse interest in him.


     33. The appellant gave a lengthy and detailed account of  exactly  what
         occurred when the police came for  the  friend  after  his  release
         (B11). He claimed he was aware  of  this  information  because  his
         brother had informed him. However,  the  appellant's  evidence  was
         also that his brother had been outside the house,  on  the  street,
         when the police arrived (B12)  so  he  could  not  have  known,  so
         precisely, what had transpired indoors.


     34. The appellant claims to have returned home on 27 August  (B12)  and
         to have remained there until he left  Algeria  in  early  November,
         despite claiming to fear the authorities and the family of his dead
         friend. No good reason has been given  for  this  and  he  has  not
         claimed that any problems befell him  during  this  time.  Nor  was
         there any attempt to find him whilst he was  in  Ain  Defla.  Given
         that he claimed that this was his old family home, it is reasonable
         to assume that the authorities would have looked there for  him  if
         he was of interest to them.


     35. A Rule 35 report was prepared for the appellant on 23 February 2017
         whilst he was in detention at Harmondsworth, prior  to  the  asylum
         interview. This is included in the appellant's  bundle  (p.128a-e).
         In that report, the doctor records that the appellant was  seen  by
         the killers and stabbed in the hand with a  bayonet  on  25  August
         2007 and warned not to inform anyone about what he had seen.  It is
         also recorded that the appellant's  friend  witnessed  the  killing
         with him.


     36.  There  was  no  further  reference  to  this  stabbing  at  either
         interview, or in his solicitors' subsequent representations  or  in
         his grounds of appeal or witness statement. If  this  is  a  matter
         linked to the sheikh's killing, then we would  expect  it  to  have
         featured in the appellant's subsequent  account,  even  if  it  was
         mentioned prior to the interview. The appellant told Judge Lal that
         it was "not an issue" (paragraph 14). In evidence to us, he  stated
         that it had nothing to do with the killing of the sheikh. That  was
         clearly in direct contradiction to what he had told the  doctor  in
         detention  and  what  he  told  Judge  Freer  (paragraph  23).   No
         explanation has been offered.


     37. This matter also raises further difficulties with the account as by
         his own evidence, the appellant claimed that  the  authorities  had
         already been looking for him before this date. If they then located
         him and stabbed him as a warning, they had then shown that that was
         the extent of their interest in him. Had they wanted to detain him,
         they could have done so at that time.


     38. We were referred to several sections of  the  country  evidence  in
         which it is maintained that the authorities  in  Algeria  act  with
         impunity. If that is the case, we find there would be no reason for
         them to be concerned about who, if anyone, had seen them  kill  the
         sheikh. The appellant, himself, said that the authorities can  kill
         anyone  they  want  and  do  whatever   they   wish   without   any
         repercussions.


     39. There has been an extraordinarily lengthy delay in the making of an
         asylum claim, given that the appellant entered the UK in 2007/2008.
         He claims not to have been aware of the procedure but he stated  at
         his interview that he had fled here to  claim  asylum.  We  do  not
         accept that in the many years he remained here unlawfully  that  he
         could not have sought advice as to his position as  he  would  have
         known full well that he was here unlawfully. We find that the  long
         delay and the timing of the claim are matters which go against  his
         claim to require international protection and are  matters  we  are
         entitled to have  regard  to  under  section  8.  Furthermore,  the
         appellant failed to make  an  asylum  claim  in  France,  Italy  or
         Belgium which he claims to have travelled through.


     40. We note that the appellant claimed upon arrest  that  he  had  come
         here to work. We consider that this is likely to be the  reason  he
         left Algeria. Indeed, he has  since  worked  without  authority  in
         various markets ((paragraph  13  of  determination  of  Judge  Lal,
         paragraph 14 of determination of Judge Freer and paragraph 3 of his
         witness statement).


     41. We do not accept the claim, put at the previous hearing,  that  the
         appellant's inconsistent account is due to his  limited  education.
         We note that he was able  to  recall  numerous  dates  of  relevant
         events which, if he was uneducated, would have been meaningless  to
         him. We note that he was able to  sign  his  name  on  the  witness
         statement and the Rule 35 report and  that  he  was  aware  of  the
         internet and  the  concept  of  'googling'  to  locate  information
         (something he mentioned to  us  at  the  hearing).  These  are  not
         matters that an uneducated man  would  be  aware  of.  We  do  not,
         therefore, accept that the appellant is a man of limited  education
         and that this could explain his incoherent account.


     42. We find that the appellant's entire claim has been  fabricated.  We
         do not accept that any  of  the  claimed  events  occurred  and  it
         follows that we do not accept that the appellant exited Algeria  in
         the manner claimed. He would not, therefore, be viewed  as  someone
         who left illegally. Having considered all the evidence in the round
         and bearing in mind  the  lower  standard  of  proof,  we  are  not
         satisfied that the claim has been made out.


     43. No health issues were raised before us.


     44. There has been no reliance upon article 8. No submissions were made
         on humanitarian protection grounds.


     45. The appellant is also the subject of a deportation order made on  2
         February 2018 and against which no appeal has been lodged.




         Decision


     46. The appeal is dismissed on all grounds.








         Anonymity


     47. We continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.

    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge Keki?

       Date: 10 December 2018


