
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05814/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2017                   |On 31st January 2017                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK


                                   Between

                              A (aka A, aka A)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Appiah, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This matter comes before me for consideration  as  to  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in  the  determination  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Reid ("the FTTJ") promulgated on 21  November  2016,  in
    which she dismissed the appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim.

 2. No anonymity direction was made in the First-tier Tribunal  but,  given
    the references in this decision to the appellant's half-brother and the
    latter's personal circumstances, an  anonymity  order  is  required.  I
    refer to the appellant's half-brother in  the  UK  (who  gave  evidence
    before the First-tier Tribunal) as "B".  I  refer  to  the  appellant's
    other brother (to whom the FTTJ refers at [36] and [37]) as "C".

Background

 3. The appellant made his initial asylum claim in October 2010, in another
    name, on the basis he was a Kuwaiti Bedoon who feared retribution  from
    his pregnant girlfriend's family and on the grounds of  his  ethnicity.
    His claim was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  that  decision
    upheld in the Upper Tribunal. Findings were made  that  he  was  not  a
    Bedoon and that he had used false documents. It  was  found  he  was  a
    Kuwaiti and could return to Kuwait.


 4. In January 2013 the appellant made a new claim  on  the  basis  of  his
    Syrian nationality, being unable to return to return to his  home  area
    Banias because he was a Sunni Muslim and would be perceived to be anti-
    regime, members  of  his  family  having  participated  in  anti-regime
    demonstrations.  He  provided  documentary  evidence  in  support.  The
    appellant then, through his new representatives, sent a further  letter
    to the respondent in May 2014 to the effect that he feared  persecution
    in Syrian  because  of  past  ill-treatment  during  military  service;
    alternatively  he  would  be  at  risk  as  a  failed  asylum   seeker;
    alternatively because his brother had been imprisoned.   The  appellant
    then produced copies of further documents: a family record of book  and
    a military service record.


 5. It was the refusal of the second asylum claim which was the subject  of
    the appeal before FTTJ Reid.  Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Landes
    granted permission to  appeal  against  FTTJ  Reid's  decision  in  the
    following terms:
         ...
         2. It is arguable that the judge erred in  her  assessment  of  the
         expert evidence as set out in ground 1.  She gave Dr Fatah's report
         weight as being  systematic  and  on  the  basis  that  he  was  an
         experienced witness with relevant expertise and qualifications  and
         accordingly it is arguable that given the weight she had placed  on
         that report her reasons for rejecting the expert's conclusion  that
         the appellant was a native Syrian Arabic speaker were inadequate.


         3. I also consider ground 2  to  be  arguable.   Whilst  I  do  not
         consider it particularly relevant that the respondent had  accepted
         [B] as a Syrian national, the judge did not  explain  why  she  had
         given no weight or little weight to [B]'s evidence.


         4.  I do not however understand ground 3.  The DNA report said that
         the appellant and [B] were half-brothers.  It was  said  that  they
         could not be confirmed to be full brothers because no samples  were
         taken from the parents but no evidence was produced to the judge to
         this effect [8].  Accordingly I do not see how the judge  can  have
         erred as alleged.  In case I have misunderstood a vital part of the
         argument and bearing in mind I am granting permission in any event,
         I do not restrict the grounds which may be argued."


 6. Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 7. Mr Appiah, for the appellant, adopted the  grounds  for  permission  to
    appeal and made additional oral submissions. I summarise the grounds as
    follows:


        a. The FTTJ gave weight to the opinion of the expert yet failed  to
           give cogent or  detailed  reasons  for  rejecting  the  expert's
           conclusion that the appellant was Syrian. The report "rated  the
           appellant's evidence ... as either  good  or  acceptable".   The
           FTTJ concluded the appellant was able to speak Syrian Arabic but
           that this was as a result of his association with B;  there  was
           no  basis  for  a  finding  that  the  appellant  had   received
           sufficient help to convince the expert he was from  Syria.   The
           FTTJ's reasons for rejecting the expert's conclusions  were  not
           supported by the  evidence.  Mr  Appiah  confirmed  it  was  not
           submitted that the decision to reject the  expert  evidence  was
           perverse.
        b. There was no assessment of the credibility of the evidence of B.
           He had been cross-examined and his  evidence  should  have  been
           given greater weight. Contrary to the grounds  of  appeal,  this
           witness had  not  previously  been  the  subject  of  an  appeal
           decision. B's evidence consisted of  three  assertions:  he  was
           Syrian, the appellant was his full brother and the appellant was
           also Syrian. The FTTJ did not give reasons for  rejecting  those
           parts of his evidence and should have done so.
        c. The FTTJ had found the appellant was not the full sibling of  B.
           There was DNA evidence before the FTTJ sufficient to support the
           claim that they were full brothers. Given that the parents  were
           not themselves  available  for  testing;  the  test  could  only
           confirm they were half brothers. It was  not  therefore  "wholly
           inconceivable" that the appellant and B were full brothers.  The
           FTTJ had failed to take into account the lower standard of proof
           in assessing the DNA and other evidence as regards the nature of
           the relationship.
        d. The totality of the evidence, which was not  available  for  the
           first asylum appeal, should  have  been  given  more  weight  to
           overturn the findings made in the first appeal.


 8. Mr Clarke, for the respondent, responded as follows:


        a. The FTTJ had given  full  reasons  for  rejecting  the  expert's
           conclusions: the  report  was  not  determinative  but  required
           consideration in  the  round,  taking  into  account  all  other
           matters.  The report should not be considered in isolation.   It
           was  appropriate  for  the  FTTJ  to  take  into   account   the
           appellant's immigration history,  including  his  earlier  false
           asylum claim. The weight to be given  to  the  expert  evidence,
           which was not wholly in favour of the appellant,  as  identified
           by the FTTJ, was a matter for the FTTJ in the light of  all  the
           material before her.  There were many reasons, as set out by the
           FTTJ to doubt the appellant's credibility.  Her approach was not
           wrong: the expert evidence was not sufficient to depart from the
           previous findings. The appellant's challenge was no more than  a
           disagreement with the findings.
        b. As regards B, there were various findings  with  regard  to  his
           credibility at [36], [37] and [40].  He had  given  inconsistent
           accounts and this damaged his credibility.  The  assertion  that
           the appellant and B were full brothers, when  the  DNA  evidence
           was  that  they  were  half   brothers,   also   damaged   their
           credibility. The evidence of  the  expert  did  not  corroborate
           their evidence as to their relationship.
        c. The appellant's  and  B's  evidence  was  contrary  to  the  DNA
           evidence. That evidence could not stand on its own; it should be
           considered in the round. There were so many  credibility  issues
           that the FTTJ was entitled to  find  that  the  DNA  report  was
           accurate and that the appellant and B were half brothers.


 9. In reply Mr Appiah acknowledged that the findings of  fact  in  the  UT
    were the starting point.  However, he submitted they were  not  binding
    and that the task of the FTTJ had been to consider  the  new  evidence.
    The appellant had given an explanation for claiming initially he was  a
    Kuwaiti; he had provided  evidence  to  support  his  new  claim;  that
    evidence was not before the UT. The single most important issue was the
    appellant's  nationality  and  this  ought  to  have  been  scrutinised
    closely.


Discussion


10. The FTTJ identifies the appellant's second asylum claim  had  "shifted"
    [20]. She sets out her specific concerns and states that "this changing
    account  affects  his  credibility".   The  FTTJ's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's own evidence,  ie  apart  from  the  expert,  DNA  and  his
    brother's evidence, is not challenged before me.  Nor  is  the  finding
    that the appellant delayed for "around 3 years after  his  arrival"  in
    the UK and the negative impact of this on his  credibility  [25].   The
    FTTJ did not accept as reasonable the appellant's explanation for  that
    delay. She noted he relied on his own false claim to explain why he had
    not identified himself as Syrian earlier.  The FTTJ did not  therefore,
    on reasonable grounds, accept the appellant's explanation for the delay
    in making the new asylum claim on the basis of his Syrian nationality.

11. The appellant does not challenge, before me, the FTTJ's findings on the
    reliability of the documents produced by the appellant  in  support  of
    his claim to be at risk as a result of being a Syrian citizen.  This is
    a matter of some importance which the FTTJ took into account in  making
    her  assessment  of  the  reliability  of  the   appellant's   evidence
    generally. She was entitled to do so.

12. This is not a case where the FTTJ has  relied  on  adverse  credibility
    findings to reject the expert evidence of Dr Fatah with regard  to  the
    appellant's nationality, as is clear  from  the  decision  overall  and
    specifically [19]. Nor is this submitted for the  appellant.  The  FTTJ
    has taken as her starting point the  findings  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
    decision dated 25 January 2012: her [12] refers. Again that approach is
    not criticised by the appellant. Thus it was appropriate for  the  FTTJ
    to approach the appeal on the basis that, unless the  appellant  showed
    otherwise, he was from Kuwait and able to return safely to  Kuwait.  It
    was also accepted by the appellant that he had used false or unreliable
    documents in support of his first asylum  claim  ([12]  of  the  FTTJ's
    decision refers). It was also accepted by the  appellant  that  he  had
    told lies and that  his  previous  asylum  claim  was  false  (see  the
    appellant's submissions at [14]).  These are matters of relevance to an
    assessment of the evidence overall, including the expert evidence.

13. The FTTJ notes that the appellant gave a different account to Dr  Fatah
    than that he  had  given  elsewhere  [34].   The  FTTJ  makes  positive
    findings about Dr Fatah's methodology, expertise and the report itself.
    She gives his opinion weight [41].  She recognises it as  "in  addition
    to the DNA tests ... a key part of the Appellant's claim to  be  Syrian
    and is part of the new evidence said to displace the previous  Tribunal
    and Upper Tribunal findings as the starting point on nationality."  She
    notes the report was based on an hour's telephone call "which  while  a
    reasonable period of time, had to  cover  a  wide  range  of  different
    topics". She also takes into account  the  appellant's  previous  false
    claim and his previous  reliance  on  false  documents  and  his  being
    "prepared to go to great lengths to extend his stay in  the  UK".   She
    notes Dr Fatah's conclusions with regard to the  level  of  his  Syrian
    Arabic.  The FTTJ accepts the appellant and  B  are  half-brothers  and
    that the appellant may have had family in Syria "who he may have  spent
    time with in Syria during his  life".   She  finds  the  appellant  was
    likely before he arrived in the UK to have some familiarity with Syrian
    Arabic already and that he has improved upon that with B's help.   She,
    in effect, found that his  ability  to  speak  Syrian  Arabic  was  not
    sufficient, without more, to demonstrate he was a Syrian national.  She
    decided  this  having  "taken  into  account  [her]  other  credibility
    findings and the fact that the Appellant  ha[d]  in  his  first  asylum
    claim used any means he [could] to try to obtain asylum and [had]  been
    dishonest".   She  noted  Dr  Fatah's  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    knowledge of  Syrian  matters,  was  "acceptable  or  good"  except  in
    relation to his knowledge of national holidays in which  he  was  rated
    "unsatisfactory" [44]. Similarly the appellant, according to Dr  Fatah,
    did not know Syrian coinage [p44].  She  observed  Dr  Fatah  noted  he
    would expect more knowledge in some areas [44]. She also noted "much of
    the information in this area  and  the  other  areas  could  have  been
    researched and learnt or taught by [B]".  The  FTTJ  has  undertaken  a
    comprehensive and detailed assessment of the evidence of  Dr  Fatah  as
    part of a global assessment of the evidence generally. She has given it
    some evidential weight, as is consistent with her  recognition  of  his
    expertise and methodology. She  has  put  it  in  the  context  of  the
    appellant's evidence overall and his history of having made an  earlier
    false asylum claim without reasonable justification. She has also taken
    into account her assessment of the evidence of B and the DNA  evidence.
    I am unable to find that the FTTJ's assessment of the  expert  evidence
    is flawed.  It  is  comprehensive  and  detailed  and  founded  in  the
    evidence.


14. I turn to the assessment of B's evidence. It is submitted that the FTTJ
    failed to make a credibility finding. I disagree.  The  FTTJ  noted  at
    [36] that the appellant claimed his brother, C, had been  arrested  and
    was in  prison  for  a  year.   However,  B  told  the  FTTJ  that  the
    authorities had not been interested in C. The FTTJ finds "this  damages
    both  the  Appellant's  and  [B]'s  credibility  as  this  would  be  a
    significant matter they would not forget  or  make  a  mistake  about".
    Furthermore, she notes at [37]  that  "neither  mentioned  [C]  was  in
    Holland until the hearing. Given the Appellant had said [C] had been in
    prison ... and relevant to his claim, this was an obvious  gap  in  his
    witness statement". Whilst the FTTJ refers specifically to a gap in the
    appellant's evidence, it is implicit that the  failure  of  B  also  to
    mention his brother  being  in  Holland,  is  deserving  of  criticism.
    Furthermore, at [40] the FTTJ deals with the DNA evidence to the effect
    that the appellant and B were half-brothers.  She finds,  "given  [her]
    other credibility findings, ... it is more likely that they  are  half-
    brothers than full brothers".  She states [40] that "this damages  both
    the Appellant's and [B]'s credibility."  Given these  findings,  it  is
    implicit the FTTJ found B's evidence to be  unreliable.  There  was  no
    need for further specific findings on the issue.


15. The third submission for the appellant is that the DNA evidence, whilst
    limited to stating that the appellant and B are  half-brothers,  should
    have been taken, given the low burden of proof, as being supportive  of
    the appellant's and B's evidence that they were full brothers. This was
    because, it is  submitted,  for  good  reason  their  parents  had  not
    provided samples for DNA testing.  It was argued that, the  DNA  report
    was consistent with their claims to be full  brothers.   The  FTTJ  was
    entitled to take into account the evidence which was before  her.  This
    included her findings that the evidence of the appellant and B was  not
    consistent and not reliable.  It was open to her to accept the findings
    of the DNA report and this she did.

16. For these reasons, I do not accept the submissions for  the  appellant.
    There are no material errors  of  law  in  the  FTTJ's  decision.   Her
    decision stands.


Decision

17. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve a
    material error of law and the decision is preserved.


18. This appeal is dismissed.





A M Black


Signed                                             Date 30 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




A M Black

Signed                                             Date     30 January 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge A M Black

