
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05659/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |On 10th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                 PRABASH [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Z Kiss, HOPO


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant has been granted permission to  appeal  the  decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Chudleigh who in a decision promulgated on 25
    June 2018, dismissed his appeal against the respondent's refusal on  16
    April 2018 to grant him  asylum  on  the  basis  of  imputed  political
    opinion.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 26  October  1981.   He
    is of Sinhalese ethnicity.

3.   He came to the UK on a Tier 4 Student visa granted on 20 January  2010.
     He returned to Sri Lanka for a holiday on 19 August 2012.  He  claimed
    that on 25 August 2012 he was arrested, tortured and detained for seven
    days before his father paid a bribe to secure his release.  He  claimed
    that he was of interest to  the  authorities  as  he  was  involved  in
    assisting his father with renting a property in October 2006  to  a  Mr
    Baljat Raviraj who was a member of  the  LTTE  and  as  he  had  become
    friends with Ramesh Kamar who was an LTTE member in the  period  up  to
    2008.

4.   In oral evidence he described his association with  Ramesh  as  a  good
    friend with whom  he  studied  and  travelled  to  countries  including
    Singapore and Malaysia.  After 2008 he had no contact with Ramesh.   He
    did not know that Ramesh  was  involved  with  the  LTTE.   They  never
    discussed such matters.

5.   The appellant claimed that when he was arrested on 25  August  2012  he
    was told that Ramesh had mentioned his name to the authorities.  He was
    told that Raviraj was an LTTE member and that the appellant's  father's
    property was used for  supporting  LTTE  in  carrying  out  attacks  in
    Colombo.

6.   The judge found that the appellant's case was inconsistent  as  to  who
    answered the door to the authorities on 25 August 2012.  In his  asylum
    interview the appellant said it was his mother but in a letter  to  the
    Tribunal prepared for the appeal, the appellant's father said it was he
    who answered the door.

7.   The appellant claimed to have been tortured in custody.   In  paragraph
    14 of his witness statement he described  scars  on  his  right  thigh,
    right leg, chin and head.  The judge noted however that  there  was  no
    mention in the report of Dr S E Joss dated 30 May 2018 of any  injuries
    to the chin.  The appellant said that he had forgotten to mention it to
    Dr Joss.

8.   The appellant  claimed  that  a  friend  of  his  father's  who  was  a
    businessman arranged for him to be released  after  the  payment  of  a
    bribe and then exited without problem from Sri Lanka after  payment  of
    another bribe.

9.   The appellant arrived back in the UK in  September  2012  but  did  not
    claim asylum until 16 October 2017.  His explanation for the delay  was
    that he feared he would be sent back to Sri Lanka and because he had  a
    student visa for two years.

10.  The appellant submitted a number of documents in support of  his  claim
    including the medical report from Dr Joss, a course certificate, a deed
    for the property rented to Raviraj, but no  tenancy  agreement.   There
    were also documents allegedly  issued  by  the  Magistrates'  Court  of
    Colombo regarding his arrest, a letter from his  father,  his  father's
    birth certificate, a letter from his wife who is now in Sri Lanka  with
    his daughter, copies of his wife's passport and visa, a letter from his
    GP regarding his depression  and  anxiety,  and  his  daughter's  birth
    certificate.

11.  The judge noted that there was a document  from  a  Magistrates'  Court
    dated 1 October 2012 which recorded that the appellant was charged with
    aiding  and  abetting  LTTE  terrorists  and  supporting   the   LTTE's
    international network.   It  also  mentioned  that  the  appellant  had
    escaped from custody and an application for an arrest  warrant.   There
    was also what purported to be an arrest warrant dated 2 October 2012.

12.  The judge also had before her a letter which appeared  to  be  from  an
    attorney in Sri Lanka dated 6 June 2018 which confirmed that there is a
    case filed  by  Criminal  Investigation  Division,  Kollupitiya  Police
    Station against the appellant on the charges  of  supporting  the  LTTE
    terrorist organisation.  The attorney also confirmed that there was  an
    arrest warrant issued against him by the Magistrates' Court of  Colombo
    for his arrest.  The attorney's opinion was that since this was an open
    arrest warrant, the appellant will be arrested at the  airport  on  his
    arrival to Sri Lanka.

13.  The respondent produced a bundle of  three  letters  from  the  British
    High  Commission  in  Colombo  relating  to  verification   checks   on
    documents.  A letter dated 5 June 2017 indicated that from  July  2014,
    277 verification checks were carried out on police and court  documents
    and that 91% were determined to be not genuine.  In addition, there was
    a letter dated 3 July 2015 that maintained  that  there  is  widespread
    abuse of attorney letters in Sri Lanka  and  that  the  vast  majority,
    86.7% of those looked at since January 2014 had been found  to  be  not
    credible.

14.  In evidence when the appellant was asked  why  he  did  not  appoint  a
    lawyer before January  2018  despite  knowing  of  the  alleged  arrest
    warrant since 2013, he said he did not need a lawyer in 2013 but needed
    one now.  He got the documents as his UK solicitor told him to  do  so.
    He said the first set of court documents he obtained were handed  to  a
    Mr Patel in April 2017 who claimed  to  be  a  solicitor  but  he  lost
    contact with Mr Patel and he lost the documents.

15.  In her findings and consideration, the judge  relied  on  the  approach
    from the Upper Tribunal in GJ and Others  (post-civil  war:  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

16.  The judge said that the appellant's case was founded on the  events  of
    August 2012.  But for the alleged arrest, the appellant would not be at
    risk on return as he is not a Tamil, he has not  ever  engaged  in  any
    LTTE activities and he is not an LTTE member or supporter.   The  civil
    war is over and the guidance indicates that  the  government's  present
    objective is "to identify Tamil  activists  in  the  diaspora  who  are
    working for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan
    state ..." and that "its focus is on preventing both (a) the resurgence
    of the LTTE or any similar Tamil separatist organisation  and  (b)  the
    revival of the civil war within Sri Lanka".

17.  The judge considered the appellant's contention that  he  was  arrested
    and tortured because of his relationship with Ramesh  up  to  2008  and
    because he introduced Raviraj to his father.  The judge said this  tale
    did not make sense in the context of the guidance in GJ.  There was  no
    suggestion that the authorities would be interested in anyone  who  had
    engaged in that sort of activity so long ago.  The judge held that  the
    authorities in Sri Lanka are interested  in  Tamil  activists  who  are
    working for Tamil separatism and to destabilise the unitary Sri  Lankan
    state at the present (post-civil war) time.  The  appellant  is  not  a
    Tamil.  He has been in the UK most of the time since 2008 and  has  had
    nothing at all to do with any activities that might be  of  concern  to
    the authorities in Sri Lanka.

18.  The judge said that the indication in GJ is that the  authorities  have
    sophisticated means of identifying individuals who may be a threat.  If
    that is right, then it is inexplicable why they would be interested  in
    the appellant.  Not only did he do nothing wrong,  but  his  activities
    took place in or before 2008 and the concern of the authorities relates
    to current activities, not historic ones.

19.  Accordingly  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  story  was  not
    consistent with the country guidance.

20.  In the light of the objective evidence the judge accepted that  bribery
    is pervasive in  Sri  Lanka  and  that  torture  of  detainees  is  not
    implausible.  She accepted that the appellant has  scars  on  his  body
    that could have been caused by blows  from  a  hard  object.   However,
    there were various discrepancies in the  evidence.   Dr  Joss  made  no
    mention of an injury to the chin, yet the appellant maintained  in  his
    witness statement that his chin was injured.  There was  a  discrepancy
    as to whether the mother or the father answered the door  to  the  CID.
    These are important details and the discrepancies  cast  doubt  on  the
    appellant's account.

21.      The judge held that she was wholly unconvinced by  the  appellant's
    evidence as to why he did not claim asylum sooner.  His  leave  expired
    on 7 June 2014, yet he did not claim asylum until more than three years
    after this time.

22.  The judge found the appellant's account as to why he did  not  instruct
    a lawyer in Sri Lanka sooner to lack credibility and she did not accept
    his explanation as to why he failed to seek legal  assistance  when  he
    learned of the alleged arrest warrant in 2013.

23.   The  judge  considered  the  Magistrates'  Court  document   and   the
    attorney's letter but found that they were not documents which were  of
    particular assistance to her in determining the claim.  She noted  that
    there was evidence  that  the  vast  majority  of  verification  checks
    undertaken by the High Commission in  Colombo  indicated  that  similar
    documents were not credible.

24.  The judge held that it seemed  unlikely  that  the  appellant's  father
    would have escaped the interest of the authorities if  the  appellant's
    account were true.  The father was the owner of the property and  would
    have been more culpable than the appellant if there was  concern  about
    to whom it was rented.

25.  In conclusion, the judge held that the appellant's account  was  not  a
    truthful one.  She did not  believe  that  he  has  been  arrested  and
    tortured as claimed, or that he was of any interest to the  authorities
    in Sri Lanka.

26.  I heard submissions from Mr Jafar and Mrs Kiss.

27.  I was not persuaded by Mr Jafar's first argument that  the  judge  gave
    too much emphasis to the fact that  the  appellant  is  not  Tamil  and
    therefore his account could not be credible and therefore would not  be
    at risk if he were to be returned to Sri  Lanka.   I  accept  that  the
    three applicants in GJ were Tamils.  I also accept that at paragraph 98
    of GJ the evidence there indicated that Sinhalese  who  are  non-Tamils
    were also arrested on suspicion of LTTE activities.  However,  in  this
    case, as held by the judge, the appellant had done nothing wrong and in
    any event his activities took  place  in  or  before  2008.   Mr  Jafar
    submitted that this was not supported in GJ as the first  applicant  in
    GJ's case was allowed because of his historical account of  links  with
    the LTTE.  I question what activities the  appellant  would  have  been
    involved in before 2008 which the authorities would be  interested  in.
    His activities from his evidence amounted to his friendship with Ramesh
    Kamar with whom he studied and travelled. There was  no  evidence  from
    the appellant about  what  Ramesh  got  up  to  with  the  LTTE.    The
    appellant said when he was arrested he was told that Raviraj,  whom  he
    had introduced to his father, was an LTTE member and that his  father's
    property was used for supporting the LTTE in carrying  out  attacks  in
    Colombo.  As held by the judge his father was the owner of the property
    and would have been more culpable than the appellant and yet there  was
    no evidence that his father was ever harassed, arrested and tortured by
    the authorities in Sri Lanka.

28.  Whilst I accept that GJ does not limit risk to just  Tamils,  I  agreed
    with Mrs Kiss' submission that the appellant's story  simply  does  not
    add up.  The judge was entitled to find that  the  appellant's  account
    was not a truthful one.

29.  Mr Jafar submitted that the arrest warrants issued by the  Magistrates'
    Court in Colombo and the lawyer's letter authenticated the veracity  of
    the appellant's evidence.  He argued that the judge failed to give  due
    weight to these documents and erred in holding that the documents  were
    of no particular assistance to her.

30.  I find no error of law  in  the  judge's  consideration  of  the  court
    documents and the lawyer's letter and her reliance on evidence from the
    British High Commission that from July 2014,  277  verification  checks
    carried out on police and court documents determined that 91%  of  them
    were not genuine.  I find that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  rely  on
    evidence that there is widespread abuse  of  attorney  letters  in  Sri
    Lanka and that a vast majority of those looked at  since  January  2014
    had been found to be not credible.  In any event,  the  judge  did  not
    accept the appellant's explanation as to why he failed  to  seek  legal
    assistance when he learned of the alleged arrest warrant in 2013.

31.  I was not persuaded by the argument that  the  judge  placed  too  much
    emphasis on the delay by the appellant in  claiming  asylum.   He  came
    back to the UK in 2012 after an alleged arrest, detention and  torture,
    and learned of an arrest warrant in 2013 and yet did not  claim  asylum
    until 2017.  On the evidence, the judge's finding was open to her.

32.  I find that the judge  did  not  err  in  her  approach  to  GJ.    Her
    findings were sound and disclosed no error of law.

33.  The judge's  decision  for  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal  shall
    stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  5 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



