

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05845/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |            Decision & Reasons           |
|                                   |Promulgated                              |
|On 04 May 2017                     |            On 09 May 2017               |
|                                   |                                         |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between


                                     O H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
                    Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran.

 2. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal,  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  5th
    December 2016 dismissed his  claim  for  protection.   The  Appellant's
    immigration history is set out within the determination,  namely,  that
    he claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom on  8th  October  2015
    after travelling from Iran to Turkey.  On 20th October 2015 he made  an
    appointment at the Asylum Intake Unit and made a claim  for  asylum  on
    23rd November 2015.  Thereafter he provided a witness statement setting
    out the factual basis of his claim to be  at  risk  of  persecution  or
    serious harm upon return to Iran as a result of his  political  opinion
    either held or imputed to him based on links to the party known as  the
    "KDPI".  The Appellant was interviewed and his claim was refused  in  a
    decision letter of 23rd May 2016.

 3. The Appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on 28th October  2016.   The
    judge had the opportunity of hearing the evidence of the Appellant  and
    for his evidence to be the subject of cross-examination.  The judge  in
    the determination found the Appellant's account to be  implausible  and
    dismissed his appeal.

 4. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  provide  sufficient  or
    sustainable  reasons  for  the  adverse  credible  findings  that  were
    contained within the determination.   Permission  was  granted  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal on 17th March 2017.

 5. At the hearing before  the  Tribunal  Mr  Gayle,  who  represented  the
    Appellant in the First-tier Tribunal, relied upon the grounds that were
    before the Tribunal.  This was essentially a reasons challenge  on  the
    basis that was set out in the grounds at paragraphs [2] to [7]  of  the
    grounds.  In his oral submissions he submitted that the judge  set  out
    the credibility findings in two paragraphs namely  that  at  paragraphs
    [13] and [14].  Dealing with paragraph [13] he submitted that the judge
    made  a  finding  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was  not  "entirely
    consistent" and went on to state "this is  because  he  was  undermined
    during cross-examination."  However, the judge erred in law by  failing
    to identity any inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  evidence  during
    cross-examination.  None was set out within the  determination  and  it
    was asserted that  the  Appellant  had  provided  a  wholly  consistent
    account in relation to the factual elements.  It is  further  submitted
    that in relation to paragraph [13] the judge also made a  finding  that
    there was nothing to suggest that the Appellant would be of interest to
     the authorities as his family  had  never  come  to  the  authorities'
    attention (see paragraph [13]).   However  it  was  a  feature  of  the
    Appellant's account that he had family members who were involved in the
    KDPI including  his  brother  who  had  been  detained,  had  given  an
    undertaking and then was later killed by the  authorities.   There  had
    been an account given that the house was  raided  after  his  brother's
    death which resulted in an injury to the Appellant.  This part  of  the
    factual background had not been considered within the findings of  fact
    at paragraphs [13] and [14] and thus  undermined  the  judge's  overall
    finding that there was nothing to suggest that he would be of  interest
    to the authorities by reason of his family membership.

 6. As to the judge's finding at paragraph [13] relating to the  arrest  of
    the courier and the judge's observation that it was "it  is  not  clear
    how he himself would be aware of that in his tender years or  that  the
    person who delivered this unknown letter was  even  arrested,"  was  in
    fact clearly set out in the evidence (in his witness  statement  before
    the interview at B28 and also within the asylum interview at  questions
    140 and 142).

 7. As to the finding made at paragraph [14], he submitted that  there  was
    no objective material to support the finding that  it  was  implausible
    that the KDPI would seek to thank the family for supporting  the  party
    in the way that the Appellant had claimed.  He submitted the background
    material that had been put in the Appellant's  bundle  did  demonstrate
    that the KDPI did produce  material  although  he  accepted  there  was
    nothing specifically to show  in  what  circumstances  the  KDPI  would
    provide support for those who were considered to  be  the  families  of
    martyrs.

 8.  A  further  issue  that  arose  when  considering  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim was his account of sur place activities.  It is clear
    from the skeleton argument at page 10 that sur  place  activities  were
    asserted and were also referred to in the  written  witness  statement.
    The judge set out some of that evidence at paragraph [10]  relating  to
    activity on Facebook but there was no consideration of  the  sur  place
    claim that had  been  made  or  any  consideration  of  the  background
    material relevant to that issue.  Thus he submitted that the judge  had
    fell into error and that the determination should be set aside.

 9. Mr Tufan on behalf of the Respondent agreed that the only findings made
    by the judge are those set out at paragraphs [13]  and  [14]  and  that
    those findings were brief.  He further, quite fairly, stated  that  the
    sur place activities do appear to have been raised at  the  hearing  as
    evidenced by the skeleton argument but that  there  was  no  suggestion
    that that was an issue that was dealt with  by  the  judge  within  the
    findings at paragraphs [13] and [14].   He  considered  that  in  those
    circumstances that was  a  material  error  of  law  given  the  agreed
    position  on  the  objective  material  that  related  to  the  Iranian
    authorities' treatment of those who were members or supported the KDPI.
     In those circumstances, he invited  the  Tribunal  to  set  aside  the
    decision and for the appeal to be remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    so that all issues could be considered.

10. In the light of that concession made by Mr  Tufan,  that  there  was  a
    material error of law in the determination of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    it is the case that the determination cannot  stand  and  must  be  set
    aside.  I consider that the submissions made by Mr  Gayle  as  set  out
    earlier in this determination are made out in any event, even  if  that
    concession was not made.  The findings of  fact  are  contained  within
    paragraphs [13] and  [14].   As  identified  by  Mr  Gayle,  the  judge
    recorded the following:

         "I found his evidence not  to  be  entirely  consistent.   This  is
         because he was undermined during the  course  of  cross-examination
         and there is nothing to suggest he himself will be of  interest  to
         the  authorities  as  his  family  themselves  never  came  to  the
         authorities' attention."

    There are two issues that arise from that  finding.   Firstly,  it  was
    incumbent upon the judge to set out why the  Appellant's  evidence  was
    not "entirely consistent" and also in the circumstances if that was the
    case, how his evidence was  undermined  during  the  course  of  cross-
    examination.  At paragraph [9] the judge referred to  "summarising  his
    extensive cross-examination" however there are no reasons given for the
    finding that that evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal  was
    undermined in the way that was stated.  The second  error  also  arises
    from that finding that there was evidence before the Tribunal  and  the
    Appellant's factual account that members of his family had come to  the
    attention of the authorities in Iran by reason of their  membership  or
    support of the  KDPI.   That  being  the  case,  the  finding  made  at
    paragraph [13] is not sustainable.   Furthermore,  the  further  reason
    given at paragraph [13] for reaching an adverse credibility finding was
    that the judge found that the Appellant's account of someone  informing
    H H that the courier had been arrested was not  clear  as  to  how  the
    Appellant would have been aware of this incident, at question 140  [and
    question 142] the Appellant had given an account as to how H H had been
    informed and how he came to know.  Furthermore as Mr Gayle outlined the
    Appellant had made reference to this before his interview in a  witness
    statement.

11. Whilst at paragraph [14] the judge made a  further  finding  concerning
    the document that had led to the Appellant leaving Iran, there  was  no
    objective material either way to support the claim made that  the  KDPI
    would have provided such a document.   However,  even  if  that  was  a
    finding that was open to the judge, in the light of the errors made  at
    paragraph [13] and also the reasons given earlier relating to  the  sur
    place activity, the decision cannot stand and  therefore  the  decision
    shall be set aside.

12. As to the remaking of the decision, both advocates submitted  that  the
    correct course to adopt in a case of this nature was for the appeal  to
    be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  because  it  would  enable  the
    judge to consider the applicant's evidence and his account; this  being
    a case in which the adverse credibility findings are unsafe and  cannot
    be preserved.

13. In the light of those submissions, I am  satisfied  that  that  is  the
    correct course to take and therefore I set aside the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and it will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    to hear afresh.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date: 05/05/2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
