
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05123/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 27th October 2017                     |On 01st November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                     YJH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Sanders, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Roots promulgated on 21st July 2017 dismissing her  appeal  on  asylum,
    humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights  grounds.   The  Appellant
    appealed against this decision and was granted permission to appeal  by
    Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor.   The  grant  of  permission  may  be
    summarised in the following terms:

         "It is arguable, despite the lawful self-direction  at  [15],  that
         the FtT  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's  protection  appeal
         through the prism of a lawful application of the standard of proof.
          The use of the word 'convincing' by the FtT  does  not  of  itself
         persuade me that this is so, but  when  taken  in  combination  the
         nature of the reasons supporting some of the FtT's  conclusions,  I
         am so persuaded.

         All grounds may be argued."

 2. I was provided with a Rule 24 reply from the Secretary of  State  which
    was considered by all parties prior to the commencement of the hearing.

    Error of Law

 3. At the close of  submissions  I  indicated  that  I  would  reserve  my
    decision, which I shall now give.  I do not find that there is an error
    of law in the determination such that  it  should  be  set  aside.   My
    reasons for so finding are as follows.

 4. In respect of the first ground in relation to the standard of proof and
    the repeated use of the word convincing  Ms  Sanders  relied  upon  the
    authority of R v Immigration Appeal Tribunal, Ex parte Mehra [1983] Imm
    AR 156, in which Mr Justice Mann stated towards the conclusion  of  his
    judgment as follows:

         "The word 'convinced' Mr Brown accepted was an unfortunate one.  It
         gains an additional flavour from a passage earlier in the  decision
         where it is remarked:

             'There were no guarantees for example, that such a  large  sum
             of money could have been or was actually within  his  personal
             control and disposal.'

         The  appropriate  standard  of  proof  is  upon  the   balance   of
         probabilities.  The use of the word 'convinced' persuades  me  that
         the Tribunal was applying a higher standard, perhaps equivalent  to
         but certainly approaching that of the standard of the criminal law.
          For that reason the decision should be quashed.  It is unnecessary
         to express a view upon the other matters to  which  Mr  Beloff  has
         referred.  I content myself  with  saying  that  they  are  not  as
         attractive as his point upon 'conviction'.

         The appropriate course is for the order to go, for the decision  to
         be quashed and the matter to be remitted  for  hearing  before  the
         Immigration Appeal Tribunal."

 5. Ms Sanders pointed me to a number of references to the word convincing,
    repeated amongst the judge's findings at paragraphs 22, 24, 25, 28,  29
    and 33.  In  respect  of  those  references  to  the  word  convincing,
    although the repeated use of the word convincing is infelicitous, I  am
    not persuaded that  the  judge  misdirected  himself  in  that  he  was
    applying a higher  standard  of  proof  than  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood in the instances mentioned by Ms Sanders.  The repeated  use
    of the word convincing did give me great pause and I have grappled with
    this ground at great length.  However, the individual uses of the  word
    convincing/unconvincing are not always mentioned in isolation.  I  thus
    reach this conclusion due to the context in which the word "convincing"
    has been used.  For example, the judge does make reference on  occasion
    to further reasons other than simply saying he is not convinced by  the
    evidence and makes the reader aware that his  findings  do  relate,  on
    occasion, to the credibility of the evidence before him.  Thus, despite
    Ms Sanders' valiant efforts, taking a view of the judgment as a  whole,
    I am not persuaded that the use  of  the  word  convincing  reflects  a
    higher  standard  of  proof,  albeit  that  the   use   of   the   word
    understandably gave rise  to  permission  and  it  required  a  careful
    reading of the determination before I could conclude that there were no
    other corroborative hallmarks that the standard of proof  was  elevated
    beyond that permissible.  Thus, whilst the judge has, for  example,  at
    paragraphs 22  and  28  simply  referred  to  the  evidence  not  being
    convincing, these two  paragraphs  evidencing  a  lack  of  reasons  in
    isolation are not sufficient to demonstrate a material error of law  in
    respect of the remainder of the assessment.

 6. Turning to Ground 2, it is fair to note that the chronology should  not
    be criticised as the chronology provided to the judge was not of  great
    assistance and thus might be the  reason  why  the  timeline  given  is
    vague.

 7. In respect of Ground 3 and the findings  regarding  domestic  violence,
    whilst it is correct that the judge accepts that the Appellant suffered
    domestic abuse and physical violence but  simultaneously  rejected  her
    account of events in 1998 and  1999,  as  Ms  Isherwood  conceded,  the
    judgment is not perfectly written but the judge  was  entitled  to  put
    weight on the fact that the Appellant gave no good reason for the delay
    in claiming asylum and that the findings in respect of  domestic  abuse
    were so historic in that  it  would  not  affect  the  outcome  of  the
    determination in any event.

 8. In respect of the judge's findings at paragraph  30  regarding  whether
    the Appellant's husband was a member of a  gang  of  any  significance,
    power or influence in carrying out serious  crimes,  as  opposed  to  a
    member of a loose group of acquaintances, some of whom  may  have  been
    involved in criminal activities; the consequence of the judge's finding
    is that, in any event, the Appellant's ex-husband is not a member of  a
    gang of any significance with the resultant  effect  that  the  country
    guidance from Jamaica concerning gangs was not considered by the judge.
     As to the distinction between the two categories, I  do  not  see  how
    that could advance the Appellant's case were it even  more  clear  that
    the husband were from the latter group as opposed to  the  former.   In
    that respect I note that there is no perversity  challenge  as  to  the
    judge's finding that the ex-husband was a member of the  latter  rather
    than the former category he has identified and consequently there is no
    material error identified in this ground.  Similarly the  criticism  of
    the judge's reference at paragraph 43 to the  daughter's  evidence  and
    the use of the words "at least" does not to my mind  create  sufficient
    ambiguity to unseat his findings on the issue of the threat of violence
    against the Appellant.

 9. Turning to Ground 4, the insufficiency  of  protection,  and  Ground  5
    regarding the internal relocation  aspect,  Ms  Sanders  accepted  that
    these issues would only come into play if Grounds 1, 2 or 3  were  made
    out, which I do not find is so.

10. In respect of Ground 6, the approach to Article 8, again,  whilst  this
    ground gave me pause and caused me to  consider  the  determination  in
    respect of Article 8 as a whole in some  detail  before  coming  to  my
    conclusion, I do not find that there is an error of law  of  sufficient
    perversity and materiality to the outcome of the appeal such that  this
    portion of the appeal should be set aside.

11. In respect of the failure to account for the domestic violence suffered
    by the Appellant, I note the judge's statement in paragraph 40 that the
    evidence of the threat or contact from the ex-husband was weak  and  so
    the effect of any abuse would not necessarily have such a great  impact
    on the Article 8 assessment in my view.  This statement is repeated  at
    paragraph 45 later.

12. In any event, given the ability to internally  relocate,  the  lack  of
    corroborative evidence from the daughter at paragraph 38, to  my  mind,
    undermines the success of this ground as the  daughter's  evidence,  as
    she states, has arisen from what she has heard from her mother, and she
    can only confirm the historic violence  towards  her  mother  from  her
    father, and this is the reason why, in my view,  the  judge  has  found
    that the last contact with the ex-husband was at  least  four  to  five
    years ago and thus any impact  which  may  result  from  that  domestic
    violence or threat of violence has not been  shown  to  have  a  direct
    impact upon the Appellant on return, such that it would have a material
    impact upon the Article 8 proportionality assessment.

13. I did, for my own part, canvas with  the  parties  the  extent  of  the
    Appellant's health concerns and whether she  was  receiving  assistance
    from her daughter, with whom she lives,  in  respect  of  those  health
    concerns and her heart condition as I was  concerned  there  may  be  a
    comingled human rights claim in respect of her  private  life  and  her
    treatment that had not been considered to date;  however,  the  parties
    confirmed that there was no evidence on this point and as  such  I  did
    not enquire further.

14. Thus, given the evidence which Ms Isherwood was careful  to  point  to,
    which demonstrated that whilst the extended family have weekly  contact
    and a good relationship with the Appellant the contact is not of such a
    regularity  and  frequency  that   it   would   render   the   decision
    disproportionate nor would it weigh heavily in the balance  in  respect
    of the Appellant's family life, I do not find that there is  sufficient
    merit in the sixth ground such that the errors identified would  result
    in the judge having come to a different conclusion.

15. As such, whilst there are errors in the determination, those errors are
    not of such materiality or perversity that the determination should  be
    set aside in accordnace with the requisite  standard  identified  in  R
    (Iran) & Ors v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 982.




Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal's determination shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date 27 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini




