
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
PA/05533/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 2 May 2018                           |     On 9 May 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     us
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs A Basharat, Counsel instructed by Howe &
Company Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan. His date of birth is 12  August
    1986. He appealed against the decision of the respondent on 23 May 2017
    to refuse to grant him asylum. His appeal was dismissed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge I Ross on 5 January 2018.

2.    Permission was granted to appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Ross
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne on 13 February 2018.


The Grounds of Appeal

3.    The grounds assert that there has been procedural  unfairness.  It  is
    argued that the judge unfairly refused to adjourn the case.  There  was
    evidence before the  judge  that  the  appellant  had  been  prescribed
    medication on 4 January 2018, one day before the hearing. The judge was
    informed by the representative that the appellant was  in  hospital  on
    the day of the hearing. It  was  unreasonable  for  the  judge  to  ask
    whether there was any evidence that the appellant was at  the  hospital
    because it was unlikely to be available at the hearing.

4.      In support of this  application  the  appellant  relies  on  a  text
    message of 5  January  2018  as  evidence  of  his  attendance  at  the
    hospital.  The case of Nwaigwe [2014] UKUT 418 is relied on.

5.      There is no challenge to the substantive decision.

The Decision of the Judge

6.       At the hearing the appellant's representative,  Mr  Ilahi,  applied
    for an adjournment. The judge set this out at [4]. In  support  of  the
    application he relied on a letter from the appellant's then  solicitors
    of 4 January 2018. Attached to this was a cover of an imaging Plain  X-
    ray of 12 December 2017 which as recorded by the judge gave  a  history
    of "chesty cough, tachycardic." The judge observed that  there  was  no
    other information. The judge asked Mr Ilahi to take instructions  about
    the possibility of the hearing being put back  to  later  in  the  day.
    Having  sought  instructions,  Mr  Ilahi  maintained  the   application
    informing the judge that the appellant was in hospital. In  support  of
    this he relied on a second letter from  the  solicitors  of  4  January
    2018. The judge noted that this stated that the appellant was unable to
    attend court due to ill health and attached a copy of  a  prescription.
    Mr Ilahi was asked by the judge whether the appellant  was  in  A&E  or
    whether he had  been  admitted,  but  he  was  not  able  to  give  any
    information other than that he was in hospital.

7.     The  judge  considered  the  limited  documentation  before  him  and
    concluded that the appellant had asthma and that he had been prescribed
    antibiotics and an anti-inflammatory drug.  The  judge  concluded  that
    there was no evidence that he had been admitted to hospital or  waiting
    in an A & E department. There was, according to the judge (see [7]), no
    evidence that the appellant was unable  to  attend  the  hearing.   The
    judge considered that the matter had been previously adjourned  at  the
    appellant's request for him to obtain specific  evidence;  however,  he
    had failed to comply with directions in respect of this evidence and he
    had not provided a bundle. The judge refused the adjournment.


Conclusions

8.   I heard submissions from both parties. Ms Basharat showed me  the  text
    that the appellant received on 5 January 2018 confirming  that  he  had
    attended hospital. She told me that the appellant is asthmatic.

9.    The author of first  received  letter  of  4  January  2018  from  the
    appellant's solicitor's stated that the appellant was  "presently  very
    ill" and purported to enclose a medical report. There  was  no  medical
    report. What is attached is a document entitled "Imaging Plain Film  X-
    Ray" referred to by the judge.  It established, at most, with a  degree
    of speculation, that in December 2017 the appellant was x-rayed and had
    symptoms as noted by the judge. The author of the  second  letter  from
    the solicitors received that same day asserted that the  appellant  was
    very ill and purported to attach supporting evidence  from  Whittington
    hospital.  This  established  at  the  most  that  the  appellant   was
    prescribed medication as set out by the judge on 4 January 2018.

10.      The evidence before the judge did not establish that the  appellant
    was unfit to attend court on 5 January 2018. It did not establish  that
    he was in hospital on that day. The letters  from  the  solicitors  are
    vague in the extreme. The judge was entitled to expect better evidence.
    In any event, the appellant has had time to  present  better  evidence,
    but has failed to do so.  The evidence now produced is a text  message.
    This does not establish that the appellant was  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing because he was in hospital on 5 January  at  the  time  of  the
    hearing or as a result of ill-health. It establishes that  he  attended
    hospital at an  unspecified  time  (may  be  4  January)  when  he  was
    prescribed   medication.   The   evidence    is    woefully    lacking.



11.   The evidence before  the  judge  and  that  now  before  me  does  not
    establish that the appellant was unfit to  attend  court  or  otherwise
    participate in the proceedings. There is  no  evidence  explaining  the
    failure to comply with the directions or why his representative was not
    able to represent him in respect of the substantive matter. The  is  no
    procedural unfairness arising from the judge's decision to  proceed  in
    the appellant's absence.

12.   There is no error of law. The decision of the  judge  to  dismiss  the
    appeal is maintained.



Signed Joanna McWilliam                                   Date 2 May 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

