
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05445/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 January 2020                             |On 16 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  ARAS [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Trevelyan of Oakmount Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Iraq.  In a decision sent on  20  August
    2019, Judge Young-Harry of the First-tier Tribunal dismissed his appeal
    against the decision made by the respondent on 10 May  2019  to  refuse
    his protection claim.  The appellant arrived in the UK in 2009 and  was
    granted discretionary leave as an unaccompanied minor until  May  2011.
    When  he  was  refused   further   leave,   he   appealed.    Following
    reconsideration of his claim the respondent refused to grant  leave  on
    26 September 2013.  The  appellant's  appeal  was  dismissed  by  Judge
    Plimmer of the First-tier  Tribunal  on  12  February  2014.   In  that
    decision Judge  Plimmer  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  provided
    unsatisfactory evidence regarding his parents  and  his  uncle.   Judge
    Plimmer did not accept that they had died as the appellant had claimed.
     In the decision made by Judge Young-Harry, he stated  in  paragraph  8
    that he took the previous appeal determination as  his  starting  point
    and noted in paragraph 10 that the appellant's claim was  not  accepted
    that his parents were dead.   Having  noted  the  appellant's  evidence
    about unsuccessful attempts to make contact with his family since  that
    appeal hearing, the judge concluded that the appellant  had  not  shown
    that he had made adequate attempts and:

         "16.  In  any  event  given  the  2014  Tribunal  found,  that  the
             appellant's parents are alive and  family  members  remain  in
             Iraq, the appellant has failed  to  explain  why  they  cannot
             provide  him  with  the  additional  information  the  embassy
             needs".


    The grounds contend that the judge placed undue weight on the  previous
    determination of February 2014 and  in  effect  treated  that  previous
    decision as both a  starting  point  and  a  finishing  point.   It  is
    contended that the judge  ignored  completely  the  British  Red  Cross
    letter dated  22  July  2019  which  corroborated  (it  was  said)  the
    appellant's claim to have sought help from the Red Cross to  trace  his
    parents.  It is further contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  fairly
    consider the appellant's efforts to seek help with obtaining a CSID and
    family information from the Iraq Embassy in Manchester.   It  was  also
    contended that despite accepting that the home area  of  the  appellant
    was Mosul, the judge had simply relied on the fact  that  there  was  a
    general improvement in the security situation  in  Iraq  and  that  the
    appellant could therefore safely return in line with AA [2017] EWCA Civ
    944.


2.   I  heard  brief  submissions  from  both  representatives.   Mrs  Aboni
    concurred  with  Mr  Trevelyan  in  considering  that  the  judge   had
    materially erred in law.  Both identified the principal error as  being
    undue emphasis placed  on  the  earlier  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    notwithstanding the length of time since in  which  the  appellant  had
    produced evidence relating to his efforts  to  make  contact  with  his
    family in Iraq.  Both also noted that the judge had  failed  to  engage
    with the issue of security issues in the appellant's  home  area  which
    would require a more careful consideration of the  situation  were  the
    appellant to be returned via Baghdad.

3.   Having heard from the  parties  I  am  persuaded  that  the  judge  did
    materially err in law.  At paragraph 16 the judge in effect treated the
    previous Tribunal determination as determinative of the fact  that  the
    appellant's parents were to be treated as alive and that family members
    remained in Iraq.  There was  no  proper  analysis  of  why  the  judge
    considered no weight could be attached to the appellant's  claims  that
    he had taken steps to trace his family through the Red Cross  and  also
    through the Iraqi Embassy.  I also consider that the judge should  also
    have addressed the issue of whether it was feasible for  the  appellant
    to return to his home area in Mosul or if not, whether he would be able
    to safely and reasonably relocate.

4.   I consider the appropriate course in this case is to remit the case  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  I would point out, however, that it remains a
    matter which must be considered by the next Tribunal Judge that  before
    Judge Plimmer the appellant had given evidence  that  his  parents  had
    died in 2007 and had prevaricated in his evidence about when he claimed
    that the uncle had died. According to his personal advisor in a  letter
    dated 11 April 2013 he had also stated  that  he  is  in  contact  with
    family  in  Iraq  who  he  speaks  with  on  a  regular  basis.    That
    inconsistency was not something that was addressed by the appellant  at
    the hearing before Judge Young-Harry but it will need to  be  addressed
    at the next hearing, as will the other points made by Judge Plimmer  in
    paragraphs 24 to 28 of her 2014 decision.  To conclude, the decision of
    the First-tier Judge is set aside for material error of law.  The  case
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Young-Harry.

No anonymity direction is made at this stage.



Signed                                  Date: 15 January 2020
[pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

