
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05597/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 January 2019                            |On 06 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                               master R N H-A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Karnik, Counsel instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq  born  on  25  February  2001.   He
    claimed to have left Iraq illegally in the summer of 2017  and  arrived
    in the UK in October 2017 having  passed  through  Turkey,  France  and
    other unknown countries.  Eurodac records indicate that  the  Appellant
    claimed asylum in Finland on 14 August 2015 and Germany on 19 September
    2016.

 2. The Appellant's asylum claim was made on 17 October 2017 and refused in
    a decision dated 28 June 2018.  The basis of his claim is that he had a
    secret relationship with a girl without the permission of  her  parents
    and he feared persecution on the basis of being  also  a  member  of  a
    particular social group viz  an  unaccompanied  child.  The  Respondent
    rejected the basis of claim, but accepted the Appellant  was  an  Iraqi
    national of Kurdish ethnicity  from  Kirkuk  with  the  date  of  birth
    claimed.

 3. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal James  for  hearing  on  13  September
    2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 16  October  2018,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal, finding that  the  Appellant  had  lied  in
    respect of his immigration history and that as a  result  of  this  the
    conclusions drawn by a clinical psychologist, Ms Ann Malkin, were based
    upon a narrative provided by the Appellant that  itself  has  not  been
    entirely truthful and he did not find her report  persuasive  for  that
    reason and did not find the Appellant credible: [35].

 4. At [37] the Judge considered the judgments in AA Iraq [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    994 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00212 but found that AAH "...is out of date to the  extent  that  there
    are now direct flights from the UK into the IKR  namely  to  Erbil  and
    Sulaymaniyah.  The Appellant is of Kurdish ethnicity.  He can  relocate
    safely into the IKR and the previous difficulty of finding a  safe  way
    to travel from Baghdad to the IKR without a CSID has been  overcome  by
    the direct flights now available".

 5. Permission to appeal was sought, in time,  on  two  grounds.   Firstly,
    that the judge had erred in failing to apply the  country  guidance  in
    AAH Iraq (op cit) in that it is clear from the  country  guidance  that
    returns of former residents of the IKR will be to the IKR and all other
    Iraqis will be to Baghdad.  Given that the Appellant is  not  from  the
    IKR and is from Kirkuk he will be removed  to  Baghdad  and  the  judge
    erred at [37] in failing  to  adopt  this  starting  point.  The  judge
    further erred in failing to take into account  that  Kirkuk  remains  a
    contested area in which an Article 15(c) risk continues to persist  and
    further misunderstood the central importance that a CSID card plays  in
    Baghdad. It was submitted the judge further erred in failing to address
    the fact that the  Appellant  remains  a  minor  and  that  has  to  be
    considered as part of the internal relocation alternative.

 6. Secondly, it was asserted that the judge erred in his approach  to  his
    consideration of the Appellant's age in his assessment  of  credibility
    which, contrary to the judge's finding, was clearly relevant. The judge
    failed to have account of the Secretary of State's own guidance as  set
    out in the skeleton argument as to the impact of  age  on  credibility.
    The judge failed to provide any or adequate reasons for  rejecting  the
    Appellant's account of why he fled Iraq and failed  to  deal  with  the
    expert and objective evidence before him, in particular the expert,  Ms
    Malkin's observation at [6.8] that he was suffering with trauma, he had
    immaturity and difficulty finding words and was functioning at a  level
    of a child far younger than his years.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted in respect of the first ground only by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge S H Smith in a  decision  dated  29  November
    2018.

 8. The  Appellant's  representatives  subsequently  sought  permission  to
    appeal from the Upper Tribunal in respect of ground 2.  In  a  decision
    dated 14 January 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission  on
    ground 2, stating as follows:

         "Although Judge James dealt with the psychological  assessment  of
    Ann Malkin at     paragraph 34 of his decision it is arguable  that  he
    has erred in law in his treatment of    this report.  In particular the
    judge's reasoning in the final sentence  of  paragraph  35  of      his
    decision arguably appears to have been made without taking into account
    the  opinion of Ms Malkin that the Appellant is functioning at a  level
    far younger than his   years."

     Hearing

 9. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I heard submissions  from  Mr
    Karnik on behalf of the Appellant, who sought to rely on the grounds of
    appeal.  I indicated that, subject to anything that Ms Pal  might  say,
    that I was with him in respect of ground 1, in that there was  a  clear
    failure by the judge to follow the relevant country guidance in respect
    of return to Iraq. Whilst the Respondent's position is as  set  out  in
    their own CPIN, the judge failed to give any reasons for  finding  that
    the decision in AAH (Iraq) was out of date and  essentially  preferring
    the Respondent's evidence as set out in the CPIN, which is  a  material
    error of law.

10. In relation to the second ground of appeal, this focused on the  expert
    report of the clinical psychologist, Ann Malkin,  who  interviewed  the
    Appellant for several hours and had the relevant  documentation  before
    her. In her clinical assessment,  she  found  that  the  Appellant  was
    functioning at a  level  far  younger  than  his  years;  that  he  has
    traumatic  reaction  and  impaired  ability  to  concentrate  and   his
    presentation suggested disassociative reaction, which left him  clearly
    less able to understand his  circumstances.   He  also  has  difficulty
    trusting people in authority after his negative experiences  of  having
    claimed asylum in Finland and having been in the 'jungle' in Calais.

11. Mr Karnik submitted the judge does not grapple with the points made  by
    the clinical psychologist when he found at [35]:

         "I accept that at the time of departing Iraq he  was  aged  14  but
         when making his statement on 9 April 2018 he was aged  17,  he  had
         increased maturity, had been in Europe and involved  with  European
         immigration authorities for more than two years and had been  in  a
         safe environment with legal advice yet he still chose to lie  about
         his narrative even to his own legal advisers".

12.  Mr  Karnik  submitted  it  was  well  documented  how  difficult   the
    circumstances are for asylum seeking minors in Europe and in Calais, in
    particular.  He sought to adopt the phrasing of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Gill in  granting  permission  to  appeal.   The  Appellant's  age  and
    maturity are clearly relevant to his capacity to handle himself were he
    able to relocate to the IKR.

13. In her submissions, Ms Pal  realistically  accepted  she  was  in  some
    difficulty in defending the judge's decisions both in respect of ground
    1 but also in light of ground 2.

     Decision

14. In light of Ms Pal's realistic acceptance that the  decision  of  Judge
    James was materially flawed, both in terms of the failure to follow the
    extant country  guidance  set  out  in  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) and in  his  assessment  of
    the  Appellant's  credibility,  in  light  of   the   expert   clinical
    psychologist report of Ms Malkin, I set that decision aside  and  remit
    the appeal for  a  hearing  de  novo  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    Birmingham.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 30 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


