
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05735/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2018                           |On 24th October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [S K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss Motteshaw, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of India born on 1st April  1989.   On  19th
    June 2012 the Appellant had applied for a Tier 4 Student visa which was
    issued as valid until 15th November 2013.  The Appellant took no  steps
    to leave the UK on expiry of her visa and on [ ~ ] 2016 her son [S] was
    born.  On 16th May 2017 the Appellant lodged an application for  asylum
    and was served with enforcement  papers.   The  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum was based on a fear that she would be unable to return to  India
    because she would be at risk from family members due  to  her  previous
    relationship and through the birth of her  son.   Her  application  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 19th April 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal A J Parker sitting at Manchester on 1st June 2018.  In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on  19th  June  2018  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. On 27th June 2018 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal.
    Those grounds contended that the decision was unsafe for the  following
    reasons:-

       . A want of adequacy of reasoning.

       . A failure of the judge to make material findings on the evidence.

       . A failure to properly  direct  himself  in  law  on  the  issue  of
         internal relocation.

       . A failure to properly assess risk  upon  return  in  light  of  the
         apparent positive findings of fact.

       . A failure to have regard to Section 55  of  the  2009  Act  in  the
         assessment of Article 8 in the light of the  position  relating  to
         the child [S].

 4. On 12th July 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal O'Callaghan  granted
    permission to appeal.  Whilst Judge O'Callaghan noted that there was no
    requirement  to  expressly  refer  to  Section  55  of   the   Borders,
    Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 within a decision and  reasons  an
    assessment as to a child's best interests is a relevant  factor  within
    the proportionality assessment and it was arguable that the  judge  had
    failed to undertake this assessment.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  her  instructed
    Counsel, Miss Motteshaw.  The Secretary of State appears  by  her  Home
    Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Submissions/Discussion

 6. Miss Motteshaw takes as her starting point paragraph 25 of the decision
    and the Grounds of Appeal pointing  out  that  the  judge  has  clearly
    applied the wrong standard of proof in assessing  the  risk  on  return
    pointing out that the judge found that "on balance" the  Appellant  did
    have problems with her family as claimed but that it was not clear what
    from the Appellant's narrative had been accepted or rejected in respect
    of her subjective fear of what might happen  to  her  on  return.   She
    points out that the wrong standard of proof has been  applied  and  the
    correct one should have been one of what was  reasonably  likely.   She
    submits that the judge simply did not assess the risk  upon  return  in
    light of the acceptance of the Appellant's problems with her family  in
    India and whether the Appellant would be at risk  upon  return  in  her
    home area from both her family and others in  the  community.   Further
    whilst it was accepted that the Appellant having been in the  UK  since
    2012 and having formed a relationship  outside  marriage  and  had  her
    child outside marriage, she considered it was difficult  to  understand
    why the passage of time and lack of contact  would  diminish  any  real
    prospect of further problems.  She submits that  the  judge  has  quite
    simply failed  to  deal  with  the  threat  posed  by  the  Appellant's
    community in her home area on account of her claimed caste and having a
    child out of wedlock.

 7. Thereinafter Miss Motteshaw contends firstly the judge  fails  to  make
    conclusions regarding the Appellant's relationship and  she  refers  me
    back to the Appellant's witness statement and that the judge  has  gone
    on to conflate the issues of internal  relocation  and  sufficiency  of
    protection.  She takes me to paragraph 26 of the decision pointing  out
    that protection and relocation are separate issues and  that  if  there
    was a sufficiency of protection in the Appellant's home  area  then  it
    would be arguable that there would be no need for the judge to consider
    internal relocation but if there was no sufficiency  of  protection  in
    the home area then it is necessary for the judge  to  explain  why  the
    issue of sufficiency  of  protection  was  relevant  to  the  issue  of
    internal relocation.  She consequently concludes that whilst the  issue
    may have been directly identified it  was  not  applied  and  that  the
    finding at paragraph 33 was a conclusion  that  was  not  open  to  the
    judge.

 8. Further, she submits that there are no clear findings of fact and  that
    the judge has seemingly ignored the Appellant's  claim  to  be  of  the
    Chamar caste and that she would face discrimination as a  result.   She
    submits that the failure to make any  findings  about  the  Appellant's
    claimed caste and its consequences upon return  are  in  themselves  an
    error.  In the alternative she  notes  that  the  judge  has  made  one
    finding, namely  that  the  Appellant  would  by  reason  of  her  high
    education be able to obtain employment in India but  she  submits  this
    simply ignores the caste the Appellant is from and in the light of  the
    level of discrimination which is revealed in the  background  evidence,
    it is a finding that was not open to the judge to make.

 9. Secondly, she takes me to Ground 2 as set out in the Grounds of  Appeal
    pointing out that the judge has failed  when  assessing  Article  8  to
    determine where the best interests of the child lay and has  failed  to
    make a specific consideration or mention of Section 55.  She refers  me
    to the headnote of JO and Others (Section 55 duty) Nigeria [2014]  UKUT
    00517 (IAC) which is set out at paragraph 12 of the Grounds  of  Appeal
    and submits that the best interests of the  Appellant's  son  have  not
    been considered and therefore the judge's assessment under Article 8 at
    paragraphs 35 to 48 are flawed.  She asked me to find  that  there  are
    overall material errors of law in the decision,  to  set  the  decision
    aside and to remit the matter  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing.

10. In response Mr Bates comments that the judge at paragraph 26 has looked
    at the claim at its highest and even if the  judge  has  erred  in  her
    findings at paragraph 25  then  he  submits  that  that  error  is  not
    necessarily material.  He submits  it  is  clear  the  judge  gave  due
    consideration to the Appellant's bundle but did  not  in  her  findings
    support the submissions made at paragraph 32  regarding  the  Appellant
    being a single mother upon whom it was contended  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to return.  He points out it is accepted that  the  Appellant  is
    from a wealthy background but wonders where that affects  any  form  of
    materiality and overall he submits that there are no material errors of
    law in the decision.

The Law

11.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

12. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

13. The thrust of the admissions made on the Appellant's behalf relate to a
    contention that the judge has made unsafe findings in  connection  with
    the risk upon return.  The judge has made findings but  I  accept  that
    the judge has applied the wrong  standard  of  proof  at  paragraph  25
    something which Mr Bates does not seek to push against.   His  argument
    is that even if such an error has been made  it  is  not  material.   I
    consider that it is because the whole of the decision has to be  looked
    at in the round and the judge falls into error in the manner  in  which
    he has assessed internal relocation.  I agree with the submission  made
    by Miss Motteshaw that the judge has seemingly made no reference to the
    Appellant's caste and the effect that this might have upon her  ability
    to relocate; this being something that the Appellant  does  rely  upon.
    To that extent there are errors of law which I consider to be material.

14. In addition, whilst  acknowledging  that  the  judge  has  no  specific
    obligation to mention  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 it is necessary as the headnote sets out to follow
    a certain format and to identify a  child's  best  interests  and  then
    balance them alongside other material considerations.  The  problem  in
    this case is that the judge has failed  to  mention  them  at  all  and
    consequently there is an error which is material.

15. In such circumstances I find that the decision is unsafe.  I set  aside
    the decision and remit the matter back to the First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    emphasise however that that is not to conclude that another judge on  a
    rehearing of this matter would not come to exactly the same  conclusion
    as the First-tier Tribunal Judge has in this case.

Decision and Directions

16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material error
    of law and is set aside.  Directions  are  given  hereinafter  for  the
    rehearing of this matter.

    (1)  That on the finding that there are material errors of law  in  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision of the First-
         tier Tribunal Judge is set aside with none of the findings of  fact
         to stand.

    (2)  The matter is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at
         Manchester with an ELH of three hours to  be  heard  on  the  first
         available date 28 days hence.

    (3)  That the hearing is to be  before  any  Judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal other than Immigration Judge Parker.

    (4)  That there be leave to either party to file and  serve  an  up-to-
         date bundle of subjective and objective evidence  upon  which  they
         seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

    (5)  That  a  Punjabi  (Indian)  interpreter  do  attend  the  restored
         hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

