
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05531/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 10 December 2019                 |On: 13th December 2019               |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     K N
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua, instructed by Morden Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 1 June 1996. He has been
      given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Watson dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
      to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant was arrested by immigration officials  on  12  September
      2014 after he was found to  have  entered  the  UK  clandestinely.  He
      claimed to be a child, but was age assessed and considered to be  over
      18 years of age. He was released from detention but then absconded and
      failed to comply with reporting restrictions. He was encountered on 12
      October 2017 on suspicion  of  working  illegally  under  a  false  UK
      passport and he was arrested, detained and served with removal papers.
      He then claimed asylum on  2  November  2017  and  was  released  from
      detention.

   3. The appellant's claim was made on the basis that he  was  at  risk  on
      return to Vietnam due to his practise of the  Pure  Hoa  Hao  Buddhist
      (PHHB)  faith,  a  non-registered  religion.  He  claimed   that   the
      authorities came to his house on 18 May 2010 when he was praying  with
      others and they assaulted him, injuring his leg. They did  not  arrest
      him on that occasion, but they arrested him when they returned  on  20
      August 2011 and again on 3 June 2013. He claimed that when arrested on
      20 August 2011 he was detained for 15 days.  On  that  occasion  there
      were prayers at his house for the first anniversary of his nan's death
      and he and his uncle were arrested. The  appellant  claimed  that  his
      uncle created and distributed leaflets against the government  and  he
      (the appellant) distributed the leaflets a few times  with  a  friend.
      This friend was caught by the police and arrested and gave his details
      and his uncle's details to the police. The police surrounded his house
      but his uncle warned  him  and  he  escaped.  However  his  uncle  was
      arrested and had been in prison since June 2014. The appellant claimed
      also that he owed money to a person who paid for his journey to the UK
      and that that person would kill him if he returned to  Vietnam  as  he
      had not paid off the debt. The appellant claimed that he left  Vietnam
      on 15 June 2014 and went to China where he was forced to work. He  was
      in China for three months until the beginning of  September  2014.  He
      came to the UK to claim asylum. He had attended two demonstrations  in
      the UK and was also at risk on that basis.

   4. The  appellant's  asylum  claim  was  refused  on  24  May  2019.  The
      respondent noted that he had given multiple  conflicting  accounts  of
      his religion and had not mentioned PHHB when he was arrested, but  had
      claimed at that time to have  no  religion.  The  respondent  did  not
      accept that the appellant was a Pure Hoa  Hao  Buddhist  and  did  not
      accept that he had been the target of the  Vietnamese  authorities  on
      the basis of his religious activities. The respondent noted  that  the
      appellant had given an inconsistent account of when he first  came  to
      the attention of the Vietnamese authorities and did not accept that he
      had ever come to the adverse attention of the authorities in  Vietnam.
      As for the appellant's sur place activities in the UK, the  respondent
      noted that the evidence  consisted  of  nine  photographs  of  himself
      holding signs and accepted that he had attended demonstrations outside
      the Vietnamese embassy, but did not consider him  to  be  at  risk  on
      return on that basis. It was not accepted that he borrowed  money  for
      his journey  and  was  at  risk  for  non-payment  of  the  debt.  The
      respondent considered that the appellant's removal  to  Vietnam  would
      not breach his human rights.

   5. The appellant appealed against that decision and his appeal was  heard
      on 14 August 2019 in the First-tier  Tribunal  by  Judge  Watson.  The
      judge made an adverse credibility finding against the appellant  owing
      to his delay in claiming asylum, pursuant to section 8 of  the  Asylum
      and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.  She  did  not
      accept that he was a genuine Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist and did not  accept
      his account of his arrest and his uncle's arrest. She did  not  accept
      his account of owing money to a person who paid for his journey to the
      UK. The judge found that even if the appellant had been a Pure Hoa Hao
      Buddhist, his evidence was that he practised his faith in  private  in
      the UK and did not proselytise, and accordingly he could do  the  same
      in Vietnam. She did not consider that the appellant would  be  at  any
      risk on return as a result of his attendance at demonstrations in  the
      UK as he would not be  of  any  adverse  interest  to  the  Vietnamese
      authorities. The judge concluded that the  appellant's  removal  would
      not breach his human rights  and  she  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
      grounds.

   6. The appellant sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
      judge had erred by taking the section 8 point of the appellant's delay
      in claiming asylum as her starting point rather than as a factor to be
      assessed in the round; that the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the
      explanation provided by the appellant's solicitor about  his  religion
      following the screening interview; that the judge failed to understand
      that the Pure Hoa Hao religion was a proscribed religion and would put
      him at risk without preaching; and that the judge failed  properly  to
      consider the appellant's sur place activities in the UK.

   7. Permission to appeal was initially refused in the First-tier Tribunal,
      but was subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal following a renewed
      application.

Appeal hearing and submissions

   8. At the hearing before me, Mr Janjua submitted that the judge had erred
      by giving undue weight to the section 8 point. He submitted  that  the
      judge had erred by finding that the appellant had changed his  account
      of his religion when he had clearly given a consistent account, having
      referred at his screening interview to being at risk for belonging  to
      an unofficial religion. The judge also failed to have  regard  to  the
      letter from Thompson & Co solicitors, at Annex H of  the  respondent's
      bundle, which clarified the  appellant's  evidence  at  the  screening
      interview and provided the correct details of his religion. The  judge
      therefore erred in  her  adverse  credibility  findings.  As  for  the
      judge's findings on the appellant's sur place  activities,  only  very
      brief reasons were given in relation to the impact of those activities
      on the question of  risk  on  return.  The  judge  accepted  that  the
      appellant had demonstrated outside  the  Vietnamese  Embassy  and  had
      erred by failing to consider the fact that he had taken his  faith  to
      the public and the risk that this posed  in  line  with  HJ  (Iran)  v
      Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2010]  UKSC  31  and  WA
      (Pakistan) [2019] EWCA Civ 302. Mr Janjua requested that  the  judge's
      decision be set aside and the case remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
      for a de novo hearing.

   9. Mr Whitwell submitted that the grounds were  largely  a  criticism  of
      form over substance. With regard to the section 8 point, Mr  Whitwelll
      accepted that the judge was wrong  to  say  that  section  8  was  the
      starting point, but it was clear that in practice she  had  considered
      it in the round together with the rest of the  evidence  and  did  not
      treat the appellant's delay in claiming asylum as determinative of his
      case. The judge identified various inconsistencies in the  appellant's
      account, including the varying accounts his religion,  which  she  was
      entitled to consider  as  undermining  his  credibility.  The  judge's
      findings at [17] in relation to the appellant's sur  place  activities
      had to be read in conjunction with [21]. There was no evidence  before
      the judge to show that the appellant would come to  the  attention  of
      the  Vietnamese  authorities   merely   by   his   attendance   at   a
      demonstration. The background information in the CPIN did not  support
      the appellant's claim. The judge  had  not  materially  erred  in  her
      decision.

  10. Mr Janjua reiterated the points previously  made  and  submitted  that
      even if the appellant had not been involved in activities in  Vietnam,
      his attendance at demonstrations in the UK showed that he  would  want
      to take his faith into  the  public  in  Vietnam  and  that  he  would
      therefore be at risk in accordance with the guidance in HJ (Iran).

Discussion and conclusions

  11. Whilst permission was granted in relation  to  the  challenge  in  the
      grounds to the judge's approach to section 8 and  to  the  weight  she
      accorded to the appellant's delay in claiming asylum, it seems to  me,
      having heard further submissions on the point,  that  this  ground  is
      simply not made out. I am in  agreement  with  Mr  Whitwell  that  the
      judge's reference to section 8 as a starting point was not  indicative
      of an unlawful  approach  when  considering  the  rest  of  her  self-
      direction at [14]  of  her  decision.  It  is  clear  that  the  judge
      considered the appellant's delay in  claiming  asylum  in  the  round,
      together with other credibility issues. She was perfectly entitled  to
      accord weight to the circumstances  in  which  the  appellant  claimed
      asylum and to consider that that impacted upon his credibility, as the
      Court of Appeal held in JT (Cameroon) v Secretary  of  State  for  the
      Home Department [2008] EWCA Civ 878 at [21]: "Where section 8  matters
      are held to be entitled to some weight, the weight to be given to them
      is entirely a matter for the fact-finder." However she plainly did not
      consider it to be determinative of the credibility assessment and  she
      provided  various  additional,  cogent  reasons  for   rejecting   the
      appellant' account, based upon inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in
      his evidence.

  12. The grounds challenge the judge's adverse findings on the  appellant's
      religion and assert that he was consistent with his claim to belong to
      the Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist faith. It is asserted  that  the  judge  was
      wrong to consider the  appellant  inconsistent  by  referring  to  his
      religion, in his screening interview, as the Hoa Hao  faith,  when  he
      had stated in the same interview that his religion was not an official
      one and had in fact corrected the recorded answer in a  letter  of  11
      December 2017. However, whilst the judge did not specifically refer to
      that letter, she was entitled to have regard to the appellant's actual
      evidence at the interview, which was that his  religion  was  Hoa  Hao
      (question 1.12). The letter of 11 December 2017, at  Annex  E  of  the
      respondent's bundle, does not assert that  the  appellant  stated  his
      religion to be Pure  Hoa  Hoa  Buddhism  at  that  interview,  as  the
      appellant suggested in his statement, but it merely seeks to amend the
      answer which he is recorded as having given at 1.12. The appellant did
      not claim to have had difficulty understanding the interpreter at that
      interview. The judge's findings were in any event not only based  upon
      the appellant's evidence at his  screening  interview,  but  also  the
      initial interview at Annex H where he claimed to have no religion.  Mr
      Janjua initially sought to address that matter by  claiming  that  the
      appellant had not had an interpreter, but he  properly  withdrew  that
      submission when he noted the interpreter's reference number.

  13. It seems to me, therefore, that the judge was  perfectly  entitled  to
      conclude that the appellant had not been consistent in his evidence of
      his religion and to draw the adverse conclusions that she did from the
      variations in his account in that regard. It is also relevant to  note
      that that was  not  the  only  reason  that  the  judge  rejected  the
      appellant's claim to be Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist and that further reasons
      were given at [15] which have not been addressed or challenged in  the
      grounds. Likewise, the judge provided detailed and cogent  reasons  at
      [16] for rejecting the appellant's claim in regard to his  experiences
      in Vietnam and no  specific  challenges  were  made  in  that  regard.
      Accordingly I find there to  be  no  errors  of  law  in  the  judge's
      assessment  of  credibility  and  her  rejection  of  the  appellant's
      account.

  14. The grounds also challenge the judge's decision  in  relation  to  the
      appellant's sur place activities in the UK, asserting that she did not
      make proper findings in that regard and field to apply the guidance in
      BA (Demonstrators in Britain - risk on return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36.
       However the judge's findings at [20] and [21] addressed the  relevant
      risk  factors  in  that  regard,  took  account  of  relevant  country
      information, and were supported by cogent reasons for concluding  that
      the appellant did not have a profile which  would  bring  him  to  the
      adverse attention of the Vietnamese authorities. Mr  Janjua  submitted
      that the judge failed to follow the  guidance  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  WA
      (Pakistan), in that she failed to consider that the  appellant  was  a
      person who had demonstrated his  faith  publicly  and  would  wish  to
      continue practising his faith publicly in Vietnam. However that was  a
      matter considered by the judge. At [21] she found that  the  appellant
      was not genuinely motivated in demonstrating his faith and that he was
      simply seeking to bolster his asylum claim. In light of such findings,
      and given that the  judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  was
      genuinely a member of the Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist religion, it is  plain
      that she did not accept that he was a person who would genuinely  wish
      to practice the Pure Hoa Hao Buddhist faith actively in Vietnam,  such
      that any risk as envisaged in HJ (Iran) would arise. Contrary  to  the
      assertion in the grounds, therefore, the judge addressed all  relevant
      matters in assessing risk on return.

  15. For all of these reasons it seems to me that the judge  was  perfectly
      entitled to reach the  conclusions  that  she  did.  On  the  evidence
      available to her she was fully entitled to conclude that the appellant
      had not given a consistent account of his religion and his reasons for
      leaving Vietnam and had not provided a credible and genuine account of
      the risks he would face on return to  Vietnam.  The  judge  was  fully
      entitled to dismiss the appeal on the basis that she did and  she  did
      not make any errors of law in doing so.

DECISION

  16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.  I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated:  10 December 2019
