
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05994/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8 June 2020                      |On 19 June 2020                     |


                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    M.B.
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                    -and-

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Decision made under rule 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

Introduction

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Moxon ('the Judge'), issued on 19 December 2019, by which  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  to  grant  him
    international protection was dismissed.

 2. The appellant appeals on all grounds with permission of  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Chohan by means of a decision sent to  the  parties
    on 20 February 2020.



Rule 34

 3. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

 4. In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule  2(1)  of  the
    2008 Rules, and also at rule 2(2)-(4), I indicated to the parties by  a
    Note and Directions dated 20 April 2020 my  provisional  view  that  it
    would be appropriate to determine the  following  questions  without  a
    hearing:

      i) Whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved
         the making of an error of law, and if so

     ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

 5. In reaching my provisional view, I was mindful as to the  circumstances
    when an oral hearing is to be held in order to comply with  the  common
    law duty of fairness and also as to when a decision  may  appropriately
    be made consequent to a paper consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board
    [2013] UKSC 61; [2014] AC 1115.

 6.  The  respondent  consented  to  the  proposed  approach  as   to   the
    consideration of this hearing.

 7. By a letter dated 5 May 2020 the appellant's representative  raised  no
    objection to the consideration of the appeal under rule 34 of the  2008
    Rules, though requested that if the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
    were to be set aside an oral hearing should then take place.

 8. I am grateful to Fountain Solicitors, on behalf of  the  appellant  and
    Mr. Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer, on behalf of the respondent,  for
    filing their helpful written submissions, dated 5 May 2020 and  19  May
    2020 respectively.



Anonymity

 9. An anonymity direction was issued by the Judge and no  application  was
    made by either party to set it aside. The direction is confirmed at the
    conclusion of this decision.



Background

10. The appellant is aged 26 and asserts that he is  an  Eritean  national,
    having been born in Eritrea to an  Eritrean  father  and  an  Ethiopian
    mother. The respondent considers that he is a national of Ethiopia.

11. The appellant states that in 1996 his father, then working in  Eritrea,
    was transferred by his company to work in Addis Ababa and the appellant
    accompanied him to Ethiopia. In 1999 the family were  deported  by  the
    Ethiopian authorities back to Eritrea. His father was arrested  by  the
    Eritrean authorities after the family's return and his mother died soon
    after. He resided with his uncle for a period  of  time  and  then  his
    uncle arranged for him to cross into Ethiopia where  he  resided  at  a
    refugee camp for 2 years. He was aged around 10 or 11 when he  returned
    to Ethiopia. He decided to leave the refugee  camp  and  slept  on  the
    streets in Addis Ababa from 2007 until 2012.

12. The appellant states that he left Ethiopia in 2012 and  went  to  Sudan
    where he lived until travelling to Libya in 2018. Whilst  in  Sudan  he
    was in  a  relationship  with  an  Ethiopian  national.  The  appellant
    provided inconsistent evidence as to whether he did or  did  not  marry
    his partner in 2014. After a period of 17 months in Libya, he travelled
    to Italy and then travelled onto this country, via France.  He  claimed
    asylum on 20 October 2017 and  the  respondent  refused  to  grant  him
    international protection by means of a decision dated 11 June 2019.



The hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appeal came before the Judge on 28  November  2019.  The  appellant
    attended and gave oral evidence. The Judge made  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings and determined  that  the  appellant  was  not  an
    Eritrean national. As to the appellant's  personal  history  the  Judge
    found, inter alia, at [21]:

         '21.

         ...

         e.   The Appellant stated  that  upon  entering  Ethiopia  he  told
             soldiers that he had escaped from Eritrea and they took him to
             the Hitsats refugee camp. He was unequivocal  about  this  and
             given that he asserts that he lived and was  educated  in  the
             camp until the age of 13, I do not accept as credible that  he
             would be mistaken as to which camp he resided. His account  of
             being taken directly to the Hitsats camp is inconsistent  with
             external evidence relied upon by  the  Respondent  that  newly
             arrived refugees would initially be taken  to  the  Endabaganu
             screening and refugee camp.

         f.   The Appellant asserts that he stayed in  the  Hitsats  refugee
             camp between 2005  and  2007,  but  this  is  contradicted  by
             external evidence relied upon by the Respondent that the  camp
             was not constructed until 2013. Whilst he states that he lived
             in a room with three other young people and that they slept in
             bunk beds, this is contradicted by  external  evidence  relied
             upon by the Respondent that young people were accommodated  in
             groups of 5 to 9 and that they would sleep  on  mats  or  beds
             made out of mud.

         g.   The Appellant stated that he left the camp  as  he  wanted  to
             progress his education, however this account is undermined  by
             the fact that he asserts that he left at grade 4  whereas  the
             camp provided education to grade 5 and  is  inconsistent  with
             external evidence relied  upon  by  the  Respondent  that  the
             Provided education to grade 12.

14. I observe at this juncture that the respondent detailed at paragraph 39
    of her decision letter that the appellant's evidence  was  inconsistent
    with the fact that Hitsats refugee camp was constructed in 2013 and the
    respondent placed objective documentary evidence from the UNHCR  before
    the First-tier Tribunal confirming that the camp opened in May 2013.

15. As to the appellant's efforts to secure proof of his efforts to acquire
    Ethiopian nationality from the Ethiopian Embassy in London,  the  Judge
    found, at [23]:

         '23. Whilst the Appellant asserts that  he  visited  the  Ethiopian
             Embassy, he had failed to disclose this prior to  the  hearing
             and his explanation of failing to tell his solicitors  is  not
             credible. I give little weight to the photograph of him  stood
             outside the Embassy as it does not show that  he  entered  the
             building. Further, I note that he has not sought to return  to
             show them the birth certificate, despite  his  assertion  that
             they had asked for proof  that  his  mother  is  Ethiopian.  I
             therefore do not accept that the Appellant has made sufficient
             effort to obtain confirmation from the Ethiopian Embassy about
             his entitlement to citizenship.'

16. The Judge concluded, at [24]:

         '24. I have stood back and considered all of the  evidence  in  the
             round and given as much weight as I feel able to the  evidence
             that is supportive of the Appellant's claim. I  have  reminded
             myself of the low standard of proof to  be  adopted.  However,
             even upon that low standard of proof I am not  satisfied  that
             the Appellant has given a truthful narrative account  or  that
             he is Eritrean. I reject his account of ever living in Eritrea
             and having ever been deported from Ethiopia. I find is a fact,
             to an extremely high standard, that he is and is recognised by
             the appropriate authorities as an Ethiopian  national  and  an
             Ethiopian citizen and additionally that he is  married  to  an
             Ethiopian citizen. I reject his accounts of having lived in  a
             camp and being deported from Ethiopia.'

17. As an alternative, the Judge found, at [25]-[26]:

         '25. In any event, even if I was to accept the Appellant's account,
             which I do not, I nevertheless find that he  is  eligible  for
             Ethiopian citizenship on account of his mother and  wife  both
             being Ethiopian. Whilst Mr. Sills argued that dual nationality
             is not permitted, it is clear from considering the  CPIN  that
             the  nationality  laws  in  Ethiopia  would  permit  Ethiopian
             citizenship  in  the   Appellant's   purported   circumstances
             provided that any Eritrean citizenship is relinquished.

         26.  I  do  not  accept  that  there  is  a  reasonable  degree  of
             likelihood that returning the  Appellant  to  Ethiopian  would
             expose him to a real risk of an act of persecution ...'



The grounds of appeal

18. The appellant relies upon five grounds of appeal that can be summarised
    as follows:

          1) The Judge failed to  consider  whether  there  would  be  very
             significant obstacles  to  the  appellant's  integration  into
             Eritrea if he were  required  to  leave  the  United  Kingdom:
             paragraph 276A(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules ('the Rules').

          2) The Judge  erred  in  his  consideration  of  the  appellant's
             efforts to acquire Ethiopian nationality.

          3) The Judge erred by making contrary findings of fact.

          4) The Judge erred by failing to make any findings in relation to
             the appellant qualifying for Eritrea nationality.

          5) The Judge erred by materially misdirecting himself as  to  the
             correct standard of proof.

19. In granting permission to appeal Judge Chohan observed, inter alia:

         '2.  The grounds that have substance in  relation  to  the  judge's
             findings are on the issues of whether the appellant  had  been
             deported from Ethiopia  and  whether  the  judge  applied  the
             incorrect standard of proof.

         3.   At paragraph 20 of the decision, the judge states that  it  is
             plausible that the  appellant  may  have  been  deported  from
             Ethiopia based on objective evidence.  However,  at  paragraph
             24, the judge rejects the appellant's claim that he  had  ever
             been deported from Ethiopia. In the same paragraph, the  judge
             refers to the lower standard of proof but then goes on to make
             a finding 'to an extremely high standard'.



Written submissions

20. The written  submissions  from  both  parties  succinctly  address  the
    grounds relied upon by the appellant  and  have  been  considered  with
    care.



Decision on error of law

21. Though permission to appeal was granted on all grounds,  I  proceed  to
    initially consider grounds 3 and 5 which  formed  the  basis  of  Judge
    Chohan's reasoning when granting permission to appeal.

22. Ground 3 details:

         '3.1 At [20] of the FTTD, the IJ made findings that the appellant's
             account of '...  being deported from  Ethiopian  is  plausible
             ...' The IJ, at [24] then makes a  contradictory  finding  and
             rejects the appellant's account of ever  being  deported  from
             Ethiopia.

         3.2  We  submit  that  this  contradictory  finding  amounts  to  a
             material error.'

23. The written submissions filed on behalf of the appellant  expands  upon
    this ground:

         '6.  In relation to ground 3, it is further contended that the  FTT
             Judge made contrary findings  on  a  material  aspect  of  the
             appellant's case which go to the core of the account. At  [20]
             of the  FTT  determination,  the  FTT  Judge  found  that  the
             Appellant  had  given  a  plausible  account  of  having  been
             deported from Ethiopia and stated that this in fact 'enhanced'
             the appellant's credibility.  However,  by  [24]  of  the  FTT
             determination, the FTT  Judge  had  rejected  the  appellant's
             account of being deported from Ethiopia.  These  findings  are
             contradictory, particularly given that between [20]  and  [24]
             of the FTT determination, the FTT Judge has not made any other
             findings in relation to the appellant's account of how he left
             Ethiopia.

         7.   This is a fundamental aspect  of  the  appellant's  case.  The
             appellant's account is that he is an Eritrean national and  is
             at a persecutory risk as a consequence. If it is  establishing
             that the appellant was in fact deported from Ethiopia, this is
             indicative that the appellant is  not  an  Ethiopian  national
             contrary to the FTT Judge's findings at [24].'

24. The Judge's observation as to plausibility is located at  [20]  of  his
    decision:

         '20. The appellant's account  of  travelling  between  Eritrea  and
             Ethiopia and being deported from Ethiopia  is  plausible  when
             considering   objective   evidence   and   so   enhances   his
             credibility.

25. This ground of appeal is misconceived. A finding as to plausibility  is
    not a finding as to credibility and so not a finding of  fact.  Ouseley
    J, sitting  as  the  President  of  the  Immigration  Appeal  Tribunal,
    confirmed in MM (DRC - plausibility) DRC [2005] UKIAT 00019; [2005] Imm
    AR 198, at [15], that while an assessment of credibility may involve an
    assessment of plausibility of what has been  said  in  the  context  of
    objective background information, it is not a  separate  stage  in  the
    assessment of credibility, which requires an assessment of the totality
    of  the  evidence,  including  consistency  on  essentials   or   major
    inconsistencies,   omissions   and    details,    improbabilities    or
    reasonableness. In this matter, the Judge observed that  the  purported
    history of travel between Eritrea and Ethiopia and being deported  from
    Ethiopia was plausible in light of  relevant  objective  evidence,  and
    proceeded to give positive weight  to  the  plausible  history  in  the
    overall assessment, but then placed a number  of  significant,  adverse
    findings of fact into his overall assessment before making his decision
    as to credibility. Consequently, the  Judge  did  not,  as  alleged  by
    ground 3, make contradictory findings of facts. Rather, he undertook  a
    lawful assessment of the evidence  in  the  round,  giving  appropriate
    weight to the individual evidence presented. There is no merit in  this
    ground of appeal.

26. Turning to ground 5, the appellant asserts:

         '5.1 At [22] and [24] of the FTTD it is submitted that the  IJ  has
             applied the incorrect standard of proof. At [22] the IJ stated
             '... there  are  already  reasons  to  doubt  the  Appellant's
             credibility ...' At [24] the IJ stated 'I find is a  fact,  to
             an extremely high standard ...'

         5.2  The IJ has, in at least two  paragraphs  in  relation  to  the
             Appellant's core of the claim has  (sic)  incorrectly  applied
             the  correct  standard  of  proof.  The  application  of   the
             incorrect standard of  proof  is  a  material  error  and  the
             decision must be set aside.'

27. By means of his written submissions, the appellant details:

         '9.  In relation to ground 5, it is contended that  the  FTT  Judge
             has materially erred in law by applying the wrong standard  of
             proof  to  the  consideration  of  the   appellant's   refugee
             protection claim. At [22] the FTT  Judge  states  '....  Given
             that there  are  already  reasons  to  doubt  the  appellant's
             credibility ...' At [24] the FTT Judge states '... I find as a
             fact to an extremely high standard ...' Again, it is contended
             that having applied  the  wrong  standard  on  more  than  one
             occasion, that such material errors go  to  the  core  of  the
             account.'

28. At [22] of the decision, the  Judge  was  considering  the  appellant's
    reliance upon an Eritrean birth certificate:

         '22. The Appellant has adduced a copy of what he purports to be his
             birth certificate. The  weight  assigned  to  that  letter  is
             enhanced by the fact that it was printed many  years  ago  and
             appears to have been sent  within  an  envelope  affixed  with
             Eritreans stamps. However, his account of meeting a friend  by
             happenstance only a month after the refusal, and  that  friend
             being able to reconnect the Appellant with his uncle who  have
             possession of his birth certificate and with whom he  had  not
             spoken to for approximately 14  years,  is  unpersuasive.  The
             credibility of  the  account  is  further  undermined  by  the
             Appellant's failure to reduce evidence from  the  friend,  not
             only about how the birth certificate was obtained,  but  about
             him knowing the Appellant is  from  Eritrea.  Given  that  the
             Appellant and his representatives knew that the central  issue
             in  this  appeal  was  nationality,  as  demonstrated  by  the
             disclosure of the purported birth certificate, I do not accept
             as credible the Appellant's account that he did not believe it
             would be prudent to obtain supportive  witness  evidence  from
             the friend. Given that there are already reasons to doubt  the
             Appellant's  credibility,  as  outlined  above,  the   failure
             without good reason to obtain that evidence which  would  have
             been readily available is undermining to  the  credibility  of
             the appellant. In all the circumstances, I give little  weight
             to the purported birth certificate as I'm not  satisfied  that
             it is a reliable document.'

29. Upon reading this paragraph  in  its  entirety,  rather  than  the  one
    sentence referred to within ground 5, it is clear that  the  Judge  was
    continuing  his  consideration  of  the  evidence  in  the  round.   In
    undertaking such consideration he adopted an approach akin to  using  a
    check list and in doing so identified factors upon which  he  concluded
    that he was to give positive weight favourable to the appellant, namely
    the apparent age of the document and the means by which it was sent  to
    the appellant. He then proceeded to consider  factors  adverse  to  the
    appellant and in doing  so  he  referred  to  'doubts'  raised  by  the
    appellant's evidence as to his personal history addressed at length  in
    [21]. I note that no challenge is made by appellant in this  appeal  to
    the reasoning adopted at [21]. The reference to 'doubts' is  consistent
    with  no  final  finding  having  been  made  as  to  the   appellant's
    credibility at this point of the decision. It  is  consistent  with  an
    ongoing assessment of the evidence in the round, with  such  assessment
    only being concluded at [24]. The approach adopted by the Judge towards
    the birth certificate at [22] as part  of  his  overall  assessment  of
    credibility was lawful and  this  element  of  ground  5  possesses  no
    merits.

30. As to the Judge's consideration  of  credibility  at  [24],  the  Judge
    applied the correct standard of proof, namely the lower standard,  when
    assessing the  appellant's  history  as  to  a  fear  of  the  Eritrean
    authorities, and such approach is not challenged by the appellant.  The
    challenge advanced is to the consideration  by  the  Judge  as  to  the
    appellant being an Ethiopian national:

         '24. ... I find is a fact, to an extremely high standard,  that  he
             is and is recognised by  the  appropriate  authorities  as  an
             Ethiopian national and an Ethiopian citizen  and  additionally
             that he is married to  an  Ethiopian  citizen.  I  reject  his
             accounts of having lived in a camp  and  being  deported  from
             Ethiopia.'

31. By means of her decision letter  dated  11  June  2019  the  respondent
    confirmed at paragraph 50 that she considered the appellant  to  be  of
    Ethiopian nationality. As such assertion was made  by  the  respondent,
    she was required before the First-tier Tribunal  to  prove  it  to  the
    civil standard. Whilst the Judge applied  an  erroneous  standard  when
    considering this issue, one akin to the  criminal  standard  of  proof,
    namely beyond reasonable doubt, the appellant cannot benefit from  such
    error as on the application of  the  civil  standard,  the  balance  of
    probabilities, the same finding  as  to  nationality  would  have  been
    reached by the Judge. Consequently, there is no merit to ground  5  and
    it is dismissed.

32. Having found that there are no merits to grounds 3  and  5,  the  other
    grounds are so significantly undermined as to also possess  no  merits.
    As to ground 1 there was no requirement for the Judge to consider under
    paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Rules as whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Eritrea as he
    found that the appellant is an Ethiopian national and not Eritrean  and
    so will be returned to Ethiopia. There was no material misdirection  in
    law.

33. As to ground 2, the Judge held  that  the  appellant  is  an  Ethiopian
    national and so despite the  contention  advanced  within  this  ground
    there was no requirement for him  to  consider  whether  the  appellant
    could 'acquire' Ethiopian nationality. In any  event,  the  Judge  gave
    lawful reasons at  [23]  for  not  accepting  that  the  appellant  had
    undertaken sufficient steps to provide the Ethiopian Embassy in  London
    as to evidence of his true nationality.

34. Ground 4 is misconceived. The Judge did not find the  appellant  to  be
    credible as to his personal history. He did not accept the  appellant's
    evidence that his father is an Eritrean national. In such circumstances
    there is no merit in the submission that  the  Judge  was  required  to
    consider as to whether the appellant qualified for Eritrean nationality
    through his father. This ground enjoys no merit.



Notice of Decision

35. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

36. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated  19  December  2019,  is
    upheld and the appeal is dismissed.

37. An anonymity order is confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

38. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 8 June 2020




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed, and no fee award is payable.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 8 June 2020
