
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05697/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |21st March 2018               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male citizen of Afghanistan born on [  ]  1997.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 18th December 2015 and applied  for  asylum
    that day.  That application was refused for the  reasons  given  in  an
    Asylum Decision dated 20th May 2016.  The Appellant  appealed  and  his
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Asjad (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 30th March 2017.  She decided to  dismiss  the
    appeal for the reasons given in her Decision dated 2nd May  2017.   The
    Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 6th October 2017
    such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before  me  the  Appellant  appeared  unrepresented  but
    indicated that he wished the hearing to proceed.   For  the  Respondent
    Mrs Aboni confirmed that it was conceded in accordance with the Rule 24
    response that there was a material error of law in the decision of  the
    Judge which accordingly should be set  aside.   She  further  confirmed
    that she agreed that the appeal should be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for the  decision  in  the  appeal  to  be  re-made  there  in
    accordance with paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice  Statements  as  there
    was judicial fact-finding still to be carried out.

 4. In accordance with the concession of the Respondent, I find a  material
    error of law in the decision of the Judge which I therefore set  aside.
    I need not give my reasons for that decision in  accordance  with  Rule
    40(3)(b) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008.   The
    decision in the appeal will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date  19th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
