
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05069/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at George House by Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 15 July 2020                            |On 29 July 2020                 |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     N M
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the appellant:     Mr Caskie, Advocate, instructed by JK Law,
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The decision of FtT Judge Gillespie, promulgated on  18  October  2019,
    was set aside by the decision of UT Judge Keith, promulgated on 2  June
    2020.

 2. The further hearing on 15 July 2020 took place  by  way  of  Skype  for
    Business.  Neither party raised any objection to that form of  hearing.
    I conducted it from a tribunal hearing room at George House, Edinburgh.
    No members of the public attended, personally or by Skype.   Mr  Caskie
    and  Mr  Whitwell  participated  remotely.   The   appellant   attended
    remotely, with his solicitor, from his solicitor's office.  Connections
    failed several times, but were restored.  There was intermittently poor
    sound quality, which required some  repetition.   At  the  end  of  the
    hearing,  representatives  confirmed  that  they  had  conveyed   their
    submissions in full and had heard the full submissions from  the  other
    side.  Despite the technical problems, which prolonged matters,  I  was
    satisfied that there had been a fair  hearing.   I  am  obliged  to  Mr
    Caskie and to Mr Whitwell for the patience and clarity with which  they
    presented their submissions.

 3. As quoted by Judge Keith at [25], a report by Professor Bowring  opined
    at [30] that for the appellant, being a Lezgin and a Sunni Muslim  from
    Dagestan, his "language and ethnicity are  in  themselves  reasons  for
    persecution.  It is also my opinion that if he returns to any  part  of
    Russia, he may be subject of persecution."

 4. (The appellant was interviewed and gave evidence in  Russian.   It  has
    not been disputed that he also speaks Lezgin.)

 5. The FtT concluded that the appellant was not at risk by  "merely  being
    one of 800,000 Lezgins from Dagestan".  Judge Keith at [26]  said  that
    while the judge  was  entitled  to  find,  notwithstanding  the  expert
    report, that ethnicity and language were not enough, he had stated  his
    conclusion without giving reasons, which was an error of law.

 6. Judge Keith maintained the FtT's findings, adverse to the appellant, at
    [47-50], but not at [51].  The case was retained in the UT,  given  the
    limited scope of the issue remaining,  "an  analysis  of  the  expert's
    report and limited fact-finding".

 7. A transfer order was made to enable the re-making of the decision to be
    completed by another UT Judge.

 8. The principal points which I noted from the submissions  by  Mr  Caskie
    were these:

      i) The expertise of Professor Bowring on southern Russian regions  was
         undisputed.

     ii) There were 3 key paragraphs in his report  - [20], on targeting  of
         members of a mosque in the  capital  of  Dagestan,  regarded  as  a
         Salafi centre; Salafis seen as a threat in Dagestan; even reporting
         on the pressure imposed on them by the authorities can be a  reason
         for illegal detention and harassment; [23], on targeting persons on
         a "watch list"; and [30], as above.

    iii) It was the expert's duty not to purport to resolve the issue  which
         was for the tribunal.  That was why he opined  that  the  appellant
         may, not would, be subject to  persecution.   That  was  consistent
         with the declaration  of  his  compliance  with  his  duties.   His
         conclusion went as far as he properly could go.

     iv) The general description of the situation in southern Dagestan,  the
         appellant's home area, showed that matters were  so  bad  that  the
         appellant qualified on language and ethnicity alone, even  although
         he had not been found specifically to be a Salafi Muslim.

      v) Further, the evidence justified a  finding  that  he  is  a  Salafi
         Muslim.  In his account of  his  difficulties  he  mentioned  being
         bearded (at the time).  He said he was targeted at  a  mosque,  and
         the expert evidence was that it is  Salafi  mosques  which  attract
         adverse attention; examples at [20] and [23].  There was no mention
         of similar pressure on non-Salafis.

     vi) Wherever the appellant might go in Russia, he would be identifiable
         as a Lezgin from Dagestan.

    vii) The appellant's religious and ethnic profile  established  a  risk,
         regardless of the lack of credibility of the rest of his account.

   viii) The FtT, in essence, shied away from a  "floodgates"  finding;  but
         where evidence shows that all members of a group are at risk,  that
         is the conclusion required.

     ix) The case did not turn on being one of 800,000, but on being from  a
         village of fewer than 5,000, in an  area  of  particularly  intense
         pressure.

      x) Professor Bowring's report was also "signed off" by a second expert
         who was able to confirm the appellant's language and ethnicity.

     xi) The appeal should be allowed.

 9. The principal points advanced by Mr Whitwell were these:

      i) Only the refugee protection issue was live.

     ii) Although the appellant is accepted  to  be  a  Lezgin  Muslim  from
         Dagestan, there were good reasons for not accepting  anything  else
         he said.  No more favourable findings should be reached.

    iii) The expert status of Professor  Bowring  was  undoubted.   However,
         this was a "hybrid" report, outsourced in part to  Mr  Alpautov,  a
         former student of Professor Bowring.  He made no declaration of his
         duties as an expert.  He  appeared  to  be  a  Prague  based  radio
         journalist.  His impartiality was not established.

     iv) The report was based on claims which the appellant had  not  proved
         about detention and interrogation.

      v) The report did not cite evidence to support a risk to  all  800,000
         Lezgins, and particularly not a risk which followed them throughout
         Russia.  That conclusion stood in isolation from the  rest  of  the
         report.

     vi) The appellant now sought a finding that he is a Salafi Muslim,  but
         he never asserted  that  in  evidence.   He  described  himself  at
         interview simply as a Muslim, and there was no evidence that he  is
         anything  but  a  (mainstream)  Sunni.   He  said   nothing   about
         allegiance to any particular branch  of  Islam.   No  such  finding
         should be made.

    vii) The report at [22] referred to a watch list.  Although it said that
         a person might not know he was on that list, there was  nothing  to
         suggest that the appellant was likely to be on it.

   viii) The report at [19] set out the  likely  categories  of  victims  of
         human rights abuses.  The appellant did  not  fall  within  any  of
         them.  He is not a public figure,  does  not  claim  to  have  high
         profile relatives, and is not a journalist, activist, or insurgent.
          Even by his own account, he has an uncle, a former policeman,  who
         was able to get him out of trouble.

     ix) It was acknowledged that the respondent  did  not  have  a  Country
         Policy  and  Information  Note  (CPIN)  covering  the   appellant's
         origins.  However, the evidence did not show  that  Lezgins,  as  a
         class, are at risk.

      x) The appeal should be dismissed.

10. Mr Caskie replied:

      i) It was conceded that the case turned  on  refugee  protection,  and
         could not succeed on humanitarian protection or any other grounds.

     ii) Mr Alpautov was not partisan, but a  specialist  of  the  type  who
         might be found on the BBC world  service.   He  had  an  impressive
         academic and expert background.  He made no  separate  declaration,
         but was invited to contribute by Professor Bowring,  one  of  whose
         functions was to select reliable sources, for which he was prepared
         to vouch.

    iii) [30] of the  report  did  not  stand  in  isolation.   It  was  the
         conclusion from the evidence of one expert, supported by another.

     iv) Although there was no finding that the appellant is Salafi, and  he
         had not said so, he had not been asked; there was  nothing  to  the
         contrary; and the background evidence indicated that he was  likely
         to be Salafi.

      v) In absence of a CPIN, the expert evidence was not  countered  as  a
         source on general risk.  There was nothing  within  the  report  to
         suggest that it should not be relied upon.

11. I reserved my decision.

12. Experts must rely on sources, and are expected to judge their  quality.
    Mr Alpautov is well qualified.  I see no reason to suspect that  he  is
    partisan.  It was not necessary to make him a co-author of the  report.
    This feature does not detract from its weight.

13. Apart from that issue, I prefer the  submissions  for  the  respondent,
    broadly for the reasons advanced.

14. The report comes closest at [19] to laying  the  evidential  foundation
    for its conclusion: "Dagestan is notorious  for  human  rights  abuses.
    Victims are mostly Salafi Muslims, relatives  of  insurgents,  disloyal
    politicians, journalists and civil society activists  ...  Lezgins  are
    regarded with suspicion and fear by the authorities."

15. There is no reason not to accept that most victims are Salafi  Muslims;
    but the general statement does not support a real risk  to  all  Salafi
    Muslims, or to all Lezgins.

16. Nor do the examples cited support such a risk.  Specific  instances  in
    the report are the son of the imam at a mosque, regarded  as  a  Salafi
    centre, in the capital; members of that mosque; alleged insurgents  and
    Lezgin separatists; and a journalist.

17. The appellant has not shown that he falls within  any  of  the  further
    categories, or sub-categories, in the general statement.

18. The report does not cite evidence which would  support  a  tribunal  in
    concluding that Lezgin language and ethnicity, without more,  establish
    a real risk of persecution.

19. Evidence is also lacking for a conclusion that any risk of  persecution
    might extend elsewhere in Russia.  No example is given.

20. Although no reference was made in the UT, I  note  that  the  appellant
    produced in the FtT several items of background evidence on  oppression
    of Salafists and insurgents in Dagestan.  These  were  from  apparently
    reputable sources, including Human Rights Watch.  However, it  was  not
    suggested that these sources set up a case of general risk.

21. The appellant mentioned that he was bearded at the time of his  alleged
    difficulties, but not as part of his usual appearance or as a token  of
    religious fervour; rather, this was by way of preparation for a  family
    wedding.  His account established clearly that he is  Muslim,  but  his
    self-description is as a conformist rather than as an  ardent  devotee.
    He did not hint at Salafism.

22. I note from [17] of the report that 83% of the population  of  Dagestan
    adheres to Islam, and that "Lezgin Sunni  Muslims  follow  the  Shafi'i
    rites that have been in place for centuries".  Shafi'i is  one  of  the
    four major Sunni schools of religious law.  Salafism is a distinct  and
    much later movement.  I was not referred to any statistic on the number
    of Lezgin Salafis,  but  they  appear  to  form  a  minority,  not  the
    mainstream, in Dagestan.

23. It is not impossible that the appellant is Salafi, but it is  odd  that
    he has not mentioned it, even in passing, in his  account.   I  do  not
    find that the evidence, as a whole, supports a finding now that  he  is
    Salafi, even as a reasonable likelihood.

24. Even if the appellant did attend a Salafi mosque, that would  not  make
    his case.

25. The issue specified at [6] above is accordingly  resolved  against  the
    appellant.

26. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  been  set  aside.   The
    decision substituted is that the appeal, as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is
    dismissed.

27. The anonymity direction made earlier in the proceedings is  maintained.




        Hugh Macleman

     UT Judge Macleman, 20 July 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.

