
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05620/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 August 2017                      |On 17 August 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

                                     BB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohzam, Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, BB, was born in 1998 and is a male citizen of Iraq.   By
    a decision dated 20 May 2016, the respondent  refused  the  appellant's
    protection claim.  The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Shanahan) which, in a decision promulgated on 30  January  2017,
    dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Granting permission, Judge Page, summarised the grounds as follows:

         "If the judge has made a mistake and applied the wrong  Immigration
         Rules or Rule that would amount to an arguable error of law.  It is
         further arguable that the judge's conclusions  that  the  appellant
         would be able to obtain a CSID card on return were  not  realistic.
         The  appellant  complains  that  the  judge's  findings  that   the
         appellant could retain contact with his family members is  perverse
         and that there is real doubt that the appellant could obtain a CSID
         card or INC on return.  These grounds appear arguable so permission
         to appeal is granted."

 3. The appellant was 18 years old at the time of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing.  He had been granted leave as an unaccompanied asylum  seeking
    child.  The judge recorded [14] that Counsel for the appellant informed
    the First-tier Tribunal that the appellant would not give evidence.  He
    explained that this decision had been taken on the basis that the  "key
    facts" of the claim as to identity, age and home area had  been  agreed
    by the  respondent.   However,  as  is  apparent  from  the  subsequent
    paragraph, several of the parts  of  the  appellant's  claim  were  not
    accepted by the respondent.  In  particular,  the  respondent  did  not
    accept that the appellant had lost touch with  his  family  members  in
    Iraq.

 4. The judge found [23] that no group or individual  within  Iraq  or  the
    Iraqi authorities would seek to harm him on his return.  At  [24],  the
    judge observed that the respondent  had  accepted  that  the  appellant
    would be in danger of Article 15(c) harm if returned to his  home  area
    of Sinjar in the Ninewah Governate.  The Secretary  of  State  accepted
    that this home area lay within one of the contested areas identified in
    AA (Iraq) CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).  Accordingly, the judge  went  on
    to consider the internal flight alternative.  The appellant is  a  Kurd
    of Sunni faith.  The judge recorded that the appellant claimed that  he
    had lost contact with his family in  Iraq,  a  claim  disputed  by  the
    Secretary of State.  The judge relied on EU (Afghanistan)  [2013]  EWCA
    Civ 32.  At [10], the Court of Appeal stated:

         "Lastly, I should mention a point made by the  Secretary  of  State
         which I consider to  have  substance.  Unaccompanied  children  who
         arrive in this country from Afghanistan have done so as a result of
         someone, presumably their families, paying for  their  fare  and/or
         for a so-called agent to arrange their journey to this country. The
         costs incurred by the family will have been considerable,  relative
         to the wealth of the average  Afghan  family.  The  motivation  for
         their incurring that cost may be that their child faces risk if  he
         or she remains with them in Afghanistan, or it may simply  be  that
         they believe that their child will  have  a  better  life  in  this
         country. Either way, they are unlikely to  be  happy  to  cooperate
         with an agent of the Secretary of State for  the  return  of  their
         child  to  Afghanistan,  which  would  mean  the  waste  of   their
         investment in his or her journey here."

 5. At [35], Judge Shanahan wrote:

         "I have considered the Appellant's  account  of  leaving  Iraq.  He
         states that when ISIS attacked his village his  uncle  grabbed  him
         and told him he had to leave the  village.  They  walked  to  Mosul
         where his uncle left him with a friend.  The  Appellant  stayed  in
         Mosul for 1 - 1.5 years with this friend of his uncle's  and  would
         go to work with him from time to time. The Appellant  says  in  his
         statement that his uncle got in contact with the  friend  and  told
         him it was getting worse in the village and asked him  to  find  an
         agent to assist the Appellant to leave the country. The friend duly
         made the arrangements. From this account I note the Appellant  says
         he did not know what happened to his family but also that his uncle
         returned to the village. The friend was in contact with  the  uncle
         and therefore it is reasonable to assume the uncle would have  told
         the friend what was happening in the village and given  information
         about the Appellant's family. I also consider that for  the  friend
         to make the arrangements for the Appellant to be taken out  of  the
         country by an agent a significant sum of money must have been  paid
         to the agent. I take into account that the Appellant's  description
         of his father is he was a contractor and worked  for  high  ranking
         people and therefore again it is reasonable to assume that he had a
         comfortable standard of living. I  have  considered  the  fact  the
         Appellant says he has no contact with his  family  in  Iraq  but  a
         significant sum of money must have  been  paid  to  the  agent,  by
         either his father or uncle. Taking into account that his father was
         a person with a good job and comfortable standard  of  living,  the
         Appellant's leaving was an arranged and organised affair as opposed
         to a sudden and urgent  flight  I  am  satisfied  that  appropriate
         communications methods would have been settled before he  left  the
         country. I have taken into account the attempts the Respondent made
         to trace the Appellant's family  but  on  the  limited  information
         provided I am not satisfied that this  demonstrates  the  Appellant
         cannot make contact with them. Accordingly I am satisfied that  the
         Appellant does have the means to contact his family in Iraq."

 6. This paragraph is significant as it clearly led the judge  to  conclude
    that the appellant could return safely to Iraq.  The judge went  on  at
    [36] to state:

         "Given I am satisfied the Appellant has the means  to  contact  his
         family it is open to him to seek their support  if  returned  there
         and for them to assist him in obtaining the necessary documentation
         such as the CSID card and INC, either while he is still in  the  UK
         or on return to Iraq. Also they would be able to provide  him  with
         the family book details to assist him with obtaining the  CSID  and
         INC.  Accordingly I am not satisfied that would be unduly harsh  on
         account of not having these documents."

          At [38], the judge concluded:

         "I am satisfied that the Appellant has the  means  to  contact  his
         family in Iraq and through them acquire the relevant documents,  he
         has previously held a passport and an ID  card  and  these  can  be
         renewed. Therefore if it were feasible to return him to Iraq  I  am
         satisfied the Appellant could be returned  to  Baghdad  without  it
         being unduly harsh or unreasonable."

 7. The judge went on to consider whether the appellant could  relocate  to
    the IKR.  At [42], she wrote:

         "I have considered section 8 of the Home Office  guidance  document
         and note that it provides conflicting information about whether  or
         not a sponsor would be needed to allow for the Appellant  to  enter
         the IKR. However even if a sponsor is required given my findings in
         relation to the Appellant's family and his contact with them  I  am
         satisfied that  his  father  would  be  able  to  make  appropriate
         arrangements for a sponsor to act for the Appellant. I  refer  back
         to the Appellant's answers in interview in which he said  that  his
         father was a contractor who worked  for  high  ranking  people  and
         ministers and accordingly I am satisfied that  he  has  connections
         which would enable him to facilitate the Appellant's entry  to  the
         IKR."

    At [45], the judge wrote that it was "fair to say  that  the  appellant
    has not said that his family are in the IKR or are from there  but  the
    appellant has indicated in his statement  that  his  family  worked  in
    Kurdistan (para 15 - witness statement) and also earlier  that  he  had
    worked for high  ranking  people  and  ministers  and  therefore  I  am
    satisfied that the family will have some connections within the  region
    [IKR} from whom he could seek support and assistance".

 8. Mr Mohzam, for the appellant, submitted that the judge had erred in her
    finding regarding the ability of the appellant to make contact with and
    be received by his family should he return to Iraq.  He submitted  that
    the judge's findings were speculative at best, that  the  judge  should
    have assessed risk and the internal flight  alternative  on  the  basis
    that the appellant would be returning alone to Iraq and would not  have
    support.   Mr  Mills,  for  the  respondent,  submitted  that  it   was
    significant that  the  appellant  had  not  been  tendered  for  cross-
    examination; the judge had been entitled, on the basis of the  evidence
    she did receive, to find that the  appellant  had  family  members  who
    would assist him on the basis of the written evidence before her.

 9. I agree with Mr Mills.  The judge did not have the  benefit  of  seeing
    the appellant cross-examined and so she was compelled to make  findings
    on the  basis  of  the  written  evidence,  including  the  appellant's
    interview record and statement.  It is clear from the decision that she
    has considered that evidence in the context of the background  material
    relating to Iraq. The findings set in paragraph [35] and which  I  have
    set out in full above are, in my opinion, legally sound. The judge  was
    entitled to find that the appellant would be able to make contact  with
    his family in Iraq.  Also of significance is the judge's  finding  that
    amongst the appellant's close family members are individuals  of  means
    who had been able and willing to pay for the appellant to  be  sent  to
    the United Kingdom.  Further, the judge did not err by relying in  this
    appeal upon the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  EU  (Afghanistan);  the
    Court of Appeal acknowledged that establishing contact with  an  asylum
    seeker's family in the country of origin is likely to  be  hampered  by
    the fact that that family, put bluntly, may not wish to have the asylum
    seeker returned to it.

10. I find, therefore, that the judge's findings regarding the  appellant's
    family in Iraq are  legally  sound  and  should  stand.   The  question
    thereafter is whether, against the background of that  factual  matrix,
    the judge correctly assessed risk and the ability of the  appellant  to
    exercise  the  option  of  internal  flight.   The  judge  relied  upon
    paragraphs 151-153 of AA:

         "151.      The  Respondent's  position  is  that,  save  for  those
         returnees in the category identified below, it would in general  be
         reasonable, and not unduly harsh, to expect a person to relocate to
         Baghdad city if there is an Article 15(c) risk in their home  area.
         The exception to this generality is identified by the Respondent as
         being:




             "A person returned to Iraq who was  unable  to  replace  their
             Civil Status ID Card or Nationality Certificate [who would] be
             likely to face significant difficulties in accessing  services
             and a livelihood and would face destitution which is likely to
             reach the Article 3 threshold. [6]"

         152.     Having considered the entirely of the evidence before  us,
         we have come broadly to the same conclusions as  the  Respondent  -
         save that we observe that there will undoubtedly be persons who  do
         not have a CSID and who have been returned with a  passport  or  an
         expired passport who will not be destitute in Baghdad, and for whom
         there are no other  reasons  why  relocation  there  would  not  be
         reasonable. In this regard,  whilst  Dr  Fatah  provides  evidence,
         which we accept, that a CSID is required to access income/financial
         assistance, employment, education, housing, a pension, and  medical
         committee documents, there will be persons who do not have  a  CSID
         but who nevertheless have access to an adequate  support  mechanism
         in Baghdad; for example those persons with  family  or  friends  in
         Baghdad who are willing and able  to  provide  such  assistance  to
         them. Such matters will, of course, require  careful  consideration
         of the evidence, and a reasoned finding to be made, in each case.

          153.     The number of persons for whom it is not  reasonable,  or
         for whom it would be unduly harsh, to relocate to  Baghdad  is,  we
         think, likely to be small."

11. Judge Shanahan found that the appellant was a "person who did not  have
    a CSID but who nevertheless has access to an adequate support mechanism
    in Baghdad".  She has, as exhorted by the Tribunal in AA,  carried  out
    "careful  consideration  of  the  evidence"  and  has  made   "reasoned
    findings".  The judge acknowledged that she did not know where in  Iraq
    the appellant's family were living  but  I  do  not  consider,  on  the
    particular facts in this case, that her  findings  that  the  appellant
    could fly from the United Kingdom to Baghdad and there be  received  by
    his family are either speculative or perverse.  Furthermore, given that
    the judge found the appellant's family are  individuals  of  means,  he
    would, after he has entered their care, not have any pressing  need  to
    obtain a CSID in order to avoid becoming destitute.  The judge observes
    [38] that the appellant previously held a passport and ID card; it  was
    reasonable for her  to  conclude  that,  in  those  circumstances,  the
    appellant would, if he needed to do so, be able to obtain a  CSID  card
    after his arrival in Iraq.

12. I have set out above the judge's  findings  at  [45].   If  the  family
    needed to relocate to the IKR, then the judge found that  the  father's
    connections with that region would enable the family to  do  so.   Once
    again, on the limited evidence which she  had  before  her,  I  do  not
    consider that finding to be speculative, as the appellant asserts.

13. The country guidance provided by the Upper Tribunal in AA has now  been
    amended by the Court of Appeal (AA [2017] EWCA Civ 944).   The  country
    guidance now is as follows:

         "A.   INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

         1.   There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         2.   The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of the  "Baghdad
         Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
         intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a
         generalised Article 15(c) risk. The  parts  of  the  Baghdad  Belts
         concerned  are  those  forming  the  border  between  the   Baghdad
         Governorate and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.

         3.   The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
         (including  Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give   rise   to
         indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such   serious   harm   to
         civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics, so  as
         to engage Article 15(c).

         4.   In accordance with the principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
         465/07) and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases  should  assess
         the individual characteristics of the person claiming  humanitarian
         protection, in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are
         such as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

         B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

         5.   Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

         6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

         7.   In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
         and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA
         Civ 1276, an  international  protection  claim  made  by  P  cannot
         succeed by reference to any alleged risk of harm  arising  from  an
         absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport or a laissez passer,
         if the Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible  on
         account of a lack of any of those documents.

         8.   Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.

         C.   The CSID

         9.   Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
         necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain
         one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
         required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance  from
         the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
         treatment. If P shows there are no family or other  members  likely
         to be able to provide means of support, P is in general  likely  to
         face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if,  by
         the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State  or  her
         agents to assist P's return have been exhausted, it  is  reasonably
         likely that P will still have no CSID.

         10. Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

         11. P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

         D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

         14.  As a general matter, it will not  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh for a person from a contested area  to  relocate  to  Baghdad
         City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

         15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for
         P to relocate to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,  however,
         likely to be relevant:

         (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to obtain one (see Part C
         above);

         (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are  less  likely
         to find employment);

         (c)  whether P has family members or friends  in  Baghdad  able  to
         accommodate him;

         (d)  whether P is a lone female (women  face  greater  difficulties
         than men in finding employment);

         (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a hotel  room  or  rent
         accommodation;

         (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

         (g)  whether there is support available for P bearing in mind there
         is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers  are  provided
         with the support generally given to IDPs.

         16.  There is not a real risk of an  ordinary  civilian  travelling
         from  Baghdad  airport  to  the  southern  governorates,  suffering
         serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  engage  Article
         15(c).

         E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION

         17.  The Respondent will only return P to the IKR if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

         18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is no Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

         19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate  from  the  IKR  can  obtain
         entry for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission
         for a further 10 days. If K finds  employment,  K  can  remain  for
         longer, although K will need to register with the  authorities  and
         provide details of the employer. There is no evidence that the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.

         20.  Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
         to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
         to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
         assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
         IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
         employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
         family and friends in the IKR.

         21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in a  home
         area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.

         F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

         22.  This decision replaces all existing country guidance on Iraq."

14. I observe that [9] the amended country guidance provides that returnees
    are generally likely to face a real risk of  destitution  amounting  to
    serious harm if there are "no family or other members likely to be able
    to provide means of support".  The appellant will not find  himself  in
    such a position.  It is apparent from the country guidance of AA in the
    Upper Tribunal and now the amended guidance from the  Court  of  Appeal
    that a distinction is to be made between returnees who have  no  family
    or other support in Iraq and no CSID card and those  who,  whilst  they
    may lack a CSID card, will enjoy support on return.  Judge Shanahan has
    firmly found that the appellant falls within that  latter  category.  I
    find that she has carried out a sound  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    ability to relocate  from  his  contested  home  area.   I  reject  the
    submission that her  findings  regarding  the  appellant's  family  are
    speculative.

15. At [47], the judge considered the appeal on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds.
    The judge correctly considered the appellant as an individual 18  years
    or older at the date of the  hearing  and  applied  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 276ADE of HC 395 (as amended).  Considering  the  appellant's
    circumstances under sub-paragraph (vi), she did not accept  that  there
    were very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in  Iraq
    [48].

16. Again I find the judge's analysis  to  be  legally  sound.   Mr  Mohzam
    submitted that the appellant should be granted Article 8 leave  because
    his position within the United Kingdom was uncertain given that it  was
    not currently feasible for him to be returned to  Iraq.   I  find  that
    submission difficult to understand. As required by the country guidance
    (see the amended country guidance at [9] - AA in the Court  of  Appeal)
    an assessment of the risk to the appellant on return should be  carried
    out regardless of the feasibility of return at the present  time.    In
    common with many thousand asylum seekers, the appellant will remain  on
    temporary admission.  Until  he  either  obtains  leave  to  remain  or
    becomes appeal rights exhausted, his continuing residence in the United
    Kingdom should not entitle him to a grant of Article 8 leave.

17. For the reasons I  have  given,  I  find  that  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.

Notice of Decision

18. This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 15 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

