
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05369/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 March 2019                      |On 21st March 2019                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    M J M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Rylatt Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant, a  citizen  of  Zimbabwe,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 10 April
    2018, to refuse the appellant's application for asylum.  In a decision,
    promulgated on 27 December  2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Parkes dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds that:

      1)  Ground  1:  the  judge  failed  to  take  into  account   relevant
         considerations, namely the appellant's  involvement  with  Lifeline
         Network;




      2) Ground 2: failure to apply the correct approach in  the  assessment
         of documentary evidence;




      3) Ground 3: irrationality in the approach to the summons provided;




      4) Ground 4: failure to take  into  account  relevant  considerations,
         namely the appellant's  injuries  sustained  in  2008  which  Judge
         Parkes identifies have been assessed by the expert, Mr Johnson,  as
         diagnostic of the appellant's account.  Whilst the judge notes that
         this is the case the judge states that this is  supportive  of  the
         appellant's account of events then but that  it  does  not  "assist
         with later events".  It was submitted that this disclosed an  error
         of law as such injuries were relevant to  the  present  appeal  and
         that they provided an important part of the narrative  in  relation
         to  ZANU-PF's  involvement  with  NetOne  employees  such  as   the
         appellant;




      5) Ground 5: failure to consider the appellant's claim under paragraph
         276ADE(1)(vi) and/or failing to give adequate reasons  for  refusal
         of the appellant's Article 8 case.

Error of Law Discussion

 3. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Walker quite properly conceded  that
    the judge's decision was infected by material errors of law, not  least
    that  it  was  evident  from  the  appellant's  witness  statement,  as
    highlighted in the skeleton argument of the appellant's representative,
    that the appellant had made numerous  references  in  relation  to  her
    involvement with the Lifeline Network.  Mr Walker  accepted  that  this
    was integral to her case in that she believed  that  she  was  at  risk
    because of her knowledge of  vote  rigging  in  favour  of  ZANU-PF  in
    conjunction with the perception by the Zimbabwean authorities that  she
    was an informant for the West and supporting the  opposition.   It  was
    her account that this view had been reached from  both  her  activities
    with Lifeline Network, together with her working relationship with  the
    previous CEO of NetOne.  Mr Walker further confirmed that the remaining
    grounds disclosed errors, not least in relation to the treatment of the
    appellant's previous injuries.

 4. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal with the consent of
    the parties.  Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding required,
    I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered de novo,
    other than by Judge Parkes.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was paid I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  19 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson















