
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05206/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2019                           |On 6 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    MS Patel, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1991 and is a male citizen of Iraq.
    He appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State dated 17  May  2019  refusing  his  application  for
    international  protection.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 26 September 2019, allowed the appeal. The Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the core of the appellant's application for asylum is his claim that
    he is at real risk in Iraq as the  possible  target  in  a  blood  feud
    arising from his marriage. The judge accepted the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account. The grounds of appeal assert that  the  judge  has
    failed  to  provide  any  clear  adequate  reasons  for  accepting  the
    appellant account and that the conclusions of the judge at [86-103] are
    not reasoned findings but 'bare statements of accepted facts.'

 3. At the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal, Mr Diwnycz, who  appeared
    for the Secretary of State, did no more than rely upon the  grounds  of
    appeal. He made no oral submissions.

 4. Ms Patel, who appeared for the appellant, submitted that the judge  had
    provided adequate reasons. The judge had analysed in  some  detail  the
    evidence and had properly considered the Secretary of State's  concerns
    regarding the appellant's account of past events  as  set  out  in  the
    refusal letter.

 5. Having considered the judge's decision carefully, I find that  I  agree
    with Ms Patel. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  at  times
    verbose and, perhaps, overly concerned with emphasising that the  judge
    has considered the evidence 'in the  round',  as  a  totality  etc.  Of
    course, the judge was required to analyse the evidence in  that  manner
    but, reading the decision, one has the impression of a  certain  amount
    of 'box ticking.'

 6. Having said that, I am satisfied that the judge has  provided  adequate
    reasons for accepting the appellant's account. He  has  considered  the
    various incidents in the account and stated why  he  finds  that  these
    occurred as described by the appellant. He  has  considered  and  given
    reasons for rejecting the concerns of the Secretary of  State.  In  his
    analysis,  the  judge  has  properly  considered  the   behaviour   and
    motivation of the actors in the account and has done so by reference to
    the appropriate standard of proof. For example,  at  [101],  the  judge
    writes that  he  was  'prepared  to  accept,  against  the  appropriate
    standard, that the mother in law [of the appellant],  as  she  now  is,
    would secure  her  daughter's  happiness  and  support  the  elopement;
    notwithstanding the claimed consequences.' The judge was aware that  he
    had  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  members  of   the
    appellant's family might act contrary to cultural norms or in a  manner
    which appeared contrary to indications provided in background material.
    In the circumstances, I have concluded that the  Secretary  of  State's
    challenge to this decision amounts to no more than a disagreement  with
    the findings of the judge. No error of law,  which  would  justify  the
    setting aside of the decision, has been identified.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 31 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






















