
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05111/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 8th January 2019                   |On 30th January 2019               |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                   m H T D
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood

                            DECISION AND REASONS

                             EXTEMPORE JUDGMENT

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008


 2. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal and
    there being no application to remove the order, I see no reason  to  do
    so and the order remains in place.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or
    court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report
    of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any
    member of their family.  This direction applies both to  the  Appellant
    and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could
    lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 3. This is an appeal by the Vietnamese Appellant against the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal brought on  international
    protection grounds.

 4. On a plain reading of the judge's decision he mistakenly believed  that
    a  contemporaneous  attendance  note  from  the  representative  of   a
    discussion with a police officer was not available to him when in  fact
    it had been made available in the course  of  the  hearing.   The  note
    indicated that he had provided a witness statement to the police  which
    was read  out  in  open  court  through  the  mechanism  of  a  hearsay
    application.  The import of the point is that the judge concluded  that
    the Appellant had not attended  court  to  give  evidence  against  his
    traffickers.

 5. Ms Isherwood argued lack of materiality by pointing out that there  was
    other evidence before the judge, to which he refers at paragraph 38, so
    that in any event the conclusion may have been the same.  Whilst  there
    is merit in that point, and Mr Bundock accepts that the evidence of the
    attendance note is not determinative, I find that  it  cannot  be  said
    that had the judge appreciated that he had the note it would  not  have
    made any difference. That becomes clear at paragraph 54, read  back  to
    paragraph 37, when the judge says  that  the  Appellant  did  not  give
    evidence in the trial and that he did not  accept  that  the  Appellant
    gave evidence via a written witness statement.  The  judge  found  that
    that was a matter which weighed adversely in the assessment of risk and
    it is not possible to say that had he appreciated the position it would
    not have had an impact on his assessment of risk.

 6. Having found that error,  I  find  it  appropriate  to  set  aside  the
    decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing   the   appellant's
    international protection grounds of appeal relating to his  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection claim arising  from  his  account  of  being  a
    victim of trafficking and working in cannabis factories in the UK.  The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  so  that  those  can  be
    determined afresh. In that light it has not been necessary  for  me  to
    deal with the remainder of the grounds as they cover matters which will
    now be considered afresh at the First -tier Tribunal.

 7. The Judge's findings and decisions that the Appellant  is  not  at  any
    risk on return based on his Catholic religion or his political opinion,
    referred to at paragraphs 51 and 52, are not challenged,  and  are  not
    infected by error, and stand.

 8.  No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.
[pic]
Signed                                              Date 08 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
