
[pic]
First-tier Tribunal
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal   Appeal Number: PA/05803/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

| Heard at Field House              |Decision and reasons Promulgated  |
|On 10 August 2017                  |On 18 August 2017                 |
|                                   |                                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA

                                   Between

                              MR AWAT IBRAHIMI
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the appellant: Mr Palmer of Counsel
For the respondent: Mr C Avery, Senior Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Iran, born on 1 August  1981,  appealed  to
    the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 20
    May 2016 to refuse his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection  in
    the United Kingdom. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pooler  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on 29 March 2017 relying on the previous decision by
    the First-tier Tribunal dated 29 June 2010.


 2.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Nightingale who said that it was arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly apply the case law of  AB  regarding  Internet  activity.  The
    Judge also erred in finding that the appellant had exited Iran  legally
    or that he could be returned on a passport with an exit visa  when  the
    appellant's claim was that he will be an unwilling returnee to Iran.


 3. Thus, the appeal came before me.


    The First-tier Tribunal Judge's findings


 4. The Judge made the following findings  which  I  summarise.  The  Judge
    accepted the findings of First-tier Tribunal Judge in a decision  dated
    29 June 2010 under the principles of Devaseelan and found that was  his
    starting point.


 5. The Judge set out appellant's immigration history in  that  he  entered
    the United Kingdom on 16 March 2008 and claimed asylum. His application
    was refused and his appeal against the decision was refused on 29  June
    2010. The appellant made further representations following which  there
    were proceedings for judicial  review  which  were  considered  by  the
    respondent and refused which is now the decision under appeal.


 6. The judge stated that the appellant's claim as put by Miss  Wilkins  in
    her skeleton argument is that the appellant fears persecution  in  Iran
    because he supported and sympathised with Kurdish opposition  entities,
    in particular the KDPI and the Peshmerga. He left  Iran  illegally  and
    would be returned as a failed asylum seeker. In his  witness  statement
    dated 7 November 2016 the appellant stated that  he  has  been  a  KDPI
    supporter since 2006. He was politically active in Iran until  he  left
    in 2008. He re-established his contact in the  United  Kingdom  with  a
    KDPI branch in 2014. Although unable to  attend  KDPI  events,  he  was
    politically active on Facebook,  having  shared  politically  motivated
    content relating to the Kurdish  cause  since  December  2012.  He  has
    attended demonstrations in Birmingham and London since 2014.


 7. The Judge relied on the first-tier Tribunal's decision and  found  that
    the previous Judge who heard the appellant's appeal on the  same  bases
    did not find the appellant's claim was at all  credible.  The  previous
    judge found that the appellant has not  demonstrated  or  that  he  was
    involved with the KDPI to any significant extent, or that  he  came  to
    the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities through his membership
    of that group. The previous Judge was not satisfied that he will be  of
    adverse interest to the Iranian authorities  on  his  return.  He  also
    found that given the appellant's general lack of credibility, he cannot
    be satisfied that, although the appellant entered  the  United  Kingdom
    illegally, he left Iran illegally. Even if he did, the  previous  Judge
    was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  would  face  persecutory  ill-
    treatment on  his  return  to  Iran  as  a  failed  asylum  seeker.  In
    conclusion, the previous Judge stated that the appellant would  not  be
    at risk on his return to Iran because of his political opinion  or  for
    any other reason.


 8. The Judge stated that now it was necessary only to consider evidence of
    facts which occurred after the hearing on 17 June 2010, which  was  the
    date of the previous decision. He took into account the  the  objective
    evidence available and the country guidance relating to  Iran  as  that
    now stands.


 9. The Judge considered the evidence of the appellant's activities in  the
    United Kingdom which consisted of demonstrations outside  the  Austrian
    embassy in London in 2015 and July 2016. He also claimed to  have  been
    KDPI meeting in 2017 but could not give  a  specific  date.  The  judge
    found that  given  the  photographic  evidence,  he  accepts  that  the
    appellant has attended two demonstrations and a KDPI party.  The  Judge
    found that the appellant had failed to adduce any  supporting  evidence
    of  his  movement  in  the  KDPI  since  2014  or  his  attendance   at
    demonstrations  beyond  the  photographic  evidence  on  his   Facebook
    account. The Judge found that moreover the  appellant  has  offered  no
    explanation for the absence of any such evidence  relating  to  events,
    which it would be reasonable to assume, were attended by other  people.
    He further noted that there was as Mrs Bowden submitted, no  attendance
    at the hearing by any representative of the KDPI in the United Kingdom.


10. The considered the appellant's Facebook account printed on  7  November
    2016 where he has posted material to his Facebook account which plainly
    invites the viewer or reader to link him to Kurdish issues.  The  Judge
    found that the appellant's attendance at  KDPI  events  in  the  United
    Kingdom are limited to three or possibly four occasions which  must  be
    regarded as extremely limited. He stated that the  appellant's  motives
    are immaterial and the issue remains  whether  the  appellant's  action
    will place him at real risk on return to Iran. This assessment must  be
    made in the context of a finding by the previous Judge in 2010 that the
    appellant had failed to prove that he had, while in Iran, been involved
    with the KDPI to any significant extent or that  he  had  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the authorities before his departure. In addition,
    he failed to prove that he had left Iran illegally.


11. He stated that Miss Wilkins relied on paragraph 457 in the case  of  AB
    and others (Internet activity - state of  evidence)  Iran  [2015]  0257
    (IAC) but it was stated that it is clear evidence that some people  are
    asked about the Internet activity and particularly for  their  Facebook
    password. It is  absolutely  clear  that  blogging  and  activities  on
    Facebook are very common amongst Iranian citizens and it is very  clear
    that the Iranian authorities are exceedingly twitchy  about  them.  The
    act of returning someone creates "a pinch point" so that returnees  are
    brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who have  both
    the time and inclination to interrogate them. We  think  it  is  likely
    that they will be asked about their Internet activity  and  lightly  if
    they have any Internet activity for that to be exposed  and  if  it  is
    less than flattering of the government  to  lead  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution. The Iranian  authorities  in  their  various  guises  both
    regulate and police the Internet. Their capability to  monitor  outside
    Iran is not very different from there capability to monitor inside Iran
    as the Internet is the World Wide Web. A person  who  is  returning  to
    Iran after a reasonably short period of time on  an  ordinary  passport
    left Iran illegally would almost certainly not attract  any  particular
    attention at all. However very few people who come before the  Tribunal
    are in such a category. At the very least people who  would  be  before
    the Tribunal can expect to have had their leave to  be  in  the  United
    Kingdom to have lapsed and  may  well  be  travelling  on  the  special
    passport. Nevertheless,  for  the  small  number  of  people  would  be
    returning on an ordinary passport having  left  unlawfully  we  do  not
    think that there would be any risk to them at all.


12. The Judge stated that Miss Wilkins relied on expert  reports  which  he
    acknowledged were generic and not written specifically in  relation  to
    this appellant. Nevertheless, their authors are experts whose  evidence
    must be afforded proper weight. In  one  experts  opinion,  that  if  a
    Kurdish returnee had given rise to suspicions of anti-regime behaviour,
    whilst abroad by applying for  asylum  or  before  he  left  Iran,  his
    prospects  of  avoiding  persecution  upon  return  would   have   been
    significantly diminished.


13. In respect  of  the  Facebook  posts,  the  expert  noted  that  it  is
    reasonably likely the appellant if these came to the attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities, his link to the Kurdish cause would be noticed and
    that his certain posts would be seen as making fun  of  former  Iranian
    leaders. The judge stated that the appellant's activities in the United
    Kingdom are unlikely to have been  brought  to  the  attention  of  the
    Iranian authorities. He has no leadership  role  in  the  KDPI  in  the
    United Kingdom and has not regularly attended KDPI  events.  The  Judge
    stated that as for his posts on Facebook the appellant appears to  have
    so few followers that I regard it is almost  unlikely  that  his  posts
    have come to the attention of the Iranian authorities.


14. The Judge concluded that  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  left  Iran
    illegally was not accepted by the First-tier Tribunal in  2010  and  no
    evidence has been adduced which leads him to form a different view. The
    appellant has failed to persuade that  he  would  not  fit  within  the
    category of those returning on an ordinary passport  having  left  Iran
    lawfully who would be at no real risk. For this reason, the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds must fail.


    Grounds of appeal


15. The grounds of appeal essentially argued that the Judge did  not  apply
    the case of AB and others properly to the facts of  this  case.  It  is
    also argued that the Judge did not properly take into account that  the
    appellant is a Kurdish and that the appellant's Internet activity would
    be found to  be  derogatory  of  the  Iranian  regime  by  the  Iranian
    authorities, which would put him at risk on his return. It  is  further
    argued that the Judge made a material error of  law  as  he  speculated
    that the appellant left Iran legally when the evidence was that he  had
    not.





    The respondent's Rule 24 response


16. The respondent in her rule 24  respondent  stated  the  following.  The
    respondent opposes the appeal and in summary she submits that the Judge
    of the first-tier Tribunal directed himself  appropriately.  The  Judge
    given anxious scrutiny to all the evidence and properly considered  the
    case of AB and others and sites  sustainable  reasons  as  to  why  the
    appellant would most likely not come to the attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities including his limited  role  in  Kurdish  activity  in  the
    United Kingdom having so few followers on  Facebook.  The  decision  is
    detailed and the grounds have no merit and  merely  disagree  with  the
    adverse outcome of the appeal without identifying any arguable material
    error of law.


    The hearing


17. At the hearing, I heard submissions from both parties  have  considered
    the skeleton argument provided.


    Findings as to whether  there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination.


18. Essentially, the point been taken by counsel on behalf of the appellant
    is that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  materially  erred  in  law  by
    finding that the appellant will be returned  to  Iran  on  an  ordinary
    passport and therefore will not attract the  interest  of  the  Iranian
    authorities or be questioned by them on his arrival. It was also argued
    on behalf of the appellant that  the  Judge  materially  erred  in  not
    applying the case of AB and others to the appellant  circumstances  and
    failed to appreciate that the appellant was a Kurdish.


19. It was clear from the decision of  the  first-tier  tier  Tribunal  who
    dismissed the appellant's appeal in 2010 stated that he  did  not  find
    the  appellant  credible  and  on  those  bases  found  that   in   all
    probability, the appellant  left  Iran  legally  because  he  does  not
    believe his narrative. However, the respondent in  her  refusal  letter
    did  not  raise  the  issue  that  the  appellant  left  Iran  legally.
    Furthermore, at his original screening interview,  the  appellant  said
    that he had left Iran illegally.


20. Therefore,  the  Judge  failure  to  failure  to  appreciate  that  the
    appellant will be returned to Iran as an  unwilling  returnee  who  has
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom and who has been  away  from  Iran
    for eight years. This is also a factor to be taken  into  account  when
    determining whether the appellant will  be  questioned  on  his  return
    which is when the problems for a returnee normally start.


21. The Judge was entitled to find that the appellant  is  not  a  credible
    witness and did not have a political  profile  in  Iran.  He  correctly
    stated that the appellant's motives about his Internet activity are not
    relevant and that he must still consider whether the appellant will  be
    at risk on return to Iran. This would include the appellant's political
    activities in the United Kingdom, notwithstanding what he found them to
    be a deliberate attempt to lay the basis of has asylum claim.


22. The Judge considered the guidance in the case  of  AB  and  others  and
    placed  undue  reliance  on  the  appellant's  level  of  activity  and
    attendance at KDPI events in the United  Kingdom  which  he  said  were
    limited to three or possibly four occasions. The issue  in  appeal  was
    not the extent of the appellant's political activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom but whether his Internet activity in the United  Kingdom  would
    come to the attention of the Iranian  authorities  where  he  would  be
    questioned on return. The Judge was aware that  the  appellant  "posted
    material to his Facebook account which plainly invites  the  viewer  or
    reader to link him to Kurdish issues".


23. Having clearly accepted that the  appellant's  Internet  activity  will
    lead to the appellant being questioned on his return to Iran  and  that
    in every  likelihood  his  Facebook  and  Internet  activity  would  be
    revealed, the conclusion that he will not come to the adverse attention
    of the authorities was not available to the Judge. There  is  no  doubt
    that the  appellant  deliberately  and  opportunistically  created  his
    Internet activity ensuring that anyone who looks at his Facebook  page,
    would lead the person to the link of his Kurdish affiliations.


24. The Judge was influenced by the evidence that the appellant's  Facebook
    page has very few followers and the implication was that  somehow  that
    limited  following  would  not  bring  the  appellant  to  the  adverse
    attention of the authorities.  The  background  evidence  is  that  the
    Iranian regime wants to  pick  out  people  with  Kurdish  loyalty  and
    affiliation. It is equally clear that if  his  Kurdish  affiliation  is
    discovered by the Iranian authorities, the appellant would be at  risk,
    notwithstanding how few followers he has on Facebook. The Judge  failed
    to appreciate that the Iranian authorities are looking for people  with
    Kurdish affiliation and that the  Iranian  authorities  institutionally
    discriminate against them  although  in  general  terms  the  level  of
    discrimination faced by Kurds in Iran is not such that  it  will  reach
    the level of being  persecutory  or  other  was  inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment.


25. However, the country guidance case of SSH and HR (a legal exit:  failed
    asylum seeker (CG) [2016] UKUT308 (IAC)  dated  29  June  2016  clearly
    states that the situation is different for  those  who  become  or  are
    perceived  to  be  involved  in  Kurdish  political   activities.   The
    authorities have no tolerance for any activities connected  to  Kurdish
    political groups and those involved are targeted for arbitrary  arrest,
    prolonged detention, and  physical  abuse.  Even  those  who  expressed
    peaceful dissent are at risk of being accused of being a  member  of  a
    banned Kurdish political group. Those  involved  in  Kurdish  political
    activities also face a high risk of persecution on vague  charges  such
    as "enmity against God truth" and "corruption on earth. "


26. It may be the case that the Iranian authorities know that failed asylum
    seekers deliberately post adverse material on the  Internet  to  lay  a
    basis for an asylum claim even though they have  no  genuine  political
    affiliation or loyalty. However, there is no evidence that the  Iranian
    authorities take this into account.


27. I find that there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal based on the guidance given in AB  and  others  and
    SSH and HR. Applying the principles in these cases and on the evidence,
    no other conclusion  can  be  reached  other  than  to  find  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on his return to Iran due  to  his  Internet
    activity in the United Kingdom, which will come to the attention of the
    Iranian authorities when he is questioned at the airport, which he will
    be, as he left Iran illegally and has been in the  United  Kingdom  for
    eight  years.  The  appellant  will  be  perceived  to  be  a   Kurdish
    sympathiser from his Internet activity, opportunistic as it is.


28. I find that there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and I set it aside. I remake the decision and allow
    the appellant's appeal. This decision disposes of the appeal.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is set aside.
The appeal is allowed under Humanitarian Protection grounds.


Signed by

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
Mrs S Chana                                                Dated  this  16th
    day of August 2017



