
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/05286/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10th April 2018                        | On 27th April 2018               |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and

                                  Mr M A R
                           (ANONYMITY order MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmed, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr D Sellwood, Counsel, instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For  convenience  I  shall  employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"  and
    "Respondent" as at first instance.  The  Appellant  is  a  national  of
    Bangladesh who applied  for  asylum  on  the  basis  of  his  political
    opinion.  The thrust of his claim was that he was a BNP activist and he
    was persecuted in his country for his political opinion  and  would  be
    should he be returned there.  His  appeal  was  allowed  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Clarke in a decision promulgated on 21st November 2017.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged by the Home Office and it  was  said
    that the judge had erred in making findings on the reliability  of  the
    Document Verification report (DVR) regarding the  verification  process
    and redacted information.  Reference was made to the  CPIN  information
    on fraudulently obtained and forged documents.  It was unclear why  the
    judge had reached the finding he did make.  Furthermore,  he  had  also
    failed to recognise that there was an internal flight option.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially refused but  ultimately  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede, who noted that there was arguable merit in
    the assertion in the grounds that the judge had erred in  her  approach
    to the DVR.  There was less merit in the second ground but it  was  not
    excluded from consideration.

 4. There was a Rule 24 response by the Appellant.   The  first  Ground  of
    Appeal was, it was said, in truth a reasons challenge, not a mistake of
    fact.  The judge had summarised the issues and the evidential value  of
    the DVR, which concerned the genuineness of a First Information  Report
    (FIR).  The grounds of application conclude by asserting it was unclear
    why the judge had reached the findings she did, namely that the DVR was
    to be given little weight.  However, it was said that Judge Clarke  had
    given clear and  cogent  reasons  why  she  came  to  that  conclusion.
    Details are provided.  In the circumstances  it  was  said  that  Judge
    Clarke was entitled to make the findings she did make and  give  little
    weight to the DVR.

 5. Furthermore, the grounds of the Respondent appear  to  be  based  on  a
    misreading of the  DVR.   The  FIR  the  Appellant  purported  to  make
    enquiries about was numbered 11/277.  The DVR concluded  there  was  no
    record of it but for reasons unknown went on to cite a  different  FIR,
    numbered 11/229, which was concerned with other matters.   The  grounds
    were conflating the two FIRs.

 6. There were ample reasons given by Judge Clarke for giving little weight
    to the DVR.

 7. In terms of internal flight the risk was not simply  localised  on  the
    basis of a land dispute.  Judge Clarke found the Appellant was at  real
    risk on return to Bangladesh from both  non-state  actors  with  ruling
    party patronage and state actors and was subject to  spurious  criminal
    proceedings in Bangladesh because of his political  activities.   There
    was no error in law.

 8. Thus the matter came before me on the above date.  For the Home  Office
    reliance was placed on the grounds.  The judge had failed to understand
    the information presented to her.  The decision should be set aside and
    the matter considered afresh.  While the issue of  internal  relocation
    was not relied on in the refusal letter paragraph 339O  of  the  Rules,
    dealing with internal flight, held that this was a matter which had  to
    be considered.  I was asked to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 9. For the Appellant Mr Sellwood relied on  his  skeleton  argument.   The
    judge had given clear reasons and there was no error in law.  The issue
    was one of the weight to be given to the DVR and that  was  a  question
    for the judge, who had given cogent and sufficient reasons.

10. I reserved my decision.



Conclusions

11. Critical to the judge's findings were what she set out in paragraph 17.
     Essentially the judge was not satisfied that the search carried out by
    the local police station was properly carried out.  The  judge  gave  a
    number of clear reasons for such a conclusion.  As the judge  said,  it
    was not known how long it took for the search to take place,  how  many
    FIRs were examined, what records were kept, and  what cross-referencing
    existed.

12. The judge went on to refer to MA (Bangladesh) v SSHD  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
    175 and she directed herself that  she  should  exercise  caution  when
    relying on documentation.  There were a number of  different  documents
    which the Appellant said were collected by a  friend  and  for  reasons
    given she placed little weight on the documents provided by A R.

13. The judge went on to refer to supporting evidence and the reports  from
    Dr Hoque and Dr Arnold (paragraphs 20 and 21).  The  judge  noted  that
    the Appellant had been a consistent witness.  For these  reasons  given
    she  accepted  the  explanation  for  the  delay  in  claiming   asylum
    (paragraph  22).   The  judge  referred  to  the  background   evidence
    describing the present  situation  in  Bangladesh,  noting  little  had
    changed since the writing of the  COIR.   Paragraph  1.3.6  reads  that
    harassment, arbitrary arrests etc. occurred  throughout  2013/2014  and
    early 2015.  Paragraph 1.3.11 reads that perceived political  opponents
    whose fear is of serious harm at the hands of the state would be unable
    to avail themselves of protection from the authorities (paragraph  23).
    In paragraph 24 the judge noted that paragraph  1.3.12  reads  that  in
    cases on fear of ill-treatment by members of opposing political parties
    effective  protection  would  not  be  available  for   the   governing
    authorities.

14. Drawing all the strands together, the judge found  that  the  Appellant
    was a credible witness because he had been consistent  since  his  late
    claim for asylum, that his account was consistent with  the  background
    evidence, he had  suffered  persecution  in  the  past  and  was  still
    suffering mentally as a result (paragraph 25).

15. In my view, there is no error of law  in  the  judge's  findings.   The
    judge has given clear reasons for concluding that little weight  should
    be given to the DVR.  As noted in the  Rule  24  notice,  there  are  a
    number of reasons given as to why the judge formed  the  view  she  did
    form and it therefore does not seem to me that any error of law emerges
    from the judge's findings.  Furthermore,  the  judge  has  gone  on  to
    consider the evidence in its totality, noting that because of the  lack
    of a sufficiency of protection  that,  by  implication,  there  was  no
    internal relocation possibility for this particular Appellant.

16. The judge's reasoning is sound  throughout  and  it  follows  that  the
    decision must stand as there is no error of law.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

I am continuing the anonymity order.

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      JG  Macdonald                                Date    27th  April
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date   27th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
