
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05646/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 January 2020               |             On 11 March 2020    |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                  MH (iran)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                        Appellant/Respondent
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                        Respondent/Appellant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bronwen Jones, instructed by Freedom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Susana Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Both members of this Tribunal have contributed to this decision.

 2. On 15 August 2019, a  judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  issued  his
    decision and reasons in this appeal. It is clear - and it  is  accepted
    by both parties - that the judge intended to dismiss the appeal on  all
    grounds.   Extensive  reasons  were  given  for  concluding  that   the
    appellant's protection claim was a fabrication and that the appellant's
    removal to Iran would  not  place  the  respondent  in  breach  of  her
    international obligations.  Unfortunately, in recording his decision on
    the appeal, the judge stated

         "Decision Asylum Appeal: allowed; Human Rights  appeal:  dismissed;
         Humanitarian Protection appeal: dismissed." [emphasis added]

 3. The Secretary of State appealed against  the  underlined  part  of  the
    decision, submitting that it was plainly in error  when  considered  in
    light of the judge's reasons.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  a
    judge of the First-tier Tribunal on that basis.

 4. The appellant also sought permission to  appeal,  contending  that  the
    reasons given by the judge for disbelieving her  account  were  legally
    unsustainable or insufficient.  Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Blum, who considered each ground to be arguable.

 5. We will refer to the parties as they were before the  FtT:  MJ  as  the
    appellant; the Secretary of State as the respondent.

Background

 6. The appellant is an Iranian national who was born on 11 November  1967.
    She entered the UK in 2017 and claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of  her
    imputed political opinion.  That claim was refused  by  the  respondent
    and an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed by Judge Siddiqi
    in March 2018.  Judge Siddiqi did not accept the appellant's claim that
    she was perceived as a spy by the Iranian regime.  The judge also noted
    that the appellant had stated that she had  become  disillusioned  with
    Islam and attracted to Christianity, although she did not seek to argue
    at that time that she would be  at  risk  on  that  basis.   The  judge
    nevertheless expressed her view that this aspect had merely been  added
    to bolster what was otherwise a weak claim.

 7. The appellant's appeal against Judge Siddiqi's decision was  ultimately
    unsuccessful and, in January 2019, she made further representations  to
    the respondent.  She relied  on  her  conversion  to  Christianity  and
    submitted that the claim she was advancing in that respect had not been
    considered in any detail by Judge Siddiqi.  The respondent  interviewed
    the appellant in connection with these  submissions,  after  which  she
    accepted that the further representations amounted  to  a  fresh  claim
    under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.  The respondent  did  not
    accept, however, that the appellant would be at risk on return to Iran,
    since she rejected her claim that she had  converted  to  Christianity.
    Whilst it was accepted that the appellant had been attending church  in
    the UK, and that she had been baptised, the respondent did  not  accept
    that the appellant had any genuine commitment to the Christian faith.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant exercised her right of appeal and the appeal came  before
    a judge of the First-tier Tribunal, sitting in Manchester  on  25  July
    2019.  The appellant was represented by counsel, the  respondent  by  a
    Presenting Officer.  The judge heard evidence from  the  appellant  and
    from Dr MN, a senior member of the church which the appellant had  been
    attending in Wigan.  Letters were also submitted from other members  of
    the  church,  attesting  to  the  appellant's  attendance  and  to  her
    adherence to the faith.

 9. At [20]-[30], the judge reviewed the extensive case  law  on  Christian
    conversion in  Iranian  protection  claims.   At  [31],  he  turned  to
    consider the primary question in the appeal, of whether  the  appellant
    had genuinely converted to Christianity.  He noted that  the  appellant
    had attended church; that she had  been  baptised;  and  that  she  had
    demonstrated knowledge of the "basic details" of  Christianity  in  her
    second interview.  Nevertheless, for reasons he gave at [32]-[33],  the
    judge did not accept that the appellant had  genuinely  converted.   He
    considered aspects of the appellant's account to be  implausible,  with
    particular reference to the manner in which the appellant  had  behaved
    at around the time she had converted to Christianity: [32](i)-(iv).  At
    [32](v), the judge attached limited weight to Dr MN's opinion about the
    appellant's claimed conversion for the following reasons:

         "The appellant relied upon a witness from her church, [Dr MN],  who
         spoke of  the  appellant's  attendance  and  participation  at  the
         church.  [Dr  MN]  recalled  an  occasion  when  she  attended  the
         appellant's home and saw her reading the bible and making notes.  I
         found [Dr MN's] evidence unsatisfactory in  one  important  regard.
         When asked whether she had attended the  Tribunal  before  to  give
         evidence, [Dr MN] said that [sic] provided testimony for  one  such
         appellant  earlier  in  2019  in  respect  of  their  faith.   When
         questioned further about the outcome of the appeal, the witness was
         hesitant and said that she did not know.  She said that she has not
         asked the person of the outcome of their appeal and that she  would
         not want  to  put  them  under  pressure.   I  was  left  with  the
         impression that [Dr MN] did not know the person very well and I  do
         not consider this evidence credible.  If [Dr MN] is to  attend  the
         Tribunal and  give  evidence  about  something  as  personal  as  a
         person's faith  then  I  would  expect  her  to  know  that  person
         sufficiently well and for their relationship to be such  that  they
         could discuss with one  another  their  status  in  the  UK.   When
         weighing [Dr MN's] evidence into the assembly of evidence  in  this
         appeal I conclude that  this  witness  honestly  does  believe  the
         appellant is a Christian convert but that her evidence  is  limited
         to that which the  appellant  displays  externally  whilst  in  the
         church environment."

10. The judge turned at [33] to consider the written evidence given by  two
    other members of the church.  He was satisfied that the  appellant  had
    spent time with them in a Christian setting  and  that  they  genuinely
    believed that she was a Christian but, having considered  the  evidence
    in the round and in light of the concerns he had expressed  previously,
    he did not consider that  her  regular  attendance  at  church  was  on
    account of a genuine conversion to Christianity.

11. At [34], the judge reminded himself of  FS  &  Ors  (Iran  -  Christian
    Converts) Iran CG [2004] UKIAT 303.  He had cited that decision and  SZ
    & JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran  CG  [2008]  82  (IAC)[1]  in  an
    earlier section of the decision.  He did not accept that the  appellant
    was an evangelist (as she had claimed) because the evidence of any such
    activity in the UK was limited and because her Facebook activities pre-
    dated her conversion: [35].  He concluded that the  appellant's  online
    activity had been "an attempt to show her to  be  a  Christian":  [36].
    For reasons he gave at [37], the judge did not accept  the  appellant's
    account that she would be at enhanced risk as a single woman.  He found
    her claim to have become separated  from  her  husband  untrue,  partly
    because he considered their actions as a couple to be  implausible  and
    partly because there was  an  absence  of  evidence  of  the  husband's
    reaction.

12. At [39], the judge  summarised  his  conclusion,  which  was  that  the
    appellant had not proved that she  was  a  genuine  Christian  convert.
    Even if he was wrong about that, however, he  did  not  find  that  she
    would be at risk because she was not an evangelist or a  single  woman;
    she would not be at risk as an "ordinary convert".

13. At [40], the judge resolved what he described as a "secondary  issue...
    in which the appellant submits that her internet activity ... has  been
    such that she would come to the attention of the authorities on  return
    to Iran".  He cited AB & Ors (Iran) [2015] UKUT 257  (IAC),  which  had
    also featured in his earlier review of the  relevant  authorities.   He
    found that the appellant could delete her posts before she returned  to
    Iran, since they were not reflective of her genuinely held beliefs.  In
    any event, he considered that the Upper Tribunal's guidance was  to  be
    considered in light of the subsequent decision of  the  ECtHR  in  A  v
    Switzerland [2017] ECHR 1171, which "introduces nuance" by  recognising
    that the Iranian  authorities  take  into  account  the  likelihood  of
    individuals falsely claiming to  have  converted  in  order  to  secure
    asylum.  He did not consider the appellant's  activities  would  expose
    her to a risk of persecution on return to Iran: [41].  The remainder of
    the decision concerns matters unrelated to the  appellant's  protection
    claim, which are not material to this appeal.

The Appellant's Appeal

14. The appellant's grounds of appeal were not settled by counsel  and  are
    somewhat discursive.  In granting permission to appeal, Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Blum stated materially as follows:

         "[1] Some of the grounds challenge the  'weight'  accorded  by  the
         judge to elements of the appellant's evidence.   The  apportionment
         of weight will, absent any irrationality, rarely amount to even  an
         arguable legal error.  It is nevertheless arguable that  the  judge
         failed to consider or apply the persuasive guidance contained in TF
         & MA [2018] CSIH 58, with particular reference to  the  appellant's
         lengthy and regular church attendance and  the  evidence  emanating
         from [Dr MN], who arguably should have been regarded as  an  expert
         given  her  role  in  the  church.   Although  the   judge   raised
         credibility concerns with [Dr MN's] evidence based on her ignorance
         of  the  immigration  status  of  another  person  who  appeal  she
         supported, there are no clear findings  in  respect  of  [Dr  MN's]
         evidence relating to her attendance at the appellant's home  or  of
         the nature of her relationship with the appellant [32(v)].

         [2]Although the judge finds, in the alternative, that even  if  the
         appellant is a genuine convert she would not be  at  risk  in  Iran
         (applying FS and others (Iran - Christian converts) Iran CG  [2004]
         UKIAT 303 and SZ and JM (Christians - FS confirmed) Iran CG  [2008]
         UKIAT 82), his further findings relating to her Facebook account at
         [40(i) & (ii)] are arguably premised on the appellant not  being  a
         convert at all.  If the  appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  it  is
         arguable that requiring her  to  remove  religious  Facebook  posts
         could breach the principles established in HJ (Iran) v SSHD and her
         refusal to remove the posts may  lead  to  the  perception  by  the
         Iranian authorities that she is more than an ordinary convert."

15. Ms Jones filed and served a skeleton argument in  compliance  with  the
    directions  issued  by  Judge  Blum.   In  her  oral  submissions,  she
    helpfully  delineated  five  main  heads  of  argument,  which  can  be
    summarised as follows:

      i) The judge had erred at [37](iii) when  he  "expected  some  written
         communication" between the appellant and her husband to demonstrate
         the  difficulties  in  their  relationship  as  a  result  of   her
         conversion.  It was impermissible to require corroboration of  this
         evidence: ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia  [2004]  UKIAT  119.
         In any event, there was no  suggestion  that  the  point  had  been
         raised with the appellant, which was procedurally unfair.

     ii) The judge's reliance, at [32] in particular, on his  own  views  of
         the plausibility of the appellant's  account  was  erroneous  in  a
         number of respects.  The judge had failed to apply HK v SSHD [2006]
         EWCA Civ 1037 or Y v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1223.   His  reasons  did
         not withstand scrutiny; he had failed to take account  of  material
         matters; and had  demonstrated  an  element  of  cultural  bias  in
         expecting the appellant's husband to react in a specific way.

    iii) There was no rational reason given by the judge for discounting the
         evidence given by Dr MN.  The  fact  that  she  did  not  know  the
         outcome  in  a  separate  appeal  was  not  rationally  capable  of
         detracting from the weight which should otherwise have  been  given
         to her evidence.

     iv) The judge had failed to apply the decision of the  Inner  House  of
         Session in TF & MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58.  The decision was  before
         him in the appellant's bundle and was persuasive authority  on  the
         weight which should ordinarily  be  attached  to  the  evidence  of
         members of an appellant's church.  In this appeal, there  was  oral
         evidence from Dr MN and written evidence from two other members  of
         the  church  and  the  judge  had  given  inadequate  reasons   for
         discounting their views on the appellant's conversion.

      v) The judge erred in his analysis of the risk to the  appellant.   As
         noted by Judge Blum, the finding in relation to  the  risk  to  the
         appellant from her Facebook  activity  was  not  genuinely  in  the
         alternative.  In any event, the judge had given inadequate  reasons
         for preferring the approach in  A  v  Switzerland  to  that  in  AB
         (Iran).

16. For the Secretary  of  State,  Ms  Cunha  submitted  that  the  judge's
    findings had been properly open to him for the reasons  he  had  given.
    Insofar as the judge was criticised for noting the absence of  evidence
    which should have been readily  available  to  the  appellant,  it  was
    permissible for him to do so: TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA  Civ  40;
    [2009] Imm AR 488.  Equally, it had been permissible as a matter of law
    for the judge to conclude as he had in relation to the reaction of  the
    appellant's  husband,  particularly  when  it  was  recalled  that  the
    appellant  had  been  somewhat  vague  about  the  chronology  of   her
    conversion.

17. In relation to the reasons given for rejecting the evidence of  Dr  MN,
    Ms Cunha submitted that the judge's approach was entirely  proper.   An
    expert's opinion might properly be afforded less  weight  when  it  was
    established that he was unaware of a material matter, or had failed  to
    take that matter into  account.   The  position  in  this  respect  was
    precisely similar, in that Dr MN had failed to take  into  account  the
    ultimate outcome in the other appeal in which she had  given  evidence.
    That ground of appeal should not succeed, whether  in  relation  to  Dr
    MN's evidence or in relation to the evidence of the  other  individuals
    from the church, who had only given written evidence.

18. In relation to the judge's assessment of the risk to the appellant,  Ms
    Cunha submitted that it had been  open  to  the  judge  to  prefer  the
    'nuanced' approach adopted in A v Switzerland,  rather  than  following
    the reported decision in AB (Iran).  That was particularly so when  the
    decision of the ECtHR concerned a case which was factually very similar
    to the appellant's.  AB  (Iran),  on  the  other  hand,  was  factually
    dissimilar to the appellant's case, since the appellant in the reported
    decision had left the country illegally.  The judge's approach was  not
    contrary to HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31; [2011]  1  AC  596  or  RT
    (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38; [2013] 1 AC 152 because the appellant
    had no genuinely held belief in Christianity and she could legitimately
    be expected to delete her Facebook posts, as the judge had found.

19. Ms Jones made three points in response.  Firstly, even if  this  was  a
    case such as TK (Burundi), in which the absence  of  readily  available
    evidence could be held against the appellant, it  was  not  clear  what
    evidence of marital disharmony was  actually  expected  by  the  judge.
    Secondly,  the  evidence  of  other   members   of   the   congregation
    (particularly Dr MN) was akin to expert  evidence  and  the  judge  had
    given no sustainable reason for discounting that evidence.  Thirdly,  A
    v Switzerland did not, when properly  understood,  provide  any  proper
    basis for dismissing the  appellant's  appeal  if  she  was  a  genuine
    convert.  To that extent, the judge's later findings were not  findings
    in the alternative.

Analysis of the Appellant's Appeal

20. In all but one respect, we do not consider Ms Jones to have established
    that the judge erred in law  in  the  extensive  reasons  he  gave  for
    rejecting the appellant's account.

21. As to the first of her submissions (which we heard de bene esse in  the
    absence of a clear reference in the grounds),  we  do  not  accept  the
    submission that the judge required the  appellant  to  corroborate  her
    account.  The judge stated at [37](iii) that he  would  have  "expected
    some written communication" and not that he was unable  to  accept  the
    appellant's account without the  same.   As  Ms  Cunha  submitted,  the
    former approach accords with decision of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  TK
    (Burundi), in which Thomas LJ (as he then was) stated at  [16]  that  a
    judge was 'plainly entitled'  to  take  into  account  the  absence  of
    supporting evidence which is or should be readily available (Moore-Bick
    and Waller LJJ agreed).

22. In her reply, Ms Jones submitted that the judge had erred in  attaching
    significance to the absence of supporting  evidence  when  it  was  not
    clear exactly what evidence might have been produced.  We do not accept
    that submission either.  The appellant has been in the  United  Kingdom
    for some time and has, she says,  been  in  contact  with  her  husband
    before and during her conversion to Christianity.  It was open  to  the
    judge to note that there was no documentary evidence of the appellant's
    husband's dissatisfaction with the appellant.

23. Nor do we accept the third way in which Ms Jones  put  this  particular
    submission, which was that this point was not put to the appellant  for
    comment.  Leaving to one side  the  fact  that  not  all  points  which
    concern a judge need be put expressly to a witness (Maheshwaran v  SSHD
    [2002 EWCA Civ 172; [2004] Imm AR 176 refers),  there  is  no  evidence
    whatsoever to support the submission that the point  was  not  squarely
    raised, whether by the judge or the  Presenting  Officer.   Insofar  as
    such procedural complaints are to be advanced, it is  well  established
    that they must be supported by evidence, usually from the advocate with
    conduct of the appeal before the FtT.  There is no such evidence before
    us.

24. Ms Jones made determined submissions about the judge's approach to  the
    plausibility of the appellant's account.  She submitted that the  judge
    erred in imposing his own "subjective views" of what would or would not
    have happened in various respects.  His  conclusions,  particularly  at
    [32], were said to have been reached in a manner which was contrary  to
    the approach required by authorities including HK v SSHD and Y v  SSHD.



25. Both of those decisions of the Court of Appeal, and Awala v SSHD [2005]
    CSOH 73, emphasised that the plausibility of an account  could  not  be
    gauged by domestic standards and that a judge "must  look  through  the
    spectacles provided by the information he has about conditions  in  the
    country in question" (Y v SSHD, at [27], per Keene  LJ)  before  making
    any such finding.  Reading this judge's decision as a  whole,  that  is
    precisely what he did.  He took demonstrable  care  to  inform  himself
    about the conditions in Iran for Christian converts.  He  undertook  an
    extensive review of the relevant reported decisions on the  subject  at
    [20]-[30] before he made his findings of fact.  No more was required of
    him.  He was not required to set out what was said in HK v SSHD or Y  v
    SSHD, provided that he adopted the required approach.  To  require  him
    to set out tracts of the authorities would be to  substitute  formulaic
    for substantive justice, as Sedley LJ  once  noted  in  response  to  a
    similar submission: SR (Iran) v SSHD [2007] EWCA Civ 460, at [5]  (Auld
    and Hughes LJJ agreed).  In our judgment, it was properly open  to  the
    judge to note various respects in which he considered  the  appellant's
    account to be implausible.  He was entitled, for the  reasons  that  he
    gave, to doubt the appellant's account for these reasons.

26. Ms Jones'  third  submission  falls  on  rather  more  fertile  ground,
    however.  These submissions concern the  basis  upon  which  the  judge
    rejected the supporting evidence given by members  of  the  appellant's
    church.

27. The member of the church who  attended  to  provide  oral  evidence  in
    support of the appellant was Dr MN.   She  had  written  a  very  brief
    letter in support of the appellant's claim.  The letter stated that the
    appellant had been attending their church since March  2018;  that  she
    had been involved in prayer nights and Iranian bible study  gatherings;
    that the appellant was baptised in September 2018 and that, in Dr  MN's
    opinion, "she is a true believer in the Christianity [sic] faith".

28. In her oral evidence, Dr MN stated that she was an  anaesthetist  at  a
    hospital in Liverpool, who had been attending the church in  Wigan  for
    many years.  She stated that she had various  different  roles  at  the
    church, including hosting,  interpretation,  bible  study  grounds  and
    entertaining people in her own house.  She confirmed that the appellant
    attended every week and that she was an "active participant"  in  bible
    study.  She had seen the appellant joining in with prayers and  singing
    songs in Farsi.  Dr MN was asked why she had said in  her  letter  that
    the appellant was a "true believer".  In response, she  said  that  she
    had only ever supported one other person at court, although she did not
    know the outcome in that appeal.  She knew that  the  appellant  was  a
    true believer because she had been to the appellant's house unannounced
    and had seen her through the window, reading a Farsi bible  and  making
    notes.

29. In addition to Dr MN's evidence, the judge also had  letters  from  two
    other members of the church.  The first was from a plasterer named  FM,
    who had been a member of the church for sixteen  years.   He  described
    how the appellant had taken part in community groups with  him,  during
    which she shared "what God had done in her life" and would  also  share
    verses from the bible which had helped her in different situations.  He
    stated that it was great to see the appellant going from  "strength  to
    strength with her walk with God and building a new life in the  kingdom
    of God".  The final letter was from BT, the pastor  of  the  church  in
    question.  He stated that he had been the pastor  for  thirteen  years.
    The church had a policy of not representing individuals in  church  but
    from what he had witnessed, he considered that the appellant had made a
    "legitimate decision to follow Jesus".

30. We have set out in full the judge's analysis of Dr MN's  evidence.   He
    considered it "unsatisfactory in one important regard", which was  that
    Dr MN had been unable to state the outcome of the  previous  appeal  in
    which she had given evidence in support of a person who had claimed  to
    have converted.  We accept  Ms  Jones's  submission  that  the  judge's
    concern in that regard did not rationally  entitle  him  to  reach  the
    conclusion that Dr MN's evidence about this appellant was  "limited  to
    that which the appellant  displays  externally  whilst  in  the  church
    environment."  As a senior member of the church, Dr  MN  had  expressed
    her opinion about the appellant's conversion and  she  had  based  that
    opinion, in part, upon something she had observed  outside  the  church
    environment, which was her discovery of the appellant reading the Farsi
    bible and making notes when Dr MN made  an  unannounced  visit  to  her
    home.  Neither Dr MN's opinion evidence nor her  factual  evidence  was
    logically undermined by the judge's concern  about  her  ignorance  (or
    claimed ignorance) of the outcome in another appeal.

31. Ms Jones primarily advanced this ground  of  appeal  as  a  rationality
    challenge to the  judge's  conclusion  and  we  accept  the  submission
    advanced in that way.  We also accept the  submission  that  the  judge
    gave inadequate reasons for concluding that the weight to  be  attached
    to Dr MN's evidence  of  the  appellant's  conversion  was  reduced  on
    account of the "unsatisfactory"  nature  of  her  evidence  in  another
    respect.  It does not necessarily follow that the evidence of a witness
    is to be discounted altogether because their evidence is  found  to  be
    unsatisfactory in one respect.  As Lord Dyson explained in MA (Somalia)
    v SSHD [2010] UKSC 49; [2011] 2 All ER 65, the significance of lies may
    vary from case to case.  The same must equally apply  in  circumstances
    in  which  a  witness  gives  evidence  which   is   in   one   respect
    unsatisfactory, so that it is necessary for a judge to explain how  and
    why that concern  bears  upon  the  remaining  evidence  given  by  the
    witness.  We do not consider the process of  reasoning  in  [32](v)  to
    discharge that obligation adequately or at all.  The basis  upon  which
    the judge discounted the evidence from Dr MN was legally  flawed.   His
    concern regarding  Dr  MN's  evidence  contributed  materially  to  his
    decision to discount the written evidence given by the other  witnesses
    from the church.  In the circumstances, we consider  that  the  judge's
    rejection of the supportive evidence from the church was erroneous  and
    cannot stand.

32. It follows that we find Ms Jones's third submission  to  be  made  out.
    That conclusion necessarily results in the judge's  assessment  of  the
    appellant's conversion being set aside as a whole, notwithstanding  our
    rejection of Ms Jones's first and second submissions.

33. We do not consider that the judge's comparatively brief analysis of the
    appellant's claim in the alternative is capable of rendering his  legal
    error immaterial.  The position in that respect  is  to  be  contrasted
    with that in OK (PTA; alternative  findings)  Ukraine  [2020]  UKUT  44
    (IAC).  As submitted by Ms Jones, the judge's analysis does not  appear
    to have been undertaken fully in the alternative.  If, contrary to  the
    judge's primary finding, the appellant is a Christian convert  who  has
    been publicising her genuinely held beliefs on the internet, she cannot
    properly be expected to delete those posts before she returns to  Iran.
    To expect her to do so would be contrary to HJ (Iran) and RT (Zimbabwe)
    and anathema to the Refugee Convention.  The judge's  consideration  of
    the appellant's internet  activity  and  the  risk  arising  from  that
    activity was undertaken entirely on the basis of  his  earlier  finding
    that the appellant's conversion was not genuine.  In the circumstances,
    the proper course is for the entirety of the FtT's analysis to  be  set
    aside and for the appeal to be reheard de novo.

34. We have intentionally confined our analysis to  the  appellant's  third
    submission, and have not based our conclusion on either the decision of
    the Inner House of Session in TF & MA v SSHD  [2018]  CSIH  58  or  the
    Administrative Court in R (on the application  of  SA  (Iran))  v  SSHD
    [2012] EWHC 2575  (Admin).   The  former  decision  is  obviously  only
    persuasive in England and Wales.   The  ratio  of  the  latter  is  not
    binding on the Upper Tribunal: Gilchrist  v  HMRC  [2014]  UKUT  (TCC);
    [2015] 1 Ch 183.

35. We did not hear full argument on these authorities but we  do  consider
    it appropriate to sound a note of  caution  about  their  effect.   The
    evidence given by 'church witnesses' such  as  Dr  MN  in  this  appeal
    doubtlessly has a role to play in such cases.  That has been recognised
    consistently in reported decisions including  SJ  (Iran)  [2003]  UKIAT
    158.  Such witnesses are able  to  provide  factual  evidence  about  a
    claimed convert's attendance at church and their other activities as  a
    Christian.  They are also able to provide their opinion as  to  whether
    the individual has genuinely converted to Christianity.  The  rules  of
    evidence do not apply in the Immigration and Asylum Chamber and  it  is
    permissible for a lay person to give their  opinion  on  such  matters:
    rule 14(2)(a) of the Tribunal Procedure (FtT)(IAC) Rules 2014.

36. In TF & MA, the Inner House of Session found that the FtT had erred  in
    law in its approach to the evidence given by members of the appellants'
    church, the Tron Church in Glasgow.  As is  clear  from  [45]-[50]  and
    [60]-[63] of the court's opinion, the error into which  the  judges  of
    the FtT were held to have fallen was to disregard the evidence given by
    members of the Tron Church because the appellants had been found to  be
    dishonest in other matters underpinning their claims for asylum.   What
    the FtT judges had failed to do was to look at all the evidence in  the
    appeals, including the evidence from the Tron Church witnesses, on  its
    own merits, before forming a concluded view as to  the  credibility  of
    the appellants' conversion,  thereby  failing  to  adopt  the  holistic
    approach required by Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] 3 All ER  449:  [50]  of
    the court's opinion refers.  The Upper Tribunal  had  also  erred,  the
    court held, in failing to recognise these  errors.   It  was  for  that
    reason that the court allowed the  appeals,  set  aside  the  decisions
    under appeal and remitted the appeals to the FtT for rehearing de novo.

37. At [52]-[59], Lord Glennie (who delivered the  opinion  of  the  court)
    also explained why aspects of the evidence given by members of the Tron
    Church were to be treated as expert  evidence  which  was  entitled  to
    respect.  This section of the court's decision was not essential to the
    disposal of the appeals and is accordingly obiter.  For  our  part,  we
    respectfully doubt that evidence given by members of a church as to the
    genuineness of an individual's conversion can properly be described  as
    expert evidence, for the following reasons.

38. At [43]-[44] of Kennedy v Cordia (Services) LLP (Scotland) [2016]  UKSC
    6; [2016] 1 WLR 597, the Supreme Court approved a section of the  South
    Australian decision in R v Bonython (1984) 38 SASR 45,  from  which  it
    distilled four key considerations which governed the  admissibility  of
    expert evidence (which in Scots law is known as "skilled evidence").

         "(i) whether the proposed skilled evidence will assist the court in
             its task;

         (ii)  whether  the  witness  has  the   necessary   knowledge   and
             experience;

         (iii)     whether  the  witness  is  impartial  in   his   or   her
             presentation and assessment of the evidence; and

         (iv) whether there is a reliable body of knowledge or experience to
             underpin the expert's evidence."

39. As we have already stated, no question of admissibility arises  in  the
    IAC but these criteria are nevertheless relevant  in  deciding  whether
    evidence is properly described  as  'expert  evidence'.   Assuming  for
    present purposes that the first three requirements are satisfied in the
    case of a witness such as Dr MN, we very much doubt that  her  evidence
    satisfied the fourth requirement.   The  court  in  TF  &  MA  did  not
    expressly address the guidance given by the Supreme Court in Kennedy  v
    Cordia on this fourth requirement.  At [54]-[56], Lord  Reed  and  Lord
    Hodge (with whom the other Justices agreed), considered the authorities
    in which the requirement for there to be a reliable body  of  knowledge
    or experience had been analysed.  Amongst other authorities,  Mearns  v
    Smedvig Ltd 1999 SC 243 was cited, in which Lord Eassie had said:

         "A party seeking to lead a  witness  with  purported  knowledge  or
         experience outwith generally recognised fields would need to set up
         by investigation and  evidence  not  only  the  qualifications  and
         expertise of the individual skilled witness,  but  the  methodology
         and validity of that field of knowledge or science."

40. In many cases, it will be apparent that the methodology and validity of
    a field of knowledge or science is such that it  can  validly  underpin
    expert evidence.  It is well established in the field of refugee status
    determination, for  example,  that  a  suitably  qualified  doctor  can
    provide expert evidence on the likely causes of physical lesions  on  a
    claimant's body, in compliance with  the  Istanbul  Protocol:  KV  (Sri
    Lanka) v  SSHD  [2019]  UKSC;  [2019]  1  WLR  1849.   Expert  evidence
    regarding an individual's mental health is also frequently received  in
    international protection appeals, documenting  diagnoses  made  by  the
    application of diagnostic criteria such as the ICD-10 or the DSM-V:  TD
    & AD (Albania) CG [2016] UKUT 92 (IAC).  In Kennedy v Cordia itself, it
    was accepted that a consulting engineer with a  degree  in  engineering
    and a diploma in safety and hygiene who was, amongst  other  things,  a
    former member of the Health and Safety Executive, was properly able  to
    provide  expert  evidence  on  a  range  of  matters   concerning   the
    precautions which  might  properly  have  been  taken  to  prevent  the
    appellant's wrist injury.

41. The position in respect of an individual's conversion  to  Christianity
    is to be distinguished from these paradigms.  There  is  no  recognised
    methodology by which the genuineness of an individual's conversion from
    one faith to another can be measured, nor can that question properly be
    categorised as belonging to a field of knowledge or science.  A witness
    such as Dr MN believes that an individual has converted to Christianity
    and  they  can  provide  reasons  for  that  belief  but  there  is  no
    established methodology by which they  reach  that  conclusion.   Their
    evidence on this issue (described  by  Lord  Glennie  as  "Category  3"
    evidence) should not, in our judgment, be described  either  as  expert
    evidence or even as "a species of expert evidence", as was submitted by
    leading counsel for the  appellants  in  TF  &  MA:  [41]  refers.   To
    describe  such  evidence  as  expert  evidence  risks   elevating   the
    significance of that evidence unduly. An example of that risk coming to
    pass can be seen in the submission  made  at  [3]  of  the  appellant's
    grounds of appeal, where it is said that "the evidence of  the  witness
    should have been treated as expert evidence by the Judge  and  afforded
    significantly more weight".

42. In fact, if one reads Lord Glennie's opinion closely, it is plain  that
    he would not endorse that submission, even though  he  categorised  the
    evidence of the laypeople from the Tron Church as expert  evidence.  At
    [59], he emphasised that their evidence was no more than:

         "admissible opinion evidence  which  is  entitled  to  respect.  Of
         course, it remains for the court or  tribunal  to  make  the  final
         decision, and nothing in the expert evidence  can  take  that  away
         from the court or tribunal".

43.  "Respect" is not the same as weight. Judicial  fact  finders  commonly
    decline to ascribe significant weight to expert  evidence  for  a  wide
    range of entirely legitimate reasons.

44. There is, in fact, a further reason why the written and  oral  evidence
    given by individuals such as Dr MN should not be  described  as  expert
    evidence.  An expert's evidence is to be provided  to  the  Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber in compliance with the Practice  Directions  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, as amended by  Sullivan  LJ
    on 13 November 2014.  Paragraph 10 of  the  PD  imposes  a  significant
    range of obligations upon an expert witness and upon those  instructing
    them.  The weight which can properly be attached to the evidence of  an
    expert might properly be reduced in the event of a  failure  to  comply
    with those stipulations: SS (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 155  and
    AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC).  It would
    not be appropriate, in our judgment, to impose those  obligations  upon
    representatives who seek to enlist the assistance of church  witnesses,
    or upon the church  witnesses  themselves.   These  witnesses  are  lay
    people who seek to give factual and  opinion  evidence  on  matters  of
    faith and not experts who can properly be expected to comply with those
    obligations.

45. The judgment of Gilbart J in R (SA) v SSHD concerned the lawfulness  of
    a decision made by the defendant that  the  claimant's  claim  to  have
    converted to Christianity was clearly unfounded under section 94 of the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  The claimant had already
    been disbelieved as to her conversion by  a  judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, who had formed a strongly adverse view  of  her  credibility:
    [5].  Permission to appeal against that decision was  refused  and,  in
    due course, the claimant made further submissions.   Those  submissions
    were supported by a raft of additional evidence, as listed by Gilbart J
    at [8].  That  material  concerned  the  truthfulness  of  the  claimed
    conversion and the mental health of the claimant's son, which was  said
    to have  deteriorated  after  the  dismissal  of  the  appeal.   Having
    reviewed the evidence, the defendant concluded not only that it did not
    cross the somewhat modest threshold presented by paragraph 353  of  the
    Immigration Rules; she  concluded  that  the  claim  was  also  clearly
    unfounded: [9].

46. Gilbart J reminded himself of the test to be applied by  the  Court  in
    considering  a  challenge  to  a  certified  decision:  [12]-[13].   He
    recalled the significance of the Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1  guidelines
    in a case which had previously been the subject of findings in the FtT:
    [14][-15]. At [16]-[20], Gilbart J concluded that it had not been  open
    to the defendant to conclude that the expert  psychiatric  evidence  in
    respect of the claimant's son could simply be set aside.   It  was  for
    that reason that the  defendant's  decision  to  regard  the  claim  as
    clearly unfounded was unlawful: [20].

47. Having observed that the conclusions summarised above were  "enough  to
    dispose of the case", Gilbart J added three observations in respect  of
    the claimed conversion to Christianity.   It  is  the  third  of  those
    obiter observations which is most frequently cited  in  cases  of  this
    nature:

         "[24] Thirdly, there is a matter  closely  related  to  the  second
         point of concern. What appears to have  impressed  the  immigration
         judge,  and  then  the  Home  Secretary,  is  that  the  Claimant's
         conversion to Christianity was not regarded by him as genuine,  and
         had been manufactured to assist her asylum claim. It is a dangerous
         thing for anyone, and perhaps especially a judge, to peer into what
         some call a man or woman's soul to assess whether a professed faith
         is genuinely held, and especially not when it  was  and  is  agreed
         that she was and is a frequent participant in church  services.  It
         is a type of judicial exercise very popular some centuries  ago  in
         some fora, but rather rarely exercised today. I am also uneasy when
         a judge, even with the knowledge one gains judicially in a city  as
         diverse as Manchester,  is  bold  enough  to  seek  to  reach  firm
         conclusions about a professed conversion, made by a woman raised in
         another culture, from the version of Islam practised therein, to an
         evangelical church in Bolton within one strand of  Christianity.  I
         am at a loss to understand how that is to  be  tested  by  anything
         other than considering whether she is an active participant in  the
         new church. But I accept that such judicial boldness as this  judge
         showed does not necessarily undermine a decision in law if he  does
         so, and his decision was not successfully appealed. But that is not
         the only point. There must be a real risk that if she has professed
         herself to be a Christian,  and  conducted  herself  as  one,  that
         profession, whether true or not, may be taken in Iran  as  evidence
         of apostasy. On the  basis  of  the  Home  Secretary's  now  stated
         position, that amounts to a potentially different circumstance from
         that addressed by the Immigration Judge."  [emphasis added]

48.  We  do  not  understand  Gilbart  J  to  have  suggested  that  it  is
    impermissible as a matter of  law  for  a  judge  who  is  tasked  with
    assessing a claimed religious conversion  to  consider  anything  other
    than whether the individual is an active  participant  in  the  church.
    That he did not intend to suggest as much is clear,  in  our  judgment,
    from the final sentence which we  have  underlined.   Insofar  as  this
    paragraph is relied upon by representatives in support of a  submission
    that active participation in church activities suffices, without  more,
    to demonstrate the truthfulness of a conversion,  we  do  not  consider
    that to be the position.  On the contrary, it is  entirely  permissible
    for a judge in a case of this nature to turn his mind to a whole  range
    of additional considerations, including not least  the  timing  of  the
    conversion, the individual's knowledge of the faith, and  the  opinions
    of other members of the congregation  as  to  the  genuineness  of  the
    conversion.

49. We are conscious that the opinions we have expressed above  are  obiter
    but we  consider  it  necessary  to  express  them,  since  it  is  the
    experience of both members of this Tribunal that TF & MA and R  (SA)  v
    SSHD are frequently cited in cases of this nature.

The Respondent's Appeal

50. Having heard argument on the appellant's grounds of appeal, we  invited
    both representatives to make submissions on  the  respondent's  appeal.
    Ms Jones accepted at the outset - as we have already recorded - that it
    had been the judge's intention to dismiss the appeal  on  all  grounds.
    To that  extent,  the  respondent's  appeal  was  not  opposed  by  the
    appellant.

51. We nevertheless invited the representatives to make submissions on  the
    procedure which should be adopted in a case such as this one, in  which
    it is clear that the final decision of the FtT does not accord with the
    reasons given by the judge.  Both parties had filed and served skeleton
    arguments in advance, although the respondent's skeleton understandably
    dealt with this point more fully than Ms Jones's.  We drew the parties'
    attention to the judgments in Bristol-Myers Squibb Co  v  Baker  Norton
    Pharmaceuticals Inc (No 2) [2001] EWCA  Civ  414;  [2001]  RPC  45  and
    Santos-Albert v Ochi [2018] 4 WLR 88 and  to  paragraph  40.12  of  the
    White Book; and we gave the advocates sufficient  time  to  familiarise
    themselves with these materials.

52. Ms Cunha relied upon the grounds of appeal and  the  skeleton  argument
    which had been settled by Mr Clarke.  The  respondent  maintained  that
    the correct course of action, in circumstances such  as  those  in  the
    present case, was for the FtT to correct the decision under  the  'slip
    rule'.  The obvious typographical error in  the  judge's  decision  was
    plainly amenable to such correction and Katsonga [2016] UKUT 228  (IAC)
    was  wrongly  decided  insofar   as   it   suggested   otherwise.    AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 208; [2019] 1 WLR  3065  supported
    the respondent's stance in that regard.  The correction  of  errors  in
    that way was fair to both sides and ensured that all parties understood
    where they stood with the minimum delay and expense.  To adopt such  an
    approach would also be consistent with the  overriding  objective.   On
    proper analysis, Bristol-Myers Squibb  v  Baker  Norton  favoured  this
    construction of the slip rule, as did  one  of  the  other  authorities
    cited in the White Book, Markos v Goodfellow [2002] EWCA Civ 1542.  All
    of the authorities underlined that the  slip  rule  could  be  used  to
    correct a judgment so as to give effect to the  original  intention  of
    the judge.

53. It was preferable, Ms Cunha submitted, for errors such as  this  to  be
    corrected under rule  31  rather  than  under  rule  35  (review  of  a
    decision).  For that rule to apply, it was necessary for there to be an
    application for permission to appeal and that route  was  unnecessarily
    cumbersome and time-consuming when  the  typographical  nature  of  the
    error was recalled.

54. We are grateful to Ms Jones for her considered response.  As  she  made
    clear throughout the hearing, her lay client fully understood that  the
    respondent's complaint was meritorious and it was only the  success  or
    failure of the  appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  with  which  she  was
    principally concerned.  Nevertheless, she assisted  the  Tribunal  with
    her analysis as a member of the Bar who practises extensively  in  this
    field.

55. Ms Jones's considered position was  in  support  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's construction of the slip rule.  She expressly  agreed  with  Ms
    Cunha that the authorities suggested that the slip rule could  be  used
    in the circumstances under contemplation and  she  too  submitted  that
    Katsonga should not be followed.  She agreed with the  respondent  that
    it was in the best interests of all parties to use  the  slip  rule  to
    correct an obvious error and  she  submitted  that  this  would  be  of
    particular assistance to  claimants  themselves,  who  were  positively
    disadvantaged by a lack of clarity in decisions which were likely to be
    written in a language which was not their own.

56. It would be preferable and more  in  accordance  with  the  over-riding
    objective, Ms Jones submitted, for errors of this kind to be  corrected
    under the slip rule, rather than it being necessary for the FtT  to  be
    presented with an application for  permission  to  appeal.   The  Upper
    Tribunal had been wrong in Katsonga to conclude that it would alter the
    'substance of the  decision'  to  change  the  concluding  words.   The
    substance of the decision, as described in  the  authorities,  was  not
    whether the appeal was allowed  or  dismissed;  the  substance  of  the
    decision was to be found in the  reasoning  of  the  judge.   What  was
    clearly not permissible under the slip rule was for  the  substance  of
    the decision to be altered but what clearly was permissible under  that
    Rule, whether under the CPR or the IAC Rules, was for a decision to  be
    amended so as to give effect to the plain intention of the judge.

Analysis of the Respondent's Appeal

57. The respondent's grounds of appeal are as concise as one would  expect,
    given the nature of the error into which it is accepted that the  judge
    fell. It was  submitted  that  the  concluding  words  of  the  judge's
    decision did not reflect his intention.  It  was  noted  that  Katsonga
    precluded the respondent from asking the First-tier Tribunal to use the
    'slip rule' in rule 31 to correct the decision.  Permission  to  appeal
    was accordingly sought.

58. In granting permission to appeal, the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  noted
    that the end of the decision stated that  the  appeal  was  allowed  on
    asylum grounds but that "it is clear from the body of the determination
    that the intention was to dismiss the  appeal  on  all  grounds".   The
    judge considered that this was "arguably a material error of law".   We
    disagree.  It was obviously an error of law, since the concluding words
    of the decision could not conceivably have reflected the  intention  of
    the judge.

59. As a result of Katsonga, the judge who considered the  application  for
    permission to appeal cannot be faulted for not turning his mind to rule
    31 of the Procedure Rules ("the slip rule").  The respondent had  quite
    properly explained in her application for permission to appeal why  she
    had not, as a result of that decision, invited  the  Tribunal  to  take
    corrective action under that rule.  What is of concern, however, is the
    fact that the judge who considered the application  for  permission  to
    appeal did not turn his mind to section 9 of the Tribunals, Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 ("the 2007 Act") and  rule  35  of  the  Procedure
    Rules, pursuant to which the FtT has power to review its own  decision.
    Rule 35 is in the following terms:

         35.  Review of a decision

      a. (1) The Tribunal may only undertake a review of a decision-

            a) pursuant to rule 34 (review on an application for  permission
               to appeal); and

            (b) if it is satisfied that there was an error of  law  in  the
            decision.

      b. (2) The Tribunal must notify the parties in writing of the  outcome
         of any review, and of any  right  of  appeal  in  relation  to  the
         outcome.

      c. (3) If the Tribunal takes any action  in  relation  to  a  decision
         following a review without first giving every party an  opportunity
         to make representations-

            (a)   the notice under paragraph (2) must state that any  party
                that did not have an opportunity to make representations may
                apply for such action to be set aside; and

             b) the Tribunal may regard the review  as  incomplete  and  act
                accordingly.

60. By rule 36, the FtT may treat an  application  for  a  decision  to  be
    corrected, set aside or reviewed, or for permission to appeal against a
    decision, as an application for any other one  of  those  things.   The
    value of rule 35 has been underlined by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Thapa
    [2018] UKUT 54 (IAC); [2018] Imm AR 724, at [38]-[44].  In  Thapa,  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  evidently  proceeded  on  a  material
    misapprehension of the facts, in that his attention had not been  drawn
    to the fact that attempts had been made to secure an adjournment on the
    basis that counsel and the sponsor were both unwell on the day  of  the
    hearing.  In the circumstances, it was readily apparent that the  judge
    had erred (albeit not through any fault of his) when he  had  concluded
    that the appellant had shown no interest in the appeal.  At  [43],  the
    Upper Tribunal stated that the First-tier Tribunal could have issued  a
    review decision, finding that the FtT had clearly erred in law, setting
    aside that decision and requiring the decision to be remade.  At  [44],
    the decision concluded with the following:

         "This case is, in short, a good example of the  usefulness  of  the
         power of review in section 9. Instead  of  granting  permission  to
         appeal, with its attendant inevitable  delay,  recourse  to  review
         would have meant the appeals  would  have  been  re-heard,  in  all
         probability long before December 2017, without the  Upper  Tribunal
         being involved."

61. The instant appeal provides an equally good example of  the  usefulness
    of the power of review.  The decision of the FtT was issued  in  August
    2019.   The  respondent's  appeal  was  lodged  in   early   September.
    Permission to appeal was granted later that  month.   The  appeal  came
    before the Upper Tribunal in January 2020.  The more expeditious course
    would have been for the FtT to write to the  parties,  indicating  that
    its provisional view was that there was an obvious error of law in  the
    decision, in that the final words of that decision did not accord  with
    the judge's reasoned conclusions.  The parties could have been given an
    opportunity to make representations,  which  need  not  have  been  any
    longer than a few days.  No competent representative  faced  with  that
    indication could have objected to the Tribunal's provisional view.

62. After a short delay, the First-tier Tribunal could  have  reviewed  the
    decision, issuing an amended decision in  which  the  concluding  words
    reflected the body of that decision.  That course  would  have  avoided
    the additional delay and expense involved in an  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  It would also have been likely, as emphasised  by  Ms  Jones
    and Ms Cunha, to bring about greater certainty for the appellant.   Her
    first language is not English and she  was  in  receipt  of  a  closely
    reasoned decision of thirteen pages, which concluded with an indication
    that she had succeeded on asylum grounds.  There is obviously a risk in
    such circumstances, particularly when a litigant is unrepresented, that
    the concluding words of such a decision  might  lead  an  appellant  to
    think that they had been successful in their appeal.  They might, as  a
    result, fail to take advice on  the  body  of  the  decision  and  find
    themselves in difficulty if, at a later stage, it becomes apparent that
    they would have wished to seek permission to appeal against the body of
    the decision.  Thankfully, the appellant in the instant appeal did  not
    find herself in such a situation but it  is  easy  to  conceive  of  an
    appellant who receives a decision which ends  with  the  words  "Asylum
    Appeal: allowed" deciding to take no  further  action.   Removing  that
    risk promptly by treating such an application for permission to  appeal
    as another type  of  application,  pursuant  to  rule  36,  is  in  the
    interests of justice.

63. Having concluded that the FtT could have acted under rule 35 in a  case
    such as the present, we turn to consider the course of action which was
    thought to be precluded in Katsonga: the  correction  of  the  decision
    under rule 31 of the Tribunal Procedure (FtT)(IAC) Rules 2014.

64. Paragraph 15(1) of Schedule 5 to the 2007 Act provides that  rules  may
    make provision for the correction of accidental errors in a decision or
    record of a decision.  In the First-tier Tribunal (IAC), that provision
    is to be found in rule 31, which is in the following terms:

         "31. Clerical mistakes and accidental slips or omissions

         The Tribunal may at any time correct any clerical mistake or  other
         accidental slip  or  omission  in  a  decision,  direction  or  any
         document produced by it, by-

         a) providing notification of the amended decision or direction, or
            a copy of the amended document, to all parties; and

         b) making any necessary amendment to any information published  in
            relation to the decision, direction or document."

65. The broadly equivalent provision in the Civil Procedure Rules is to  be
    found in rule 40.12(1) ("Correction of errors in judgments and orders")
    which provides that "The Court may at any time  correct  an  accidental
    slip or omission in a judgment or order".

66. In Katsonga, a judge of the First-tier Tribunal had given  reasons  for
    concluding that the appellant's removal would not  breach  the  Refugee
    Convention or the European Convention on Human Rights and that she  was
    not in need of Humanitarian Protection.  The judge  had  concluded  her
    decision by stating  that  the  appeal  was  "refused"  on  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds but "allowed on human rights  grounds".



67. Both parties made applications for permission to appeal.  As set out at
    [4] of the Upper Tribunal's decision, the respondent's application  was
    premised on a submission that the  judge's  decision  on  human  rights
    grounds was a "slip of the pen" which was amenable to  the  slip  rule.
    This application was brought to the attention of  the  Resident  Judge,
    who arranged for the judge's decision to be corrected  under  the  slip
    rule and re-issued, reflecting his original intention  to  dismiss  the
    appeal on all grounds.

68. The appellant then  lodged  a  second  application  for  permission  to
    appeal, containing the  original  grounds  of  appeal  and  an  amended
    ground, objecting to the use of the slip rule at  the  request  of  the
    Secretary of State.  Drawing on the authorities cited at 40.12.1 of the
    White Book, the Upper Tribunal concluded that the slip rule  could  not
    be used to change the substance of a judgement or order  and  that  the
    rule could not be used to reverse a decision at  the  instance  of  the
    losing party: [9]-[10].  So it was that the  Upper  Tribunal  concluded
    that there had been no jurisdiction to correct the decision under  that
    rule, and that "the first determination is  the  determination  of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal".   Having  reached  that  conclusion,  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted that it was  agreed  on  all  sides  that  the  original
    decision could not stand, for the reasons identified in the grounds  of
    appeal originally presented by both the appellant and  the  respondent.
    The decision was accordingly set aside and remitted to be heard  afresh
    by the First-tier Tribunal, with no findings of fact preserved.

69. Katsonga is cited as authority for  the  third  sentence  in  paragraph
    15.15 of the fifth edition of Jacobs' Tribunal Practice and Procedure:

         "The [slip rule] allows a decision to be corrected.   It  does  not
         allow a decision to be changed  from  the  one  that  the  Tribunal
         intended to make, however substantial the  mistake.   It  does  not
         allow a decision to be reversed  at  the  instance  of  the  losing
         party.  The  court  rule  was  used  to  allow  the  correction  of
         oversights but this result is now achieved using the power to  vary
         an order." [emphasis added]

70. In AS (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 208; [2019] 1 WLR 3065,  the
    Court of Appeal considered  an  appeal  against  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    country guidance decision about  the  return  of  Afghan  nationals  to
    Kabul: AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT  18  (IAC).   It
    had been submitted by the Secretary of State that only  about  0.1%  of
    the population of Kabul province would become  civilian  casualties  in
    the year 2017-2018, and that the security situation should be viewed in
    that context.  At [106] and [196] of its decision, however,  the  Upper
    Tribunal made reference to less than 0.01% of the population  of  Kabul
    suffering death or injury in the same period.  It was accepted on  both
    sides that the lower figure did not reflect the submission  made;  that
    there was no support for it in the evidence; and that it was simply  an
    error.  The error was not clearly identified  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal which was made to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   It  was
    clearly identified in  the  skeleton  argument  which  accompanied  the
    grounds of appeal to the Court of Appeal.

71. In the course of his judgment, Underhill LJ considered at  some  length
    the submission made by leading counsel  for  the  Secretary  of  State,
    which was (in summary) that the reference to 0.01%  of  the  population
    was clearly a typographical error in the decision of the Upper Tribunal
    and that such an error was amenable to the slip rule.  (Rule 42 of  the
    Upper Tribunal's Procedure Rules is in precisely similar terms to  rule
    31 of the FtT's Rules.)  Underhill LJ concluded that the Upper Tribunal
    would have jurisdiction to correct the error in its decision if it  was
    a mere error of expression but that it would not be  right  for  it  to
    exercise that jurisdiction in  the  particular  circumstances  of  that
    case: [47].  Newey and Nicola Davies LJJ agreed, for  separate  reasons
    given at [48]-[53] and [54]-[55] respectively.  In the  course  of  his
    leading judgment, Underhill LJ made reference to Katsonga at [45].  His
    citation of that decision was accompanied by an  endnote  in  which  he
    said:

         "Note 7  My citation of Katsonga should not be  taken  as  implying
         approval of the proposition in the judicially-drafted headnote that
         "the 'Slip Rule'... cannot be used  to  reverse  the  effect  of  a
         decision", which if taken out of context  may  be  misleading.  If,
         say, a "not"  were  accidentally  omitted  from  a  declaration  or
         injunction its correction might well reverse what  would  otherwise
         be the effect of the decision, but it is hard to see why it  should
         for that reason be illegitimate: indeed it might be thought  to  be
         the paradigm of the kind of  case  for  which  the  slip  rule  was
         required."

72. Those remarks, read with the what the Court had to say in general about
    the power to correct a "formal decision", mean that it is necessary  to
    revisit Katsonga. In doing so, we have had the benefit of argument  and
    the citation of authorities, which the Tribunal  in  Katsonga  did  not
    enjoy.

73. We respectfully take a different view about the effect of the  decision
    of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Bristol-Myers  Squibb  v  Baker  Norton
    Pharmaceuticals, which was cited in Katsonga support of the  conclusion
    that the power conferred by CPR 40.12 could not be used to  change  the
    substance of a judgment or order.  In so holding,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    mirrored the commentary in the White Book.   The  critical  distinction
    drawn by Aldous LJ (with whom Laws LJ and Blackburn J agreed), however,
    is to be found at [25]:

         "Those cases establish that the slip rule cannot enable a court  to
         have second or additional thoughts. Once the order is drawn up  any
         mistakes must be corrected by an appellate court.  However,  it  is
         possible under the slip rule to amend an order to  give  effect  to
         the intention of the Court."

74. Aldous LJ therefore drew a distinction, as the  rest  of  his  judgment
    shows, between two broad categories of case.  In the first,  which  are
    described in the judgment as 'second thoughts'  cases,  a  party  or  a
    judge seeks to make an impermissible amendment to a perfected  judgment
    or order in order to correct a legal error or to alter his reasons.   R
    + V Versicherung A.G. v Risk Insurance  and  Reinsurance  Solutions  SA
    [2007] EWHC 79 (Comm) falls into that category because the  alterations
    proposed to the judge's orders  concerned  challenges  to  the  judge's
    judgment.  So too does Secretary of State  for  Trade  and  Industry  v
    Rogers  [1996]  1  WLR  1569,  since  the  judge  in  that   case   had
    intentionally inserted a  finding  of  dishonesty  into  his  perfected
    judgment; such a  finding  having  been  absent  from  the  ex  tempore
    judgment and beyond the scope of the Secretary of  State's  case.   The
    Court of Appeal in that case held that the slip rule could not be  used
    to excise  the  relevant  sentences  from  the  judgment,  since  their
    addition to the perfected judgment had been "deliberate and  intended":
    p1577H refers.  The Court of Appeal therefore declined to use the  slip
    rule to delete the offending words, deciding instead to set  aside  the
    finding on the basis that it was not open to the judge.

75. At the other end of the spectrum is the category of  case  in  which  a
    party or a judge seeks permissibly to amend  a  perfected  judgment  or
    order so as to give effect to the intention  of  the  court.   Bristol-
    Myers Squibb v Baker Norton was such a case.  A more recent example  is
    to be found in Santos-Albert v Ochi [2018] EWHC 1277 (Ch); [2018] 4 WLR
    88.  In that case, a District Judge had used the slip rule to  add  the
    words 'the amount now owing' to a final charging order in respect of  a
    property owned by the defendant.  The District Judge had confirmed that
    the amended order was the one she had intended to make on  the  earlier
    occasion.  The appellant's appeal against the application of  the  slip
    rule  was  dismissed  by  Snowden  J.   In  rejecting  the  appellant's
    submission that the slip rule could not be  used  to  make  substantial
    amendments, he said this

         "[27] I do not accept Mr Nicol's submission as to  the  meaning  of
         CPR 40.12. Although CPR  40.12  uses  the  word  "slip",  its  real
         purpose is to ensure that the order conforms with  what  the  court
         intended, even if the error  which  has  originally  been  made  in
         drawing up the order is substantial. So, for example, if the  court
         intended to order payment of 1,000,000  but  in  error  the  order
         drawn up by the court required payment of only  1,000,  I  do  not
         doubt that the order could be amended under  the  slip  rule,  even
         though the financial difference between the order as drawn and  the
         court's true intention would be very great. In my view,  as  stated
         in Bristol-Myers Squibb, the  key  requirement  in  every  case  is
         simply that the order should reflect the actual  intention  of  the
         court. The limitation discussed in the  authorities,  and  which  I
         think is what is meant by the sentence in the White Book,  is  that
         there should genuinely have been an accidental error  or  omission:
         the slip rule should not be used to permit the court to have second
         or additional thoughts or to add  a  provision  having  substantive
         effect which was not in the contemplation of  the  parties  or  the
         court at the hearing."

76. We agree, and we consider these dicta to  apply  equally  to  the  slip
    rules in the procedure rules of the IAC.  We consider that construction
    to be supported by the examples given by Underhill LJ  in  the  seventh
    endnote of AS (Afghanistan).  The correction of a judgment or order  by
    the addition or deletion of the  word  'not'  might  well  reverse  the
    effect of a decision but  might  legitimately  be  thought  to  be  the
    paradigm example of the type of  case  for  which  the  slip  rule  was
    intended.  The example given at 40.12.1  of  the  White  Book,  of  the
    amendment of an order to refer  to  the  claimant  as  opposed  to  the
    defendant would also have the effect of reversing its  effect.   Again,
    the fact that the amendment is 'substantial' or that  it  reverses  the
    effect of the order matters not; the amendment is  permissible  because
    it gives effect to the plain intention of  the  Court.   If  a  further
    example is required, it is to be found in Dickinson & Ors v Tesco & Ors
    [2013] EWCA Civ 226, in which the Court of Appeal used the slip rule to
    correct an order which failed accurately to reflect the judgment of the
    court.

77. Our conclusion in that regard also accords with  the  approach  to  the
    slip rule which is applied in the Administrative Appeals Chamber.   The
    leading decision on the subject remains AS v  Secretary  of  State  for
    Work and Pensions [2011] UKUT 159 (AAC), in which Upper Tribunal  Judge
    Jacobs said this:

         "[16] Rule 36 is by its contents a species of slip rule and  should
         be interpreted in accordance  with  the  nature  of  that  type  of
         provision. As such, it deals with matters that were in the  judge's
         mind when writing but for some reason did not find their  way  onto
         the page. Typical examples are the typing error that  produces  the
         wrong date or a momentary lapse of concentration  that  results  in
         the word 'not' being omitted. The rule does not cover matters  that
         the judge had planned to mention but forgot to include.  Obviously,
         it is difficult for the Upper Tribunal to  know  what  was  in  the
         judge's mind, but the extent of the changes are an  indication.  It
         is difficult to classify the omission of a total of nine  lines  of
         explanation as in the same category of mistake as a typing error or
         a momentary lapse of concentration. For that reason, I decide  that
         the changes made by the presiding judge were not authorised by rule
         36."

78. Applying our analysis to a case such as the present,  we  come  to  the
    clear conclusion that the slip rule may be used in order to correct  an
    accidental slip in the  section  of  a  judge's  decision  entitled  or
    otherwise  comprising  the  'Notice  of  Decision',  even   where   the
    correction would 'reverse' the effect of  the  decision.   To  conclude
    otherwise, on the basis of the current authorities, would be to deprive
    the slip rule of  the  purpose  recognised  in  those  authorities,  of
    ensuring that the decision which is issued  to  the  parties  is  truly
    reflective of the intention of the judge.   By  "a  case  such  as  the
    present", we mean a case in which it is absolutely clear that the judge
    intended either to allow  or  dismiss  the  appeal  but  in  which  the
    concluding words of the decision do not reflect that intention.

79. There will be applications for permission to appeal pending before  the
    FtT in which errors of this kind have been made.  A judge  of  the  FtT
    who considers such an application, whether from an  appellant  or  from
    the Secretary of State has three options.  They may grant permission to
    appeal.  They may review  the  decision  under  rule  35,  as  we  have
    considered above.  Or they  may  use  the  slip  rule  to  correct  the
    decision, so as to reflect  the  intention  of  the  judge.   Like  the
    advocates before us, we  consider  the  last  option  to  be  the  most
    expeditious and the most likely to further  the  overriding  objective.
    Rule 36 provides the mechanism by which an application for one of these
    forms of relief might properly be  considered  as  an  application  for
    another.

80. For the future, a party to an appeal who considers there to be an error
    such as occurred in the present case should write to the Resident Judge
    of the hearing centre in question, asking for the  typographical  error
    to be corrected under rule 31 of the Procedure Rules.   The  error  may
    (as permitted by [2] of the Practice Statement of the  Immigration  and
    Asylum Chambers) be corrected by the Resident Judge or by the judge who
    issued the decision.  That is likely to be a matter  for  the  Resident
    Judge, and their decision is likely to be influenced, in particular, by
    the availability of the judge to attend to correct the error.   In  the
    event that there is any ambiguity as to the intention of the judge, the
    slip rule should not be used. In that eventuality, the  application  to
    correct may be treated (under rule 36) as an application for permission
    to appeal, leading to review of the decision or to the grant or refusal
    of permission.  In the event that  the  judge  declines  to  treat  the
    application in this  way,  the  parties  may,  if  so  advised,  pursue
    alternative avenues  of  redress.   In  the  event  that  there  is  no
    ambiguity, the decision may be corrected and re-issued to  the  parties
    in accordance with rule 31(a).

81. Returning to the present case, we find as follows.  The  judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  purportedly  allowing  the  appeal
    when it was his plain intention to dismiss it.   The judge  also  erred
    in law in his treatment of the evidence from  the  witnesses  from  the
    appellant's church, and Dr MN in particular.  The decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside accordingly and we order that the appeal  be
    remitted for hearing de novo by another judge of that Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal was vitiated by legal error  and  is
set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  hearing
afresh by a judge other than Judge Clegg.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the  appellant  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                                10 March 2020
                           -----------------------
[1] It is to be noted that these  decisions  are  no  longer  designated  as
country guidance on the situation  for  Christian  converts  in  Iran.   The
guidance is now to be found in PS (Christianity - risk) Iran CG [2020]  UKUT
46 (IAC), although that decision was issued after the decision  of  the  FtT
in this case.

