
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05337/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th January 2018                |On 26th February 2018                 |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER

                                   Between

                                     R V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant born on [ ] 1998 is a citizen of Iran.  The Appellant had
    made a claim for asylum which had been refused by  the  Respondent  and
    the Appellant had appealed that decision.   His  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on 24th July 2017 and  his  appeal  had
    been dismissed.  Application for permission to appeal had been made and
    initially had been refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Parkes on  18th
    October 2017.  That application had been renewed to the Upper  Tribunal
    and permission to appeal had been granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb
    on 15th December 2017.  It was said that it was arguable that the judge
    had erred in reaching an adverse credibility finding in  reliance  upon
    the Appellant's evidence in interview that his  mother  had  owned  the
    printing company stating that to be a significant credibility issue but
    failing to consider subsequent  evidence  that  that  assertion  was  a
    mistake.

Submissions on Behalf of the Appellant

 2. Ms Radford of Counsel submitted that the finding that  the  mother  had
    owned the printing press was either an  error  of  fact  or  had  given
    insufficient reasoning as to why the Appellant may have  said  that  in
    his interview record if it was found not to be an error of  fact.   She
    referred to the  interview  record  where  throughout  there  had  been
    reference to the father owning the printing press.

Submissions on Behalf of the Respondent

 3. It was submitted by Mr Kotas that this was a  safe  decision  and  that
    even if one error had been made that  did  not  affect  materially  the
    judge's decision when looked at in the round.

 4. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision to consider the
    evidence and submissions made.  I now provide  that  decision  with  my
    reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 5. Permission had been  granted  on  the  basis  that  the  judge  had  at
    paragraph 13 of the decision relied upon the  Appellant's  evidence  in
    interview that his mother owned the printing press but  had  failed  to
    examine later evidence claiming that this was an  interpreter  mistake.
    Whilst the judge had allowed the other grounds  pleaded  when  granting
    permission he had noted that they may not ultimately be meritorious.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal Judge had noted at paragraph 2 the core of  the
    Appellant's claim to fear  persecution  upon  return  to  Iran,  namely
    because his father ran a printing  company  and  had  printed  leaflets
    about MEK, a banned group, at the behest of a friend.   Those  leaflets
    had been discovered in a  friend's  car  by  the  authorities  and  the
    Appellant and his father had subsequently fled Iran to Iraq  where  the
    father remained.  However the Appellant by some means had come  to  the
    UK.  He was a minor (aged 17) when he entered  the  UK  but  became  an
    adult in August 2016 and was such prior to his appeal hearing.

 7. The First-tier Judge had  nevertheless  given  due  allowance  for  the
    Appellant's age (17) when interviewed.

 8. The judge had made findings on credibility at paragraphs 7 to 17 of the
    decision.  It is the case that the judge at paragraph  13  referred  to
    the Appellant's interview where he had mentioned his mother owning  the
    printing press.  That answer given by the Appellant stood in  isolation
    to the rest of the Appellant's evidence.  The judge had made an adverse
    credibility finding on the inconsistency of that answer and said it was
    significant.  The judge did not refer  to  the  subsequent  solicitor's
    letter in which it was claimed  the  Appellant  asserted  that  was  an
    interpreter error.  Given the judge did not refer to  that  explanation
    there was no consideration whether that was a credible  explanation  or
    not.

 9. If that adverse credibility finding stood in isolation then it would be
    material.  However  that  finding  did  not  stand  alone.   The  judge
    throughout, had operated on the  basis  that  it  was  the  Appellant's
    father according to the Appellant who owned and operated  the  printing
    press consistent with the Appellant's claim.  Within the parameters  of
    the Appellant's evidence the judge had made  ten  separate  credibility
    findings.  There was  a  sufficiency  of  reasoning  to  support  those
    adverse credibility findings and a logic and pattern to the  case.   At
    paragraph 14 the judge  had  referred  to  the  Appellant's  nonchalant
    manner in terms of the content and manner in  which  he  gave  evidence
    regarding the possible fate of his mother and  sister  that  led  to  a
    further adverse credibility finding.  Ms Radford criticised  the  judge
    for relying upon demeanour and referred to the familiar cases that warn
    against findings based on demeanour.

10. Judges in the First-tier Tribunal have a significant  advantage  within
    the appellate system in that they get to see and  hear  witnesses  give
    evidence.  It is common ground and knowledge that demeanour is a  risky
    factor upon which to base credibility for  or  against  and  is  rarely
    deployed.  In this case it was the manner  of  the  Appellant's  verbal
    evidence that clearly surprised the judge to the extent that a  finding
    was made.  She had the advantage of seeing and  hearing  the  Appellant
    and the content of his evidence and the feature of that particular part
    of his evidence.  She was entitled to make the  observations  that  she
    did and to make that one of the adverse credibility findings that  were
    made.

11. In summary the judge had given an adequacy of reasons  for  making  the
    various adverse credibility findings that were made and were based upon
    the Appellant's own account of events.  Save and  except  the  isolated
    reference to the mother owning the printing press at question 63 of the
    interview record that account was based on the Appellant's father being
    responsible for the press and perhaps  more  significantly  responsible
    for the printing of the leaflets and the risk principally being against
    the father who had fled to Iraq.  Whilst the judge made an error in not
    noting the Appellant's self-correction of his answer  in  interview  as
    recorded within the solicitors letter  and  perhaps  examining  whether
    that explanation was credible or not that  particular  feature  of  the
    case did not stand alone in the judge's examination  of  the  evidence.
    Accordingly whilst an error was made it was not a material  error  when
    one considers the full examination of the Appellant's case by the judge
    and the adequacy  of  reasoning  given  in  the  findings  made.   That
    specific matter  referred  to  would  not  have  affected  the  judge's
    decision in this case and it was a decision clearly open to her on  the
    evidence presented and the findings that were made.

Notice of Decision

12. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
