
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05297/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 December 2019                           |On 17 January 2020            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     OA
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT




                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, instructed by Fisher Stone
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant was born in 1975 and is a female citizen of Nigeria.  She
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 15 May 2019 refusing her application  for  international
    protection. The First-tier Tribunal, in a decision  promulgated  on  19
    August 2019, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge found that the appellant has  a  well-founded  fear  of  ill-
    treatment at the hands of her first husband's family in her  home  area
    of Nigeria. However, the judge found that  the  appellant  could  avail
    herself of  the  option  of  internal  flight.   The  judge's  findings
    regarding the threat to the appellant in her home area of Nigeria  have
    not been challenged by the Secretary of State.

 3. Granting permission, Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  stated  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge's brief reasoning at [48-51] is  inadequate  to
    sustain the finding on internal relocation. I agree. Having carried out
    an exhaustive analysis of the appellant's claim to  fear  ill-treatment
    in her home area, the judge disposes of the matter of  internal  flight
    in three brief paragraphs. The first  paragraph  comprises  mainly  the
    judge's rejection of the  appellant's  claim  that  she  had  seen  her
    brother-in-law in uniform (and therefore in a position of authority) at
    Lagos Airport. It  sets  out  also  the  judge's  acceptance  that  the
    appellant's first husband and his  family  do  have  influence  in  the
    region of Ogen State, Lagos and Abuja. It appears  the  judge  believes
    that the appellant cannot return  safely  to  those  areas  of  Nigeria
    although she does not say so in terms. This begs the question as to the
    relevance of the judge's rejection of the appellant's claim  about  the
    brother-in-law given that she had already found that the  appellant  is
    in danger in Lagos on account of the first husband's influence in  that
    city. Moreover, it is not clear why the judge's finding  regarding  the
    brother-in-law should lead her to 'prefer the respondent's position' as
    set out in the refusal letter; that position is based on the fact  that
    Nigeria is a large country with a  population  of  173.6  million.  The
    judge did not seek to identify to which  particular  areas  of  Nigeria
    beyond the influence of the brother-in-law it would  be  safe  for  the
    appellant relocate. The last sentence of [50] brings no clarity to  the
    reasoning: 'her claimed risk from her  first  husband's  family,  given
    that I have not accepted [the brother-in-law] works at Lagos airport  I
    attach weight to the respondent's reasons for internal relocation.'

 4. The judge's rejection part of the  appellant's  account  concerning  an
    area of Nigeria where the judge has found the appellant is at risk does
    not take the argument very far  forward.  The  remaining  reasoning  as
    regards  the  internal  flight   alternative   concerns   the   judge's
    observation that the appellant  is  'an  educated  lady  who  was  held
    teaching posts in Nigeria and has a network of  people  have  supported
    financially in the United Kingdom'. That statement is  something  of  a
    non sequitur; the judge has not examined how  continuing  support  from
    United Kingdom will enable the appellant to re-establish itself  in  an
    unidentified region of Nigeria where  she  will  be  a  stranger  whose
    employment prospects, notwithstanding her teaching experience,  may  be
    uncertain. In addition, the judge has not factored into her  assessment
    of internal flight the fact that the appellant will have with her three
    children aged 14, 12 and 5 years respectively.

 5. In the light of what I say above, I find that the judge's  analysis  on
    the internal flight alternative is obscure and  insufficient.  This  is
    unfortunate given the judge's thorough and  detailed  analysis  of  the
    other aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim.  I  accept  also  counsel's
    submission on the appellant's behalf that the judge has failed properly
    to engage  with  background  material  relating  to  Nigeria  which  is
    extensively referenced  in  the  skeleton  argument  submitted  to  the
    Tribunal. In the circumstances, I set aside the decision. The  findings
    as to the risk facing the appellant and her children in her  home  area
    of Nigeria are preserved. The only issue remaining to be determined  is
    that concerning internal flight. Both parties may submit fresh evidence
    provided they file and serve such evidence at least 10  days  prior  to
    the next hearing. In the light of the fact-finding as regards  internal
    flight which needs to be carried out, that hearing will take  place  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.





    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal set aside. Findings  concerning
    the risk to the appellant and  her  children  in  her  home  region  of
    Nigeria are preserved. The findings in respect of internal  flight  are
    set aside. The only issue  requiring  determination  concerns  internal
    flight within  Nigeria.  The  appeal  is  returned  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision. The attention of the
    parties is drawn to the directions set out in paragraph 4 above.






Signed                              Date 31 December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
