

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/05024/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                           |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13th September 2017                   |   On 18th October 2017             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  mr s a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr H Pratt, Counsel, WTB Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  5th  April  1989.   The
    Appellant was encountered at a truck stop in  Kent  on  17th  September
    2016 along with other irregular migrants.  He  claimed  asylum  on  the
    same day.  The Appellant's application was based upon a fear that if he
    returned to Iraq he would face persecution from the group  referred  to
    as Islamic State  (IS)  or  Daesh.   The  Appellant's  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by a Notice  of  Refusal  dated  17th
    March 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Shergill sitting at Manchester on 8th November 2016.   In
    a  decision  and  reasons  promulgated  on  17th  November   2016   the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on protection  grounds  and  on  human
    rights grounds.  He was however granted  anonymity  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  No application is made to  vary  that  order  and  the
    anonymity direction is maintained.

 3. On 1st December 2016 the Appellant lodged  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  Those short grounds  contended  that  the  Immigration
    Judge's sole reason for dismissing the appeal was based around choosing
    not to apply a valid country guidance and it was submitted that this is
    an error of law and given that it affects the entire  decision  it  was
    submitted that the decision should be set aside.

 4. On 9th January 2017 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Easterman  refused
    permission to appeal.  Judge Easterman concluded that whilst the First-
    tier Tribunal had found it likely to be unduly harsh for the  applicant
    to have to remain in Baghdad in his view it  was  open  to  the  judge,
    taking into account the  country  guidance  to  which  he  referred  at
    paragraph 15, to  find  the  applicant  could  successfully  internally
    relocate without undue hardship to the IKR and that  in  his  view  the
    decision disclosed no arguable error of law.

 5. On 26th January 2017 extended and renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged
    to the Upper Tribunal.  Those grounds noted that the Immigration  Judge
    accepted that the Appellant was  from  a  contested  area  of  Iraq  as
    considered in the country guidance case of AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) and so could not be expected to  return  there.
    It was noted  that  the  Immigration  Judge  had  found  that  internal
    relocation for the Appellant to Baghdad would be unduly harsh but  that
    the judge had noted that the country  guidance  case  law  stated  that
    returnees to Iraq from outside the IKR would be returned to Baghdad and
    decided that this would not apply in  the  Appellant's  case.   It  was
    submitted that this was a clear legal error in  light  of  the  country
    guidance in AA which at head note 5 states:

         "Return of former residents to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)  will
         be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will be to Baghdad ...".

 6.  It  was  submitted  that  the  Immigration  Judge's  sole  reason  for
    dismissing the appeal was based around choosing not to  apply  a  valid
    piece of country guidance and that this constitutes  an  error  of  law
    given that it affects the entire decision.

 7. Thereinafter at paragraph 7 the Grounds of Appeal  address  the  reason
    for refusing permission by Judge Easterman  by  submitting  that  those
    reasons did not deal at all with the point  that  the  judge  at  first
    decision indicated that the Appellant could be returned directly to the
    Iraqi Kurdish Region which is in direct contradiction  of  the  country
    guidance case by which the Immigration Judge should have been guided.

 8. On 27th February 2015 Upper Tribunal McWilliam  granted  permission  to
    appeal in a succinct set of reasons stating that it was  arguable  that
    the judge inadequately reasoned the decision that the  Appellant  could
    relocate to the IKR.

 9. It was on that basis that the  appeal  originally  came  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Secretary of State made
    a concession in that it was relevant to consider the Home Office policy
    and how someone travelling from Baghdad would make their  way  back  to
    the IKR.  Both legal representatives pointed out to me  that  this  was
    constantly changing in that the military activity along the whole  line
    of the route and the objective evidence that was made available  showed
    that the safety of the preferred route can change rapidly.

10. I found that there was a material error of law in the decision  of  the
    First-tier Judge in that all he appeared to have done was to  seemingly
    rewrite country guidance and suggest an alternative route by which  the
    Appellant could return to Erbil and  Sulaymaniyah.   I  found  that  to
    adopt such an approach without further  explanation  and  expansion  of
    reason constituted a material error of law.  I gave directions for  the
    further rehearing of this matter noting that the findings of fact  were
    to stand but that the material error  of  law  solely  related  to  the
    judge's approach to the country guidance authority of  AA  and  to  the
    current Home Office policy and as to the ability for the  Appellant  to
    be returned to the IKR.

11. It was on that basis that the appeal  returns  before  me  for  further
    consideration.  It is, as  I  directed,  to  be  addressed  by  way  of
    submission only.  Continuity is maintained by the legal representatives
    who appeared before me on the error of law hearing remained  the  same,
    namely Mr Pratt of Counsel for the  Appellant  and  Mr  Bates  for  the
    Secretary of State.  In accordance with my  directions  I  am  provided
    with a further bundle of documents from the Appellant's representatives
    including a skeleton argument.  I have given due consideration  to  all
    of these documents.  There are no further  documents  provided  by  the
    Secretary of State.

Submission/Discussion

12. Mr Pratt reminds me that the  sole  issue  extant  in  this  matter  is
    whether or not it is possible for the Appellant to travel from  Baghdad
    to the IKR.  He reminds me that the Appellant is ethnically Kurdish and
    fears discrimination and ill-treatment in central Iraq on  the  grounds
    of his being a member of an ethnic minority.  He points  out  that  the
    Appellant holds no Iraqi passport and no Iraqi  national  ID  card  and
    that he would therefore be unable to access benefits  and  services  in
    Baghdad as set out in the headnote to AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]
    UKUT 00544 (IAC).  He reminds me that the Appellant is a  Sunni  Muslim
    and that country information shows ongoing and severe  violence  within
    Baghdad including, but not  limited  to,  bombings  which  are  causing
    hundreds of casualties each month.  He  further  points  out  that  the
    country information reflects that violent abuses against Sunni  Muslims
    are carried out by Shia militias.

13. He points out that for the Appellant to return to the IKR it  would  be
    necessary for him to pass through areas known as the Baghdad Belts  and
    that the country information indicates that they are still sufficiently
    dangerous to engage Article 15(c).  He submits that  any  journey  will
    involve transit through these areas, that it would not be possible  for
    him to travel either by land or by air because he does not possess a ID
    card and that in order for him to  obtain  such  a  card  it  would  be
    necessary for him to go to Kirkuk in the IKR and apply for one.

14. He reminds me that it is not possible for the Appellant to ask a  proxy
    to obtain a card and therefore it is impossible for him to  access  the
    necessary documents.  The logistic outcome is, he consequently submits,
    that it is impossible for the Appellant  to  travel.   The  only  place
    therefore he submits he would be able to go  to  is  Baghdad  which  he
    submits is unsafe for him and consequently his appeal must succeed.

15. Mr Bates responds by relying on the Notice of Refusal.  He states I  am
    not being invited to depart from country guidance.  He refers me to the
    extract from the country policy and information  note  for  Iraq  dated
    June 2017, paragraph 3.1.2 which sets out in general the areas where at
    that time the Secretary of State considered return was possible to.  He
    does not ask me to depart from country guidance and  acknowledges  that
    the position does constantly change.  He  accepts  that  there  are  no
    forced returns at present to Baghdad but submits if he were returned it
    would be possible for the Appellant to board an  internal  flight.   He
    states the position is unclear as to whether the Appellant would need a
    CSID in order to facilitate onward transit.  He further considers  that
    he would have family support and that  there  is  nothing  unreasonable
    about asking the Appellant to transit to  Sulaymaniyah  and  that  that
    would avoid the  onerous  overland  route.   He  reminds  me  that  the
    resettlement packages on offer include aid for onward travel  and  that
    he considers that that would be sufficient in this  instance  and  that
    the Appellant would be able to find work and  re-establish  himself  in
    IKR.

16. He submits that having arrived in the IKR it would be  highly  unlikely
    that the Appellant would be asked to leave as he has family  there  and
    he has previously worked for the Kurdish region  security  forces.   He
    submits there is no reason why the Appellant could not get documents to
    live in the IKR and he asked  me  to  find  that  realistically  it  is
    practical and possible for him to travel there.

17. In brief final submission Mr Pratt points out  that  it  would  not  be
    possible for the Appellant to travel without documents although he does
    acknowledge that travelling by air would be safer than by travelling on
    land.

Findings

18. The Home Office policy document states that in  general  a  Kurd  or  a
    person who originates from the IKR can relocate to or  within  the  IKR
    and that it is for decision makers to assess each case by  its  merits.
    It has been emphasised to me  that  the  issue  turns  on  whether  the
    Appellant can actually reach the IKR.  Part of the problem that judge's
    experience at the present time in this jurisprudence is the  continuing
    variation of the safety of accessing routes.  The position  however  is
    relatively clear.  Technically  the  Appellant  could  be  returned  to
    Baghdad.  There are flights to Baghdad and there is a package available
    for onward transition to other areas.

19. I accept that the objective evidence shows that there  is  considerable
    violence likely to be perpetrated within the Baghdad Belts and that  it
    would not be practical at the present time for the Appellant to try and
    make his journey to the  IKR  by  road.   However,  I  agree  with  the
    submissions made by Mr Bates that as a matter of principle there is  no
    reason why the Appellant could not travel by plane to Sulaymaniyah  and
    that when he arrives there, bearing in mind his family  connection  and
    his previous employment connection, that  he  would  be  able  to  live
    there.

20. I note the contentions made in his skeleton argument by Mr  Pratt  that
    the Appellant speaks only limited Arabic and that he has no  family  or
    other means of support or sponsorship within the Baghdad area or indeed
    any part of southern Iraq.  It would seem that the suggestion made that
    the Appellant is financially destitute is not sustainable.

21. I consequently reach the conclusion that it has not been  shown  to  me
    that it is not reasonable, nor  practical,  for  the  Appellant  to  be
    returned to the IKR by way of air  transport  from  Baghdad  onward  to
    Sulaymaniyah and that having arrived there that he would not  be  in  a
    position to sustain himself through family and employment.  In fact the
    evidence provided shows just the contrary in the event that he  finally
    gets there.  In such circumstances the Appellant's appeal fails  and  I
    uphold the position as formally found by the Secretary of State in  his
    Notice of Refusal.  There is however one factor to bear in mind in  all
    this in that I am advised by Mr Bates that  at  present  there  are  no
    forced returns to Iraq and consequently the likelihood of the Secretary
    of State enforcing the decision is not in the present climate likely to
    happen.  That however is a practical factor  and  not  a  consideration
    that I reach as a matter of law as to whether or  not  the  Appellant's
    appeal fails.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal  is  dismissed  and  the  original  decision  of  the
Secretary of State to refuse the Appellant's application for  protection  is
upheld.

The Appellant was previously granted anonymity  in  these  proceedings.   No
application is made to vary that decision and that decision  is  maintained.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date 17 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed                              Date 17 October 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
