








Upper Tribunal
          (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      Appeal Number: PA/05157/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th January 2019                     |On 4th February 2019          |
|                                        |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between

              MR THUSARA CHAMINDA AMUGODA AMUGODA KANKANAMALAGE
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Jaffer of Counsel instructed by Liyon Legal Ltd

For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Goodrich promulgated on the 12th July 2018  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's claims to international protection
    and claims based on Article 8 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Chapman on 26 November  2018.  Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

Grounds of appeal

 4. The appellant had submitted documentation allegedly from the Magistrate
    Court at Kegalle in Sri Lanka supported by letters from a  lawyer  that
    had collected the documentation from  the  court.  The  respondent  had
    undertaken no checks to authenticate or establish  the  reliability  of
    the documentation. In accordance with the case of PJ v SSHD  2014  EWCA
    Civ 1011, given  the  failure  on  the  part  of  the  Home  Office  to
    authenticate the documentation the judge's approach to the evidence  in
    respect of the documentation did not follow the guidance given  in  the
    case law. As reliance could be placed upon the documentation and as  an
    arrest warrant had therefore been issued  against  the  appellant,  the
    appellant fell to be considered in accordance with the country guidance
    case of GJ 2013 UKUT 00319 as a person that  would  on  return  to  Sri
    Lanka be arrested and at risk of mistreatment.

 5. The 2nd ground of appeal asserts that the judge has made findings which
    are contrary to the country guidance case and objective  evidence.  The
    judge had found that the appellant, a Tamil, had  never  supported  the
    Tamil cause and had no involvement in diaspora activity in the  UK.  It
    is  suggested  that  the  country  guidance  and  background   evidence
    established that the authorities in Sri Lanka targeted  people  of  all
    backgrounds who they considered to be supporters or sympathisers of the
    LTTE. In that respect it reliance is placed upon the  Court  of  Appeal
    decision in GJ Sri Lanka wherein  references  made  to  the  government
    taking action against those  that  they  perceive  as  threats  to  the
    integrity of the Sri Lankan unitary state.  Diaspora  activity  whether
    real or perceived as the principal basis for the Sri Lankan  government
    assessing whether an individual is of interest and therefore at risk.

 6. The 3rd ground alleges that the judge has placed too much weight in the
    discrepancies between the appellant screening  interview  and  his  SEF
    statement. The judge has noted discrepancies but it is alleged that the
    judge has failed to consider the explanation given by the appellant.

 7. The  4th  ground  alleges  that  the  judge  has  failed  to  give  the
    appellant's case anxious scrutiny

 8. the 5th ground alleges that the judge has made findings based upon  the
    judges own assumptions

 9. Finally the 6th ground it is alleged that the judge has placed too much
    weight on the appellants delaying claiming asylum.

    Consideration

10. Judge a very detailed  and  careful  assessment  of  the  evidence  has
    pointed out clear discrepancies and  inconsistencies  in  the  accounts
    given by the appellant in his SEF interview, his substantive interview,
    his statement and his evidence otherwise. The  judge  was  entitled  to
    take such discrepancies into account.

11. In considering the evidence as a whole the judge has clearly considered
    the criteria set out in the case of PJ as is evident from paragraph  56
    of the decision in this case.

12. In that respect I would draw attention to the fact that in paragraph 29
    of the judgement of decision of Lord Justice Fulford, which states:-

    ... There is no basis in.... Jurisprudence of the general approach that
    Mr Martin submitted ought to be adopted whenever local  lawyers  obtain
    relevant documents from a domestic court, and thereafter transmit  them
    directly to lawyers in the UK. The  involvement  of  lawyers  does  not
    create a rebuttable presumption that documents  they  produce  in  this
    situation are reliable.

13. The case law does go on to indicate that there may be circumstances  in
    which it would be appropriate for the  respondent  to  make  enquiries.
    However it has to be noted in the present circumstances that  there  is
    no suggestion of instruction and transmission lawyer to lawyer  in  the
    present case. The documents are obtained and created at the  behest  of
    the appellant's family and are given to the appellant's  family  before
    being transmitted to the lawyers in the United Kingdom.

14. With regard to whether the Secretary  of  State  had  a  duty  to  make
    enquiries, it was a matter for the court to determine (as set  down  in
    paragraph 32 PJ)  whether  or  not  there  was  an  obligation  on  the
    Secretary of State to make enquiries to establish the  authenticity  of
    the documents. In the case of PJ as is evident from paragraph 41  where
    an individual had in the past been arrested in connection with  a  bomb
    incident, 3 members of his family had close ties with the LTTE  and  he
    was wanted for questioning with regard to other activities,  there  was
    in those circumstances sufficient  evidence  to  show  that  the  court
    document should have been verified by the respondent.

15. The same cannot be said in  the  present  case.  Consideration  of  the
    appellant's case  has  to  be  put  in  the  context  of  his  evidence
    otherwise. The judge has carefully considered  not  only  the  criteria
    within PJ but also the country guidance case  and  has  considered  the
    evidence of the appellant in that context.

16. Having analysed the account  given  by  the  appellant  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that the crucial issue was whether or not the  Sri
    Lankan authorities would  consider  or  perceive  the  appellant  is  a
    present risk to the unitary state of Sri Lanka. The judge has  properly
    considered the  facts  and  given  valid  reasons  for  coming  to  the
    conclusion that the appellant had not been  involved  in  any  diaspora
    activity and would not be perceived as an individual  who  had  brought
    into issue or assisted in challenging the unitary state of Sri Lanka as
    identified in the country guidance case. That the  appellant  otherwise
    would not be otherwise perceived as an individual of  interest  to  the
    Sri Lankan authorities.

17. Those were findings of fact that the judge was entitled to make on  the
    basis of the evidence that was before him.

18. With regard to the issue of weight which is the basis of at least 2  of
    the grounds of appeal matter of weight is entirely for a matter for the
    judge as is evident from the case of FK  (Kenya)  2010  EWCA  Civ  1302
    paragraph 23 of the judgment of Lord justice Maurice Kay :-

    23.......... It follows that the appeal on this ground is in  effect  a
    perversity challenge, and the submission that undue reliance was  being
    placed by the Immigration Judge on the appellant's convictions  amounts
    to no more than a submission  that  the  Immigration  Judge  gave  that
    factor too much weight. It is well established that a  submission  that
    too much or too little weight has been given  to  a  particular  factor
    does not raise an arguable point of law. There is no suggestion,  apart
    from the submission that the Immigration Judge gave undue weight to the
    appellant's criminal record, that she failed to take into  account  any
    other relevant factor or that she  took  into  account  any  irrelevant
    factor. In these circumstances it seems to me there is no proper  basis
    on  which  this  perversity  challenge  to  the   Immigration   Judge's
    conclusions can succeed.

19. The judge has carefully considered the evidence presented  to  him  and
    given valid reasons for  finding  material  parts  of  the  appellant's
    evidence not credible. It  is  in  that  context  that  the  judge  has
    assessed the documentation submitted and has made  findings  that  were
    open to him having considered the guidance given in the case law.   The
    judge has properly considered all the evidence and has fully  justified
    the conclusions reached. There is no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

20. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 18 January 2019



