
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05103/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22 March 2019                   |On 1 April 2019                    |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                    A A R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Iqbal, instructed by Westbrook Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    To preserve the anonymity direction made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,
I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008, precluding publication of  any  information  regarding
the proceedings which would be likely to  lead  members  of  the  public  to
identify the appellant.

2.    This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Onoufriou promulgated on 14  January  2019,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background

3.    The Appellant was born  on  17  August  1984  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh.

4.    On 28 March 2018  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

5.     The  Appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   First-tier
Tribunal Judge Onoufrio ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the
Respondent's decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 8 February  2019
Judge Osborne gave permission to appeal stating inter alia

    "2.    The grounds assert that the Judge wrongly refused to adjourn the
    hearing due to a clash in representation; at [27-28] the Judge referred
    to the lack of original medical evidence which the appellant said would
    be filed; that was another good reason for an adjournment;  the  letter
    from the lawyer in Bangladesh [30] was also on its way from Bangladesh;
    in [33] the Judge found the  documents  not  genuine  but  provided  no
    reason for that finding.

    3.     In an otherwise careful decision it is nonetheless arguable that
    fairness was not  achieved  in  this  appeal  by  the  refusal  of  the
    adjournment. Much if not all the responsibility for the double  booking
    on the day  of  the  hearing  of  the  appellant's  solicitor  was  the
    responsibility of the solicitor and it is arguable that  the  appellant
    should not suffer prejudice in those circumstances.

    4.     This arguable error of  law  having  been  identified,  all  the
    grounds are arguable."

The Hearing

6.    For the appellant, Mr Iqbal moved the grounds of appeal.  He  told  me
that the Judge made two errors. The  first  was  that  he  should  not  have
refused the  application  to  adjourn  the  hearing.  The  second  error  is
inadequate reasons for rejecting the documentary evidence. Mr Iqbal took  me
from [9] to  [33]  of  the  decision  and  told  me  that  the  Judge  makes
inconsistent findings about the documentary evidence. He  told  me  that  at
[13(4)] of the  decision  the  Judge  finds  that  all  of  the  documentary
evidence required to enable him to make the decision is  available,  but  he
then goes on to make unwarranted criticisms of the  documents.  Counsel  for
the appellant told me that the Judge failed to follow the guidance given  in
Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 00439

7.    For the respondent, Ms Everett told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law. She told me that the Judge carefully  considers  each
strand of evidence & then followed the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed  when
dealing with documentary evidence. She told  me  that  the  Judge  sets  out
carefully  reasoned  findings  of  fact,  and  reminded  me  that  when  the
application to adjourn was refused, the appellant walked out of the  hearing
and refused to offer any evidence. She reminded  me  that  the  Judge  could
only make findings of fact on  the  basis  of  the  evidence  available.  Ms
Everett told me that the Judge gave adequate reasons  for  considering,  and
then refusing, the application to adjourn.  She  urged  me  to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand

Analysis

8.    Between [8] and  [14]  of  the  decision  the  Judge  deals  with  the
adjournment request made on the date of the hearing  before  the  First-tier
Tribunal. The case file tells me that an application to adjourn the  hearing
was made by the appellant (before the hearing date)  on  14  December  2018.
That application was refused on the same day and the refusal  was  intimated
to the appellant. On 18 December 2018 (the date of  hearing)  the  appellant
attended the First-tier Tribunal and  renewed  his  application  to  adjourn
because his solicitor was not available to conduct the hearing.

9.    At [8] of the decision the  Judge  sets  out  the  background  to  the
appellant's  application  to  adjourn.  At  [9]  the  Judge  rehearses   the
appellant's reasons for seeking an adjournment and [10]  the  Judge  details
the respondent's opposition to the  application  to  adjourn.  At  [12]  the
Judge reminds himself of rule 2 of the procedure  rules,  and  at  [13],  in
four  sub-paragraphs,  the  Judge  gives  his  reasons  for   refusing   the
application  to  adjourn.  At  [13(4)]  the  Judge  says  that  he  has  the
appellant's bundle which includes the appellant's witness  statement  and  a
witness statement from the appellant's father. At [13(3)] the Judge  records
the Home Office presenting officer's position that copy documents  would  be
treated as original.

10.   In Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418  (IAC)  it  was
held that  if a Tribunal refuses to accede to an adjournment  request,  such
decision could, in principle, be  erroneous  in  law  in  several  respects:
these include a failure to take into account  all  material  considerations;
permitting  immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;   denying   the   party
concerned a fair hearing; failing to apply  the  correct  test;  and  acting
irrationally.  In practice, in most cases the question will be  whether  the
refusal deprived the affected party of his right to a fair  hearing.   Where
an adjournment refusal is challenged on fairness grounds,  it  is  important
to recognise that the question for the Upper Tribunal  is  not  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal acted reasonably.  Rather, the test  to  be  applied  is
that of fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected  party's  right
to a fair hearing?

11.   The Judge refused the  application  to  adjourn.  The  appellant  then
decided not to  participate  in  the  hearing,  declining  to  provide  oral
evidence.  Between  [19]  and  [22]  the  Judge  considers  the   background
materials. Between [23] and [35] the Judge  makes  findings  of  fact  drawn
from the documentary evidence placed before him.

12.   The question for me is whether or not the appellant was deprived of  a
fair hearing. The Judge writes a detailed and carefully  reasoned  decision.
After refusing the application to adjourn the Judge explained the  procedure
to the appellant. The appellant chose not to  participate  in  the  hearing.
The Judge clearly  adopted  an  inquisitorial  role  when  considering  each
strand of evidence. Even though the appellant did  not  participate  in  the
hearing the Judge manifestly took account of what the appellant says in  his
witness statement, so that the hearing proceeded as if  the  appellant  gave
evidence in chief without allowing his  evidence  to  be  tested  by  cross-
examination.

13.   The Judge clearly fulfilled an enabling role.  When  the  decision  is
read carefully there is no trace of any unfairness to the appellant. As  the
appellant was not deprived of a fair hearing there is no  error  of  law  in
refusing the application to adjourn. The Judge  sets  out  adequate  reasons
for refusing the application to adjourn

14.   The documentary evidence including  a  copy  FIR  and  a  copy  arrest
warrant. The Judge records the Home Office presenting  officer's  acceptance
that the documents would not be challenged solely because  they  are  copies
([13(3)] and [10(3)]).

15.   At [23] and  [28]  the  Judge  considers  a  copy  hospital  discharge
certificate. His principal  reason  for  placing  little  weight  upon  that
adminicle of evidence is  that  the  document  does  not  confirm  that  the
appellant was attacked by Awami League supporters. At [30] the Judge  refers
to an FIR and an arrest warrant. At [33] the Judge finds that the  documents
bearing to be the FIR and arrest warrant are  not  genuine  and  then  gives
good reasons  for  finding  that  the  copies  are  not  copies  of  genuine
documents.

16.   Tanveer Ahmed (Starred) 2002  UKIAT  00439  says  that  Judges  should
determine how much weight is to be given to each piece of  evidence  in  the
appeal in the normal way.  It is then for the Judge to assess each piece  of
evidence together to arrive at an overall  conclusion.   A  document  is  no
different to any other piece of evidence in this respect.   The  Judge  must
decide whether it is a weighty piece of evidence; whether  the  weight  that
can be attributed to the document is limited; or whether it  is  a  document
which merits no weight at all.

17.   Contrary to what is now plead  for  the  appellant,  the  Judge  gives
sustainable reasons for rejecting the  documentary  evidence.  He  does  not
reject the documentary evidence because only copies are placed  before  him.
He draws on other strands of evidence and finds  that  that  other  evidence
undermines the documents. There is nothing wrong with the logic employed  by
the Judge. Even though the appellant insists that  original  documents  were
in the post and would arrive the day after the Tribunal hearing, no  purpose
would be served by waiting for the documents because the Judge  treated  the
copies as if they were the originals.

18.   The Judge manifestly follows the  guidance  given  in  Tanveer  Ahmed.
Even though the appellant turned his back on the Tribunal hearing and  chose
not to participate, the Judge carefully considers  the  evidence  which  had
been prepared for the appellant, and carefully  considered  the  appellant's
case as set out in his witness statement. A fair  reading  of  the  decision
makes it clear that the Judge carefully considered each strand  of  evidence
before reaching well-reasoned conclusions.

19.   In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside)  [2013]  UKUT  85  (IAC)
the Tribunal held that (i) Although there is a legal duty to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

20.   A fair reading of the decision demonstrates  that  the  Judge  applied
the correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all
of the evidence. The Judge refused  the  application  to  adjourn,  but  the
appellant's evidence was fully considered  and  the  appellant  was  treated
fairly. There is nothing unfair in the procedure adopted nor in  the  manner
in which the evidence was  considered.  There  is  nothing  wrong  with  the
Judge's fact-finding exercise. The appellant might not like  the  conclusion
that the Judge arrived  at,  but  that  conclusion  is  the  result  of  the
correctly applied legal equation. The correct test in law has been  applied.
The decision does not contain a material error of law.

21.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION

22.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 14 January 2019, stands.

Signed      Date 28 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

