








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05878/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 12th June 2019                     |On 14th June 2019               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                             Mr Mahmoud Khanfour

                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, instructed by Lei Dat Baig Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr McVitie, Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge McAll promulgated on the 2nd January  2019  whereby  the
    judge dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  the  appellant's  claims   based   on   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances I do not consider it
    necessary to do so.

 3. Leave to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chalkley on 20th March 2019. Thus the case appeared before me  to
    determine whether or not there was a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Outline factual background

 4. The appellant was born on 27 September 1993 and claims to be a  citizen
    of Syria. The appellant has produced  a  birth  certificate  issued  in
    Jordan, which allegedly shows that the appellant was born in Jordan but
    is noted on the birth certificate  as  being  a  Syrian  national.  The
    respondent does not accept the appellant's nationality.

 5. The appellant has given evidence that his family fled  Syria  prior  to
    his birth and that the family lived in Jordan. The appellant has  lived
    all his life in Jordan, had worked for periods of time  in  Jordan  and
    ultimately suggests that because he was not  a  Jordanian  national  he
    began to suffer mistreatment in Jordan such that he fled the country.

 6. The majority of the appellant's  family,  apart  from  one  sister  who
    appears now to be living in the UK, all continue to live in Jordan.

 7. The respondent did not accept that the  appellant  was  a  national  of
    Syria. Equally the respondent did not accept  that  the  appellant  had
    been subjected to the mistreatment alleged in Jordan.

 8. The appellant had produced initially a series of documents, a Jordanian
    driving licence, a Syrian passport and a Jordanian ID card.  As  stated
    subsequently the appellant as  part  of  the  bundle  for  the  hearing
    produced a birth certificate allegedly from  Jordan,  which  identified
    him as a national of Syria. The hearing bundle was produced on the  3rd
    December 2018.

 9. The first three documents submitted by the appellant had been subjected
    to forensic examination. The 3 documents referred to were found  to  be
    unreliable and specific reasons were  given  for  their  unreliability.
    There were verification reports on each of the documents.

10. The respondent had made a decision refusing the appellant's  protection
    claim on 24 April  2018.  As  part  of  that  refusal  the  appellant's
    nationality  was  challenged.  The  appellant's  account  otherwise  of
    mistreatment was not accepted. The  respondent  having  considered  the
    evidence produced states in the reasons for  refusal  letter  that  the
    appellant's nationality is unknown.

11. The refusal letter contains the following:-

         "32      Although any appeal would be considered on  the  basis  of
         the risk of return to Syria, as this is the country  of  which  you
         claim to be a national, the Home Office will argue that you are not
         a national of that country so the appeal must fail.

         33 Notwithstanding that conclusion, if the tribunal considers  that
         you are in fact a national of Syria/Jordan the risk on  the  return
         to this country will then be considered."

12. The appellant appealed against the decision. As part of the grounds  of
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal the representatives,  who  have  been
    representing the appellant throughout, set out the following as part of
    the grounds of appeal:-

         "Protection decision

         1 ...

         Our client is a Syrian national  who  was  raised  in  Jordan.  Our
         client has fled Jordan,  and  cannot  return  to  either  Syria  or
         Jordan. He fears returning to Syria  due  to  violence  there.  Our
         client qualifies as a refugee  and  his  removal  from  the  United
         Kingdom  will  break  U.K.'s  obligations  due  under  the  refugee
         Convention."

13.  Central  to  a  consideration  of  the  appellant's  appeal  was   the
    credibility  of  the  appellant's  account.  It  was  clear  that   the
    respondent did not accept the appellant's claimed  nationality  or  the
    appellant's claim to  have  been  subjected  to  mistreatment.  It  had
    clearly been asserted that the appellant was of unknown nationality.

14. In that respect I would draw attention  to  the  Immigration  Act  1971
    Scheduled 2 paragraph 8 which provides inter-alia  that  an  individual
    can be returned to one of a number of places including the  place  from
    which he commenced his journey  to  the  United  Kingdom.  Clearly  the
    appellant's case was that he had started  his  journey  in  Jordan  and
    there was evidence to support that and  support  that  his  family  had
    lived in Jordan for a substantial period of years.

15. The appellant's appeal had been listed to  be  heard  on  a  number  of
    occasions. The appellant's representative at various  stages  requested
    adjournments on a number of occasions as is evident from paragraph 5 of
    Judge McAll's decision. The appeal  had  first  been  listed  for  full
    hearing on  5  June  2018  but  was  adjourned  whilst  an  expert  was
    instructed on behalf of  the  appellant  to  verify  the  documentation
    produced by the appellant. There was a further adjournment from 27 July
    2018 when again it was submitted  that  an  expert  report  was  to  be
    prepared on the documentation. The appeal  was  again  adjourned  to  3
    September but again no report was available and no reason was given for
    the report not being  available.  There  were  other  adjournments  and
    correspondence  between  the   Tribunal,   the   respondent   and   the
    representatives, seeking to establish whether the  case  was  ready  to
    proceed.

16. Ultimately the appeal was listed to be heard on 7 December 2018  before
    Judge McAll.

17. At the hearing on 7 December 2018 whilst checking whether  or  not  the
    appellant's nationality was still in dispute,  the  representative  for
    the respondent indicated that nationality was in dispute  and  that  as
    the appellant was of  unknown  nationality  it  would  be  possible  in
    accordance with the 1971 Act to return the appellant to Jordan. It  was
    not accepted that the appellant had been subjected to  mistreatment  in
    Jordan and he would not be at  risk  in  Jordan,  the  place  where  he
    commenced his journey.

    Consideration of the issues

18. One of the grounds of challenge with regard to  the  decision  is  that
    that submission by the respondent that the appellant could be  returned
    to Jordan was  not  an  issue  that  had  been  raised  before  by  the
    respondent  and  as  such  the  appellant's  representative  wanted  an
    adjournment to enable them to prepare the appellant's case  in  respect
    of return to Jordan.

19.  Judge  McAll  refused  the  adjournment  being  satisfied   that   the
    appellant's appeal could be justly and fairly dealt with.

20. The issue raised is that the respondent had raised a new issue and  the
    appellant and his representative had not had an opportunity of  dealing
    with that new issue.

21. In refusing the adjournment the judge set out why the issue  of  return
    to Jordan had always been a live issue. Judge  McAll  referred  to  the
    fact that during the course of the  substantive  asylum  interview  the
    appellant had been asked why he could not be returned  to  Jordan.  The
    appellant's representative had also produced evidence  with  regard  to
    Jordan. Whilst the focus had been on the circumstances  of  Syrians  in
    Jordan, the representative had clearly been aware that  the  conditions
    in Jordan were relevant to the appellant, especially as his family  was
    living there.

22. The prospect for individuals within Jordan as part  of  the  background
    evidence as part of the appellant's case was set out  in  paragraphs  9
    and 10 and issues had been raised as to the prospects of the  appellant
    in Jordan.

23. Judge McAll held that the issue of return to Jordan  had  clearly  been
    live throughout and was present in the documentation. The central  core
    of the appellant's case was that he was a Syrian national was  at  risk
    in Syria. The judge did consider  whether  or  not  the  appellant  had
    proved that he was a Syrian national and has given  valid  reasons  for
    finding that he is not a Syrian national.  The  judge  found  otherwise
    that the appellant's claims to have been mistreated in Jordan were  not
    credible. Those findings would be sufficient to dispose of the case.

24. Given the findings where the appellant was to be returned  to  was  not
    central to the appeal. However the judge has considered whether or  not
    the issue of return to Jordan had been raised as set out  in  paragraph
    10 of the decision.

25. It is clear given the legal provisions set out above; the fact that the
    nationality of the appellant was not accepted; that the  evidence  that
    the appellant had lived a major part of his life  in  Jordan;  and  had
    commenced his journey to the United Kingdom from Jordan, that return to
    Jordan was an issue in the case.

26. The appellant's representative has relied on the case of Nwaigwe [2014]
    UKUT 00418. I take account of the principles set in the case. The judge
    has taken account of all the materials circumstances and was  satisfied
    that the appellant would have a fair hearing. In the circumstances  the
    judge was entitled to refuse the adjournment. This was not a new  issue
    but was on the basis of the refusal letter an  issue  that  was  to  be
    considered in the appeal, especially as the appellant's nationality was
    not accepted.

27.  The  appellant's  representatives  have  raised  issues  as   to   the
    documentation produced. The birth certificate produced  in  respect  of
    the appellant, it was claimed that no issue had been taken with  regard
    to the birth certificate.  The  birth  certificate  referred  to  above
    whilst issued in Jordan has written on  it  that  the  appellant  is  a
    Syrian national.

28. The judge had considered that document along with the  other  documents
    produced by  the  appellant.  As  stated  the  appellant  had  had  the
    opportunity of having the documents examined by  his  own  expert.  The
    appeal had been adjourned on a number  of  occasions  waiting  for  the
    report from the appellant's expert.  Any  report  emanating  from  that
    expert had never been served upon the tribunal.

29. In paragraph 43 of the decision the judge had  specifically  considered
    the documentation and found that the appellant had certainly produced 3
    documents which for valid reasons could not be relied upon. Indeed  the
    findings by the expert indicated for example that the passport had been
    altered and was therefore unreliable. There were  other  features  with
    regard to the other 2 documents referred to which  rendered  them  also
    unreliable.

30. In considering the  documents  overall  the  judge  having  found  that
    unreliable documents had been produced found he could place no reliance
    upon any of the documentation. That was a finding of fact that  he  was
    entitled to make on the evidence that was before him.

31. Much though the appellant's representative seeks to argue that no issue
    was taken with  the  birth  certificate,  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    consider the birth certificate in line with  the  other  documentation.
    The judge has given valid reasons for finding that no reliance could be
    placed upon the documentation. That was a  finding  of  fact  that  the
    judge was entitled to make on the evidence that was before him.

32. In the circumstances the judge has given valid reasons for the findings
    of fact made. The judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant was
    not a Syrian national and thereafter to  conclude  that  the  appellant
    could be  returned  to  Jordan.  The  judge  has  fully  justified  the
    conclusions reached.

33. For the reasons set out there is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

34. I dismiss the appeal on all grounds.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 13th June 2019





Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                                   Date 13th June
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

