
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05999/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th September 2018                        |On 5th October 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  MISS BMT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Eritrea born on 15th February 1984.   The
    Appellant left Eritrea illegally in July 2012 travelling onward through
    Sudan, Kenya and Dubai prior to entering the  United  Kingdom  on  12th
    December 2016 whereupon she claimed asylum.  She arrived in the UK on a
    flight directly from Dubai.  The Appellant's application for asylum was
    based on a purported well-founded fear of persecution in Eritrea on the
    basis of her imputed political opinion.  That application  was  refused
    by the Secretary of State by Notice of Refusal  dated  8th  June  2017.
    The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Ransley sitting at Manchester on 21st July  2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 3rd  August  2017  the  Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 2. On 15th August  2017  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 25th October 2017 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Bird
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge Bird noted  that  it  was  alleged
    that the judge failed to apply the country  guidance  decision  in  MST
    (military service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016]  UKUT  443  when
    deciding whether the Appellant had left Eritrea illegally.  Judge  Bird
    considered that it was arguable that in reaching  her  conclusion  that
    the Appellant had left Eritrea illegally the judge had failed  to  take
    into account the list of those who can leave as mentioned in MST and MO
    (illegal exit - risk on return) CG [2011]  UKUT  00190  and  that  this
    amounted to an error of law.  Secondly it was argued that the judge had
    made an arguable error of law in her assessment of Article  3  and  the
    decision of the European Court of Human Rights  in  Paposhvili.   Judge
    Bird considered that it was arguable that in assessing the evidence  in
    relation to availability of medication the judge had failed to properly
    apply the guidance on this issue  in  Paposhvili  and  consequently  an
    arguable error of law had been made as a consequence.

 3. On 14th November 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds
    of Appeal pursuant to Rule 24.  The Rule 24 response indicated that the
    judge relied on the evidence of the Appellant  that  she  was  exempted
    from national service and would therefore not be viewed as  a  deserter
    or draft evader by the Eritrean authorities and this was a finding open
    to her and that  she  had  given  adequate  reasons.   Further  it  was
    submitted that Paposhvili conflicted with the  guidance  in  M  and  GS
    (India) and it was the Secretary of State's case that those  cases  are
    binding upon the Tribunal and that Paposhvili is not.

 4. On that basis the appeal came before me to  determine  whether  or  not
    there was a material error of law in the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  I found that there was  and  set  the  decision  aside
    solely on the ground


         "that the assumption by the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  that  the
         exemption from national service on grounds of maternity meant  that
         her departure would be regarded as lawful"


    constituted an error of law and that the question to be answered on the
    rehearing of this matter was whether in the light of  country  guidance
    to be found in MST and Others  (national  service  -  risk  categories)
    Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT  443  the  Appellant  met  the  requirements  to
    satisfy her claim for asylum.

 5. I listed the matter to be retained reserved to myself,  and  it  is  on
    that basis that the appeal comes back  before  me.   The  Appellant  is
    represented by Mr Brown of Counsel.  Mr  Brown  is  extremely  familiar
    with this matter.  He has appeared in this matter  throughout  and  has
    been the author of Grounds of Appeal.  In this instance  the  Secretary
    of State is represented by  her  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr
    Whitwell.

Country Guidance

 6. The law is to be found in the country guidance  authority  of  MST  and
    Others (national service - risk  categories)  Eritrea  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00443 (IAC).  That case is authority for a number of  propositions  all
    set out in the head note.  The relevant head  note  herein  however  is
    paragraph 10 which states:

         "Accordingly, a person  whose  asylum  claim  has  not  been  found
         credible, but who is able to satisfy a decision-maker (i)  that  he
         or she left illegally, and (ii) that he or she is of or approaching
         draft age, is likely to be perceived on return as a draft evader or
         deserter from national service and as a result face a real risk  of
         persecution or serious harm".

Preliminary Issue

 7. As a preliminary issue Mr  Brown  takes  me  to  two  letters  from  an
    organisation called Sahir House.  These two letters are both dated  6th
    September 2018.  One is from the Appellant's specialist asylum  support
    worker and the other is from the senior psychotherapist at Sahir  House
    which supports people who are living  with  HIV.   The  psychotherapist
    advises that she has been working with the Appellant since  June  2017.
    Those two letters are of only  limited  relevance  to  this  rehearing.
    However, what they do indicate is that  there  is  professional  advice
    that the Appellant is  a  vulnerable  person.   Their  content  is  not
    challenged by Mr Whitwell and  I  proceed  on  the  basis  that  it  is
    accepted that  the  Appellant  is  a  vulnerable  person.   She  is  in
    attendance.  She is not expected to give evidence  today.   Her  asylum
    support worker also attends with her.

Submissions/Discussion

 8. Mr Brown points out quite properly that the question extant before  the
    Tribunal is whether or not the Appellant  left  Eritrea  illegally  and
    being of draft age would she be considered a draft evader.  He  reminds
    me that this was a  finding  not  accepted  by  Judge  Ransley  in  her
    decision although it is accepted that the Appellant left in  2012.   He
    takes me to the Respondent's bundle and to the question  asked  in  the
    Appellant's asylum interview as to how she left Eritrea and as  to  the
    explanation given and submits that that evidence needs  to  be  weighed
    against and alongside paragraph 10 of the head note of MST referred  to
    above.

 9. He takes me to paragraph 308 of MST which sets out  the  categories  of
    eligibility for national service and exit visas and  those  people  who
    can lawfully exit Eritrea.  He reminds me  that  the  reason  that  the
    Appellant exited was due to her maternity and points out that it  would
    only be possible for the Appellant to bring herself within the relevant
    category as set out at paragraph 328 of MST if it can be shown that the
    Appellant left on the basis of her mental health.  He acknowledges that
    there is insufficient evidence  to  show  this  and  submits  that  the
    Appellant does not therefore  come  within  the  categories  who  could
    legally exit as set out within paragraph 328.

10. He reminds me that the Appellant has not returned after some six  years
    away from Eritrea and that had  she  been  given  permission  to  leave
    legally she would have been time-limited and therefore after six  years
    it is not unreasonable to assume that her exit was illegal and  she  is
    unable to explain  her  absence  under  a  category  which  would  have
    justified her leaving.

11. In brief response Mr Whitwell, who I acknowledge  comes  very  late  to
    this matter, relies on previous submissions that have been made and the
    findings in the Notice of Refusal.  He acknowledges that in  the  event
    that I am persuaded by Mr Brown's  argument  that  the  Appellant  will
    succeed.

Findings

12. I am satisfied  that  the  submissions  made  by  Mr  Brown  above  are
    sustainable.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not deal with all  this
    evidence.  This is an Appellant  who,  on  an  interpretation  of  MST,
    exited illegally and who would be perceived as  a  draft  evader.   Six
    years have passed since she left  Eritrea  and  she  would  not,  I  am
    satisfied, be able to explain her absence.  It is appropriate that  the
    Tribunal  on  rehearing  this  matter  considers   and   assesses   the
    Appellant's risk on return now.  I am satisfied that following  country
    guidance  she  would  be  at  risk  on  return  and  consequently   the
    Appellant's appeal succeeds on asylum grounds.

Notice of Decision

The Appellant's appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application has been made throughout the process to vary that  order  and  I
am satisfied that that order should remain in  place,  particularly  bearing
in mind the Appellant's vulnerability.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris           01 October 2018


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
