
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05372/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 March 2020                      |On 30 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     R G
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J. Dhanji, Counsel, instructed by OTS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Turkey.  His date of birth is 20 November
    1983.  For the reasons given in the error of law  decision  promulgated
    on 29 November 2019, the Appellant is anonymised.  There is  no  reason
    to interfere with that order.

 2. The Secretary of State made a deportation order against  the  Appellant
    on 22 January 2016 pursuant to Section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007
    because the Appellant is a foreign criminal.

The Appellant's Immigration History

 3. The Appellant came to the UK on 8 July 1988 at the age of 4 years and 8
    months.  He came to the UK with his mother and  siblings  in  order  to
    join his father who was at that time granted ILR.   The  Appellant  was
    granted LTR until May 1990.  This was subsequently extended to  a  date
    in 1993.  On 10 May 1996 the Appellant was granted ILR.  The  Appellant
    married a British citizen on 12 March 2014.  They have a  daughter,  B,
    who was born on 4 July 2014.  The Appellant's marriage came to  an  end
    in 2016.  Various applications were made by the Appellant,  culminating
    in the Respondent's decision on 10 April 2018 refusing  an  application
    on protection grounds and under  Article  8.   The  Appellant's  appeal
    against this decision on human rights grounds was dismissed.  The Upper
    Tribunal set aside that decision.

The Appellant's Criminality

 4. The Appellant has amassed  a  total  of  eighteen  convictions  for  33
    offences between 1997 and 7 September 2015.  These include two offences
    against the person, five offences of theft and related offences, eleven
    offences relating to police, courts and prisons, five drug offences and
    ten miscellaneous offences for  which  the  Appellant  received  fines,
    detention  and   training   orders,   community   orders   and   curfew
    requirements.   On  11  May  2015  the  Appellant  was   convicted   at
    Snaresbrook Crown Court causing serious injury  by  dangerous  driving.
    On 17 July 2015 he was sentenced to eighteen months' imprisonment.   He
    was disqualified from driving for a period of 33 months and ordered  to
    pay compensation and a victim surcharge.  This was the trigger  offence
    for deportation.  On 22 May 2015 the Appellant was sentenced  to  three
    months' imprisonment for breach of a non-molestation order.

 5. When sentencing the Appellant, the judge  at  Snaresbrook  Crown  Court
    said as follows:-

         "It's my duty now to sentence you  for  the  offence  of  dangerous
         driving causing serious injury, an offence which the jury who tried
         you found you guilty of ... danger  did  occur  because  this  lady
         crossed from the side of the road, across the middle  of  the  road
         and you, despite I  accept,  a  late  effort  to  avoid  collision,
         collided with her.   She  suffered  really  grievous  injuries  and
         indeed she continues to suffer since then.  In a statement that was
         made  on  13  January  2014,  she  described  the  horrendous   and
         lifechanging injuries of the left side of her body,  her  left  leg
         was broken in a number of places and an operation was necessary  to
         insert a metal retained.  Her pelvis was broken in three places and
         she suffered a collapsed left lung.  Her  left  shoulder  was  also
         broken."

The Error of Law Decision

 6. Following a hearing on 19 November 2019 the  Honourable  Lord  Matthews
    and Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam found that First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Cockrill made an error of law.  The decision of Judge Cockrill was  set
    aside for the following reasons:-

         "Error of Law

         21.  We cannot be satisfied that a proper reading of  the  decision
             discloses that the  judge  approached  the  question  of  very
             significant obstacles correctly.  We cannot exclude that  when
             he conducted an assessment of very significant  obstacles,  he
             did not take into account the Appellant's family life here and
             the public interest; neither matter is material.

         22.  We consider that there is substance in ground 2.  We find that
             the judge did not adequately engage with the  expert  evidence
             in this  case.   While  certain  conclusions  reached  by  the
             Respondent in the Reasons for Refusal Letter were drawn to our
             attention, there  was  evidence  before  the  judge  which  is
             arguably capable of undermining those conclusions.  Whilst the
             judge was entitled to  reject  the  expert  evidence;  it  was
             incumbent on him to  engage  with  it  and  to  give  reasoned
             findings.  It is not entirely clear from his decision what  he
             made of it beyond his  recognition  that  there  may  be  some
             discrimination shown to the Appellant.   However,  Dr  Bayir's
             evidence was more far- reaching than that  (particularly  when
             considered in the context of the medical  evidence).   We  are
             concerned that the judge did not  make  adequate  findings  in
             relation to the evidence of Dr Salter  about  the  Appellant's
             mental health and the consequences for him should he return to
             Turkey.  We are satisfied that this evidence was not  properly
             engaged with  when  assessing  specifically  very  significant
             obstacles and when assessing proportionality  generally  under
             Article 8.

         23.  Mr Melvin drew our attention to the case  of  UT  (Sri  Lanka)
             [2019] EWCA Civ 1095.  We are mindful  of  what  was  said  by
             Baroness Hale in  the  judgment  of  the  House  of  Lords  in
             Secretary of State for the Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007]
             UKHL 49 at paragraph 30 and we approach this appeal  with  the
             appropriate  degree  of  caution.   However,  the   inevitable
             conclusion on a proper reading of paras. 53 and  54,  is  that
             the judge applied the wrong test, took into account immaterial
             matters and did not engage with material evidence.  We  cannot
             say with certainty that had these  errors  not  been  made  it
             would have made no difference to the outcome in this case.

         24.  For the above reasons the decision of Judge  Cockrill  is  set
             aside."

 7. There was no further evidence produced by the Appellant.  The panel  on
    the last occasion stated that the matter would proceed on the basis  of
    oral submissions.

The Issues

 8. The Appellant relies on private life grounds.   His  case  is  that  he
    meets the requirements of paragraph  399A  of  the  Rules  mirrored  in
    s.117C (4) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   His
    case is that deportation breaches his rights under Article 8.   It  was
    accepted that he  did  not  have  family  life  with  his  ex-wife  and
    daughter.  It was accepted that the Appellant had  been  here  lawfully
    most of his life.  The FtT found that he was  socially  and  culturally
    integrated.  The issue is whether there are very significant  obstacles
    to integration.  If so his appeal succeeds under Article 8.  If not,  I
    will consider whether despite this,  deportation  nonetheless  breaches
    his rights under Article 8.



The Legislative Framework

 9. The deportation order was made on 22 January 2016 pursuant  to  Section
    32(5) of the UKBA 2007.  The Appellant is a foreign criminal as defined
    by Section 32(1) of the UKBA 2007.  Under Section 32(4) his deportation
    is conducive to the public good for the purposes of Section 3(5) (a) of
    the  Immigration  Act  1971.   The  Secretary  of  State  must  make  a
    deportation order in respect of a foreign criminal under Section  32(5)
    of UKBA 2007.

10. The relevant Immigration Rules are paragraphs A398 and 399A  which  are
    now encapsulated in primary legislation at Section  117C  of  the  2002
    Act.  The provisions are set out below  and  the  potentially  relevant
    parts for the purposes of this appeal are emphasised.

         "A398.   These rules apply where:

                (a)    a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that
                    his  deportation  would  be  contrary  to   the   United
                    Kingdom's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
                    Rights Convention.

                (b)    a foreign criminal applies for  a  deportation  order
                    made against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
                to the UK's obligations under Article 8 of the Human  Rights
                Convention, and

                (a)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    at least 4 years;

                (b)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because they have been convicted of an offence for which
                    they have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment  of
                    less than 4 years but at least 12 months; or

                (c)     the  deportation  of  the  person  from  the  UK  is
                    conducive to the public good and in the public  interest
                    because, in the view of the Secretary  of  State,  their
                    offending  has  caused  serious  harm  or  they  are   a
                    persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for
                    the law, the Secretary of State in assessing that  claim
                    will consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,
                    if it does not, the public interest in deportation  will
                    only be outweighed by other factors where there are very
                    compelling circumstances over and above those  described
                    in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399A.    This paragraph  applies  where  paragraph  398(b)  or  (c)
                applies if -

                (a)    the person has been lawfully resident in the  UK  for
                    most of his life; and

                (b)    he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK;
                    and

                (c)    there would be  very  significant  obstacles  to  his
                    integration into the country to which it is proposed  he
                    is deported.

         Section  117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations   in   cases
         involving foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.]

Case Law

11. In KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2008] UKSC 53 the Supreme Court  addressed  the
    construction  of  Section  117C  and  specifically  whether  the  Rules
    contained therein "allow any further room for balancing of the relative
    seriousness of the offence,  beyond  the  difference  between  the  two
    categories" (see paragraph 21).  In respect of the provision in Section
    117C(4) which is relevant in this appeal, the Supreme Court was clear:-

         "... Exception 1 seems to leave no room for further balancing.   It
         is precisely defined by reference to three factual  issues:  lawful
         residence in the UK for most  of  C's  life,  social  and  cultural
         integration  into  the  UK  and  'very  significant  obstacles'  to
         integration into the country  of  proposed  deportation.   None  of
         these turns on the seriousness of the offence ..."

12. It is  the  Respondent's  case  that  there  are  no  very  significant
    obstacles to integration.  In respect of this aspect of Section 117C(4)
    in the case of the Secretary of State for the Home Department v  Kamara
    [2016] EWCA Civ 813 the Court of Appeal said as follows:-

         "14. In my view, the concept of a foreign criminal's  'integration'
             into the country to which it is proposed that he be  deported,
             as set out in section 117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph  399A,  is  a
             broad one.  It is not confined to the mere ability to  find  a
             job or to sustain life while living in the other country.   It
             is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as  subject
             to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a court or
             tribunal simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament
             has chosen to use.  The idea  of  'integration'  calls  for  a
             broad evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to  whether  the
             individual  will  be  enough  of  an  insider  in   terms   of
             understanding how life in the society in that other country is
             carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to  have
             a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
             operate on a day-to-day basis in that society and to build  up
             within a reasonable time a variety of human  relationships  to
             give substance to the individual's private or family life."

13. The Court of Appeal considered very significant obstacles in  the  case
    of CI (Nigeria) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 2027 and in terms of the assumed
    knowledge of culture relating to the country of origin said as  follows
    at paragraph 86:-

         "86. An inference that an  immigrant  who  has  no  memory  of  his
             country  of  origin  (having  left  it  as  an  infant)   must
             nevertheless have acquired some knowledge of its  culture  and
             traditions through his upbringing might in  some  cases  be  a
             reasonable one to draw.  But on the evidence before the  Upper
             Tribunal there was no reasonable basis  for  drawing  such  an
             inference in this case.  The judge referred to the  fact  that
             CI's mother was abusive towards him but considered  that  that
             fact 'does not demonstrate that he lacked familiarity with his
             mother's cultural way of life.'  This appears wrongly to  have
             put the onus on CI to prove that  he  was  not  familiar  with
             Nigerian culture rather than requiring some factual basis  for
             finding that he was.  More importantly, it paid no  regard  to
             the evidence about the nature and extent of the delinquency of
             CI's mother as a parent.  It is not only the evidence  of  her
             abusive treatment of her children but also the evidence of her
             severe neglect of them that is relevant in this  context.   As
             Dr  Rachel  Thomas,  another  psychologist  who  gave   expert
             evidence, observed in her report, the information  about  CI's
             mother indicates that she was 'not  the  sort  of  responsible
             parent who will have spent the  time  to  teach  her  children
             about their cultural origins.'  There was, moreover,  positive
             evidence to which the Upper Tribunal judge did not refer  that
             CI and his siblings had indeed been brought up by their mother
             ignorant of  Nigeria  and  its  culture.   CI's  older  sister
             explained the matter graphically when she wrote:

                  'Nigeria is as foreign to us as China.  We don't  know  it
                  and we don't know anyone there.'

             The judge  gave  no  reasons  for  rejecting  this  and  other
             evidence to similar effect and I can see no reason to do so."

14. The Court of Appeal in Secretary of State v Olarewaju [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    557 reminded us at paragraph 26 that a "very  real  culture  shock"  on
    return does not constitute a very significant obstacle to  integration.



15. When assessing very compelling circumstances in the context of  Section
    117C(6) the Court of Appeal in the case of NA (Pakistan) v Secretary of
    State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ  662  Jackson  LJ  gave
    significant guidance.  This Appellant is what is described as a "medium
    offender".  The following paragraphs of NA are of assistance:-

         "29. In our view, the reasoning  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  JZ
             (Zambia) applies to those  provisions.   The  phrase  used  in
             section 117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and  which  we
             have held is to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean
             that a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation  is  altogether
             disentitled from seeking to rely on matters falling within the
             scope of the circumstances described in  Exceptions  1  and  2
             when seeking  to  contend  that  'there  are  very  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  As we have indicated above,  a  foreign  criminal  is
             entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would  need  to  be
             able to point to features of his case of a kind  mentioned  in
             Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399  or  399A  of  the  2014
             rules),  or  features  falling   outside   the   circumstances
             described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made
             his claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         32.  Similarly, in the case of a medium offender, if all  he  could
             advance in support of his Article 8 claim was  a  'near  miss'
             case in which he fell short of bringing himself within  either
             Exception 1 or Exception 2, it would not be  possible  to  say
             that  he  had  shown  that   there   were   'very   compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  He would need to have a far stronger case  than  that
             by reference to the interests protected by Article 8 to  bring
             himself within that  fall  back  protection.   But  again,  in
             principle there may be cases in which such an offender can say
             that features of his case of a kind described in Exceptions  1
             and 2 have such great force for Article 8 purposes  that  they
             do constitute  such  very  compelling  circumstances,  whether
             taken by themselves  or  in  conjunction  with  other  factors
             relevant to Article 8  but  not  falling  within  the  factors
             described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  The decision  maker,  be  it
             the Secretary of State or a tribunal, must  look  at  all  the
             matters  relied  upon  collectively,  in  order  to  determine
             whether they are sufficiently compelling to outweigh the  high
             public interest in deportation.

         33.   Although  there  is  no  'exceptionality'   requirement,   it
             inexorably follows from the statutory scheme that the cases in
             which circumstances are sufficiently  compelling  to  outweigh
             the high public interest in deportation  will  be  rare.   The
             commonplace incidents of family life, such as  ageing  parents
             in poor  health  or  the  natural  love  between  parents  and
             children, will not be sufficient.

         36.  In relation to a medium offender, first see whether  he  falls
             within Exception 1 or Exception  2.   If  he  does,  then  the
             Article 8 claim succeeds.  If he does not, then the next stage
             is to consider  whether  there  are  'sufficiently  compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2'.  If there are, then the Article 8 claim succeeds.   If
             there are not, then the Article 8 claim  fails.   As  was  the
             case under the 2012 rules  (as  explained  in  MF  (Nigeria)),
             there is no room for a general Article  8  evaluation  outside
             the 2014 rules, read with sections 117A-117D of the 2002 Act."

16. In the case of Akinyemi v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
    [2019] EWCA Civ 2098 the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals  giving  the
    leading judgment said in respect of the public interest as  follows  at
    paragraph 45:-

         "45. Dealing first with the legislation.  There is on the  face  of
             section 117C NIAA 2002 a flexible or moveable quality  to  the
             public interest in deportation that is described  albeit  that
             the interest must have  a  minimally  fixed  quality.   It  is
             minimally fixed because at section 117C(1) the public interest
             as described can never be other than in favour of deportation.
              It is flexible because  at  section  117C(2)  the  additional
             consideration described is as follows: ' The more serious  the
             offence committed by a foreign criminal, the  greater  is  the
             public interest in deportation of the criminal'."

The Appellant's Evidence

17. The Appellant's evidence is  contained  in  his  undated  and  unsigned
    witness statement  (B1,  Appellant's  bundle).   His  evidence  can  be
    summarised.  He came here with his parents and siblings at the  age  of
    4.  His father had to leave Turkey as a result  of  his  political  and
    religious views.  He has lived here since  then.   He  attended  school
    here.

18. In the UK the Appellant has access to medical treatment and support for
    his medical condition.  He has no connections with Turkey.  He  is  not
    familiar with the lifestyle there.  He will  suffer  serious  emotional
    and psychological harm should he be expected to return to Turkey having
    lived here for more than 30 years.   The  Appellant  is  fragile  as  a
    result of various upheavals throughout his life  including  a  volatile
    marriage and difficult divorce.  The Appellant  has  a  daughter  here;
    however, his ex-wife has prevented him from having contact with her.

19. The Appellant's entire family live in the UK.  He needs  their  support
    to function.  The majority of family members are British citizens.  His
    family is strong, close and loving.  It was difficult  when  serving  a
    sentence because he was separated from his family.  He does not want to
    be separated again from them.

20. The Appellant has been seeing North  Hackney  Community  Mental  Health
    Team since 2002.  He  needs  support  as  a  result  of  mental  health
    problems.  He receives care and supervision.  There is no-one in Turkey
    who would be able to provide this support.

21. The Appellant is making positive changes to his life.  He  sends  money
    to his daughter.  He  attends  the  local  community  centre  where  he
    explains to young people his past  experiences  so  that  they  do  not
    follow his path.  He attends the gym regularly and  he  is  on  a  drug
    programme.



The Evidence of HG

22. HG is the Appellant's mother.  Her evidence is contained in her witness
    statement which is unsigned and undated (B6, Appellant's bundle).   Her
    evidence can be summarised.  The Appellant came here at the age  of  4.
    He can have access to medical support here in the UK  for  his  medical
    condition.  He has no connections with Turkey.  He will suffer  serious
    emotional and psychological harm should he be required to  live  there.
    He had a difficult marriage and unpleasant divorce.  He has connections
    here in the UK.  All the family reside here the majority  of  whom  are
    British citizens.  She has a strong, loving and close relationship with
    her son.  The family cannot understate the loss  if  the  Appellant  is
    deported.  The Appellant's mental health problem has affected him.   He
    would not be properly treated  in  Turkey.   The  Appellant  needs  his
    family's care and support.  He is making positive changes in  his  life
    to address his problems.

The Evidence of MG

23. MG's evidence is contained in his witness statement which  is  unsigned
    and undated (B11, Appellant's bundle).  MG is the  Appellant's  father.
    His evidence is in very similar terms to that of the Appellant and  the
    Appellant's mother.  He also has a good relationship with his son.   He
    fears that his son would be placed "at  serious  risk  to  himself"  on
    return to Turkey.  He is accustomed to the British way of  life  having
    spent the majority of his life here.   His  mental  health  is  getting
    better in the UK but there will be no support for him in  Turkey.   The
    Appellant needs his family's care, love and support.

The Evidence of EG

24. EG is the Appellant's  brother.   His  evidence  is  contained  in  his
    undated and unsigned witness statement (B15, Appellant's bundle).   The
    Appellant's brother's evidence is in  similar  terms  to  that  of  the
    Appellant and his parents.

25. He says that the Appellant struggled at school and  had  mental  health
    difficulties and was involved  with  drugs.   His  convictions  do  not
    accurately portray his true character.  The Appellant has been  through
    a difficult time.  It is hopeful he will be reunited with his  daughter
    one day.  He plays an active role  in  the  lives  of  all  his  family
    members.  Including siblings  and  their  children.   He  has  a  close
    relationship with his nephews  and  nieces.   Family  members  are  all
    concerned for the Appellant's welfare should he be deported.  He speaks
    very limited Turkish and would struggle to find  employment  or  access
    basic services.  His mental health is likely to deteriorate.  He relies
    on family here for emotional support  and  encouragement  to  take  his
    medication and to make sure that he is coping with life.

26. The Appellant was forced to leave Turkey when he was a child because of
    the risk of persecution.  Being a solitary Kurd  with  no  support,  no
    income and weak language skills and mental health problems there  would
    be a significant risk to his safety.



The Evidence of LG

27. LG is the Appellant's sister.  Her evidence  is  in  her  unsigned  and
    undated witness statement (B21, Appellant's bundle).  Her  evidence  is
    similar to that of her siblings.  She talks about the relationship that
    the Appellant has with her daughters and says that he is an "incredibly
    sensitive individual" who relies heavily on his  family  for  emotional
    and financial support.  He would not be able to cope should  he  return
    to Turkey.

The Evidence of ZH

28. ZH is the Appellant's niece.  Her evidence is contained in her  witness
    statement  which  is  unsigned  and  undated.   Her  evidence  can   be
    summarised.  The Appellant is a "massive part" of her life and  he  has
    always been someone to whom she can turn to for support.  She  has  her
    own mental health issues which she has been able to  discuss  with  the
    Appellant who was understanding and supportive.  He would not  be  able
    to integrate into life in Turkey.

The Evidence of RH

29. RH is the Appellant's niece.  Her evidence is contained in her  undated
    and unsigned witness statement.  Her evidence can be  summarised.   The
    Appellant has been an important part of her life whilst growing up.  He
    is something of a mentor to his nieces and nephews.

The Evidence of OG

30. OG is the Appellant's sister.  Her evidence is contained in her undated
    and unsigned witness statement (B28, Appellant's bundle).  Her evidence
    can be summarised.  The family care deeply for the Appellant  who  will
    always be  their  "little  boy".   The  family  is  concerned  for  the
    Appellant's welfare should he return to Turkey where he would  struggle
    to integrate.

The Evidence of NG

31. NG's  evidence  is  contained  in  her  undated  and  unsigned  witness
    statement (B30, Appellant's bundle).  Her evidence can  be  summarised.
    She has a close  relationship  with  the  Appellant  as  do  her  adult
    children.  She suffers from depression and the Appellant has been  very
    supportive to her.  He is doing his best to reform  and  to  make  good
    progress.

Other Evidence

32. There is evidence from friends of the Appellant in the form of  letters
    (B34-B38, Appellant's bundle).





The Medical Evidence

33. Dr Mark Salter is a  treating  consultant  liaison  psychiatrist.   His
    psychiatric report concerning the Appellant is dated 18  October  2018.
    His evidence can be summarised.

34. The Appellant first came into  contact  with  psychiatric  services  in
    March 2004 when he was brought to hospital by the police under  Section
    136 of the Mental Health Act.  He was noted to be  expressing  suicidal
    intent.  He had had little sleep, was self-neglected with  disorganised
    thinking, overvalued persecutory ideas and possible hallucinations.  He
    was diagnosed with drug-induced psychosis.  He defaulted from care  but
    was subsequently returned to hospital some days later when  he  engaged
    more substantially with psychiatric care over the following months  and
    then years.  He complied with antipsychotic medication which  he  found
    helpful and has continued with this.  He  has  good  insight  into  his
    illness.  He has distanced himself from his former peers and  has  made
    substantial reductions in his use of drugs.

35.  The  Appellant  had  difficulties  with  sustained  concentration  and
    impulsive behaviour at school.  He underachieved academically and began
    to socialise with a more deviant peer group by his mid-teens.

36. Dr Salter last saw the Appellant in a psychiatric out-patient clinic at
    the Homerton Hospital on 19 September 2018.  He presented in a state of
    acute crisis, characterised by tearfulness, agitation, depression  with
    severe insomnia and tearfulness which have worsened as his  immigration
    hearing draws near.  The Appellant is distressed  at  the  prospect  of
    having to return to Turkey.

37. The Appellant fears the prospect of being deported to a country that he
    has never known and in which he has few  contacts.   Deportation  would
    lead to separation with  his  family  who  provide  him  with  valuable
    support, and it would prevent him from ever  making  contact  with  his
    daughter.  He presented with  anxiety  and  depression.   There  is  no
    evidence that this has led to a return to his  more  challenging  early
    behaviours and there are aspects of his mental state and recent conduct
    which suggests he is committed to making a better life for himself.

38. Dr Salter states as follows:-

         "I have no doubt whatsoever that compulsory  removal  from  the  UK
         would exert a highly adverse effect upon [RG's] mental  health  and
         behaviour.  In the short term, it is highly likely he would  become
         acutely  distressed  with  an  agitation,  impulsive   self-harming
         behaviour and an increased risk of resort to substance misuse.  Way
         to return to street drugs at his former  levels,  he  would  almost
         certainly undergo a psychotic relapse.

         In my opinion is highly unlikely that he would be capable,  without
         support, of making contact with  local  psychiatric  services,  and
         thus maintaining compliance with antipsychotic  medication  he  has
         taken regularly for many years in the UK, with good  result.   Such
         discontinuation would place him an increased risk for his  physical
         safety and wellbeing.

         Deportation would also effectively sever regular contact  with  the
         entire family, whose unstinting support and encouragement  for  him
         to adopt more mature ways of coping  with  his  difficulties,  have
         played a significant role in his progress over recent years.   Such
         severance would, therefore, further compromise his mental health.

         Were he to be allowed to remain in the UK, on the same terms as his
         family, his positive long-term prognosis would be maintained.  I am
         reasonably confident that this would lead to him enacting the plans
         that are currently muted with regard  to  employment.   This  would
         also lead to a sustained reduction in his risk of reoffending.

         Another important element of his progress  thus  far  concerns  his
         motivation  to  re-establish  contact  with  his  daughter,  who  I
         understand is now aged 5.  On the basis of his present mental state
         and level of function, alongside the high level of support that  he
         receives from his social network, I am confident that he  would  be
         capable of re-establishing a safe relationship with this child.   I
         would advise that this was initiated on an indirect  basis  in  the
         first  instance,  thereafter,  progressing   to   actual   contact,
         initially  on  a  supervised  basis.   Further  revisions  to   the
         conditions of contact  could  thereafter  be  made  depending  upon
         progress."

39. There is a letter from the Appellant's GP Dr  Aggarwal  of  3  December
    2019.   He  says  that  the  Appellant  is  suffering   from   paranoid
    schizophrenia which is managed by the local mental health services.  He
    is currently taking Mirtazapine, Olanzapine and Kemadrin.


40. There is an update from Dr Salter of 11 December 2019. He reviewed  the
    Appellant on 11 December at the request of his GP.  He  said  that  his
    mental state had deteriorated substantially.   There  was  no  suicidal
    ideation.   However,  the  Appellant's  thinking  displayed   psychotic
    features identical to  those  which  led  to  his  hospitalisation  two
    decades ago during which time he was under Dr Salter's  care.   He  has
    engaged with community  support  over  the  years  and  formed  a  good
    trusting relationship with a Turkish/Kurdish social worker.  He  agreed
    to engage with local drug  rehabilitation  services  and  made  a  good
    improvement.  According to Dr Salter "the most significant  factors  in
    his substantial progress over the last decade have without doubt arisen
    more from psychological stability of his family and social  environment
    and his moderation of substance misuse, as  from  simple  antipsychotic
    medication."  He also states that in his view to return him "  alone  ,
    estranged from his family to live until aged in the  country  where  he
    has never lived will prove detrimental to his mental state".


The Background Evidence


41. The Appellant relies on a report from Derya Bayir, a  qualified  lawyer
    affiliated to the Istanbul Bar Association.  He has provided  a  report
    concerning mental health treatment in  Turkey.   His  evidence  can  be
    summarised.


42.  There  is  no  systematic  official  reporting  system   showing   the
    performance of mental health institutions in  Turkey.   Until  recently
    Turkey did not have a general  policy  on  mental  health  issues.   An
    action plan was prepared in  2011  in  line  with  international  human
    rights standards and since then  Turkey  has  taken  some  measures  to
    increase  the  quality  and  capacity  of  services  and  institutions.
    However, very little has been achieved towards the realisation  of  the
    goals set out in the plan.


43. Domestic laws  and  legislation  in  Turkey  are  not  compatible  with
    international human rights conventions.  There is no standalone  mental
    health law regulating involuntary hospitalisation or compulsory holding
    in mental institutions in Turkey.  There is no authority or independent
    body to assess the compatibility of compulsory  holding  with  domestic
    and international laws and standards.  Involuntary hospitalisation  and
    compulsory holding in mental institutions can be  judicially  reviewed.
    However, this is a lengthy procedure.


44. There is no case recorded where the  courts  rejected  the  involuntary
    hospitalisation demands of the  hospital  administration.   Psychiatric
    patients are not usually informed of their right  to  refuse  treatment
    since involuntary hospitalisation is considered  as  approval  for  any
    treatment.  Solitary confinement and physical  and  chemical  restraint
    practices are quite widespread.


45. Those with mental and psychological problems can easily be deprived  of
    their legal capacity under  the  Turkish  Civil  Code.   Mental  health
    institutions are overcrowded, understaffed and inadequately  resourced.
    There is a negative social attitude and mindset  in  regard  to  mental
    health patients.


46. Since the introduction of the action plan a  community-based  treatment
    approach has been adopted.  The main purpose of which is to  make  sure
    that psychiatric patients receive the health service nearest  to  their
    home  and  those  who  are  hospitalised  stay  only  short-term  in  a
    psychiatric clinic and once the reasons for  hospitalisation  disappear
    the patient will be  directed  to  the  community-based  mental  health
    centre where psychiatrists and other professionals will  work  together
    to assist with rehabilitation.  However, the  existing  system  is  far
    from  adequate  to  cope  with  the  demand.   There  are  only  eleven
    psychiatric hospitals in Turkey nine of which are  run  by  the  state.
    Demand exceeds supply.  As a result, most people suffering from  mental
    health problems in Turkey live with their family.


47. Instate-run hospitals patients are keep indoors all day and  forced  to
    spend their days watching TV and wandering  the  corridors.   There  is
    reported  mistreatment  of  patients.   There  is   no   individualised
    treatment and very little interaction between staff and patients.   The
    use of electroconvulsive or shock treatment is widely used.   There  is
    widespread stigmatisation and negative attitudes towards and  prejudice
    against mentally ill patients.  There is a general belief that mentally
    ill people are dangerous.  As a result, individuals  are  reluctant  to
    apply to psychiatric clinics or professionals for help.


48. At present the Appellant is prescribed  olanzapine  10mg,  procyclidine
    hydrochloride 5mg, kemadrin 5mg.  These medications are  not  available
    in Turkey.  However, there is a drug available, Zyprexa, which has  the
    same active ingredients as olanzapine.


49. There is no free translation service available for  those  who  do  not
    speak Turkish save in court proceedings.  It would  be  very  difficult
    for the Appellant to establish life in Turkey without language  skills.
    English is not widely spoken by the general population.   It  would  be
    difficult for him to establish life in  Turkey  where  English  is  not
    widely spoken.  The Appellant has no experience of living in Turkey  or
    knowledge about how to navigate through public administration  and  the
    paperwork.  He will find it difficult to  live  there.   He  will  have
    problems integrating into the quite conservative general society  as  a
    single man.  Without a job or family network it would be difficult  for
    him to rent a place or as a single man develop relationships with other
    families without having a female  partner.   However  perhaps  the  big
    cities where traditional social structures and relations are relatively
    weak it would be an easier place to live in this regard.


50. A low-income person upon verification of their situation can  get  free
    treatment and medication from  state  hospitals.   There  is  a  social
    benefit system in Turkey however the Appellant would have to go through
    an assessment process.


51. The production of cannabis is legal in  nineteen  provinces  in  Turkey
    under government control.  It  is  a  criminal  offence  to  use,  buy,
    receive or possess drugs for personal use.  There is an alternative  to
    a prison sentence for drug offences.


52. Kurdish people and their political organisations have faced  oppression
    from the Turkish state.  However, knowing that he  does  not  have  any
    political involvement it  is  unlikely  that  the  Appellant's  Kurdish
    background would put him at risk within the  criminal  justice  system.
    However anti-Kurdish sentiment is on the rise and there have been  many
    incidents in recent years of discrimination.  The Appellant  will  find
    it difficult to adapt to  the  social  relations  which  are  sensitive
    regarding ethnic religious and political fault lines in the country.


Submissions


53. I  was  assisted  by  the  representatives'  skeleton  argument/written
    submissions.  At the start of the hearing, I queried paragraph 30 of Mr
    Melvin's written submissions.  It was brought to his attention that the
    FtT made an unchallenged finding that the Appellant was culturally  and
    socially integrated.  He  accepted  this  was  the  case  and  withdraw
    submissions on this issue.


54. Mr Melvin relied on his written submissions.  In so far as  Dr  Bayer's
    evidence is concerned, Mr Melvin indicated that the Respondent did  not
    accept that he is a recognised country expert.  His  evidence  has  not
    been tested in a  court.   Mental  health  treatment  is  available  in
    Turkey, though understaffed and under resourced.  The  evidence  before
    the FtT was that the family regularly visits  Turkey  where  they  have
    accommodation. Mr Bayir has  not  met  the  Appellant  or  any  of  his
    extended family here.  It  is  not  accepted  that  that  there  is  an
    obligation on Alevi Kurd parents to care for their son.  The  Appellant
    is currently  living  with  his  brother  and  not  his  parents.   The
    Respondent does not accept  that  there  is  widespread  discrimination
    against people with mental health difficulties or that the Appellant as
    a Kurd would suffer additional discrimination.


55. Mr Melvin highlighted that Dr Salter's first report  says  that  he  is
    committed to making a better life for himself and does  not  suggest  a
    return to more challenging behaviours.   His  updated  evidence  of  11
    December  2019  says  that  his   mental   health   has   substantially
    deteriorated, and he was displaying psychotic features first  displayed
    some 20 years ago, caused  by  the  heavy  use  of  marijuana.   It  is
    accepted by the Respondent that Dr Salter has known the  Appellant  for
    many years.  It is the Respondent's position  that  the  Appellant  has
    fallen back into substance misuse because of the decision to remove him
    to Turkey.  There is no recommendation by Dr  Salter  of  a  course  of
    medication or counselling.  He prescribes his appeal to be  allowed  to
    solve his mental health problems.  He is not an expert on mental health
    in Turkey.  The Respondent expresses concern about the  nature  of  the
    support given to the Appellant by his family because they are unable to
    prevent him from offending and taking drugs.  It is not  accepted  that
    removal to Turkey will have a significant  impact  on  the  Appellant's
    mental health.


56.  The  evidence  does  not  establish  very  significant  obstacles   to
    integration.  The high test is not met in this  case.   The  Respondent
    does not accept that the Appellant will not be able to  communicate  in
    Turkey.  The family members who  attended  and  gave  evidence  at  the
    hearing before the FtT did  so  through  a  Turkish  interpreter.   The
    Appellant can access support from the UK.  The  relationship  that  the
    Appellant has with his family  here  does  not  go  beyond  the  normal
    emotional ties between adults.  He  would  be  able  to  access  social
    services and benefits.


57. In respect of the wider proportionality assessment, the Appellant has a
    lengthy criminal record stretching over a significant period. Since the
    trigger offence, he has breached a non-molestation order.


58. Mr Dhanji relied on his skeleton argument  in  oral  submissions.   The
    Appellant  has  a  history  of  mental  health  difficulties  including
    psychosis,  bipolar   affective   disorder,   suicidal   ideation   and
    depression.  He has been taking anti-psychotic drugs  for  many  years.
    His health has deteriorated since the hearing before the  FtT.   Mental
    health care in Turkey is substandard.  There is stigmatisation.  In  Dr
    Salter's opinion it is unlikely  that  without  support  the  Appellant
    would be capable of making contact with psychiatric services in  Turkey
    and thus maintaining compliance with antipsychotic medication  that  he
    had regularly taken for years in the UK with good results.   Separation
    from his  family  would  further  compromise  his  mental  health.   Dr
    Salter's evidence is that the family support that he would get from his
    family in the UK if removed  to  Turkey  would  not  be  sufficient  to
    provide stability for his psychotic condition.   There  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to integration  on  account  of  the  Appellant's
    mental health, the treatment of those with mental  health  problems  in
    Turkey and the Appellant has not lived in Turkey since he was four  and
    has no knowledge of life there.  He would  not  have  the  capacity  to
    participate   in   Turkish   society.    The   Respondent's    decision
    disproportionately interferes with the Appellant's family  and  private
    life.  The Appellant has been here for  32  years  and  his  family  is
    settled here.


Findings and Reasons


59. The Appellant has not been to Turkey since he was aged four.  I  accept
    that he does not have relatives there and that he has a very close  and
    supportive family here.  I accept that his main  language  is  English.
    However, I consider that there was a Turkish interpreter at the hearing
    before the FtT to assist three of  the  witnesses.   It  is  reasonably
    likely that the Appellant has some grasp of the Turkish language.


60. I attach significance to the  medical  evidence.   Dr  Salter  is  well
    placed to give an opinion about  the  Appellant's  mental  health.   Mr
    Dhanji in submissions stated that the Appellant did not seek to rely on
    Dr Salter's evidence in  so  far  as  it  relates  to  Turkey  and  the
    provision of health  care  there.   It  was  not  challenged  that  the
    Appellant has mental health problems as identified by Dr Salter.


61. In respect of the evidence  of  Dr  Bayir.  His  report  is  adequately
    sourced.  The fact that there is nothing to say  that  he  has  been  a
    witness in a court case, may impact on the weight to be attached to the
    evidence but does not render it unreliable.


62. Neither party draw my attention to the Country Background Note relating
    to Turkey (version 3.0 of September 2019) specifically section 7  under
    the heading "healthcare".  I summarise  the  salient  parts  from  this
    document which I assume the parties are aware of.  Patients are obliged
    to make flat rate out of pocket payments when receiving medication  and
    outpatient services in public hospitals which  can  inhibit  access  to
    health for the poor.  A new law provides health care also to unemployed
    people if they match certain  criteria.   Slow  progress  was  made  on
    community-based mental health centres.  In 2017, 14 new community-based
    mental health centres were set up, making  a  total  of  163,  and  350
    family physicians were given mental health gap training.  At 7.1.6  the
    report states as follows:-


         "The Australian Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade  published
         a report in October 2018 which stated:

             'Turkey adopted a National Mental Health Policy in 2006, which
             shifted mental health services to a community-based system and
             integrated them into general health services.  As  of  October
             2015, 86  community  mental  health  centres  (CMHC)  operated
             nationwide. Observers claim the CMHCs are inadequately funded,
             and that the number of psychiatrists and other  mental  health
             professionals  per  capita  is  well  below   European   Union
             averages.  Local groups report a lack of coordination  between
             the government and NGOs working in the area,  particularly  in
             relation  to  reducing  discrimination  and   stigma.    Other
             complaints include that CMHC staff are  often  poorly  trained
             and paid, leading to high turnover and poor service, and  that
             patients must pay directly for their treatment, leading  to  a
             two-tiered  system.   The  Ministry  of  Health  reported   in
             November 2017 that the number of applications filed to  health
             institutions over psychological complaints increased  by  27.7
             per cent between 2011 and 2016.'"

63. The County Background Note supports Dr Bayer's conclusions  in  respect
    of stigma towards the mentally ill and the  inadequacy  of  the  system
    generally.  I accept his evidence that the Appellant has no  experience
    of living Turkey and  would  have  difficulty  accessing  services.   I
    accept that there may be difficulties arising from him being  a  single
    male without family.  There is no good reason  for  me  to  reject  the
    evidence of Dr Bayir.  I  accept  that  his  evidence  alone  does  not
    establish very significant obstacles to integration, but it establishes
    that the Appellant would experience significant difficulties.  However,
    when considered together  with  the  evidence  of  Dr  Salter  and  the
    evidence generally, I conclude that there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to integration.

64. The Appellant has a very significant private life here.  He is aged 36.
     He has spent 32 years of his life  here.   It  was  not  open  to  the
    Respondent to argue that the Appellant was not socially  of  culturally
    integrated; however, had it been, I would have found in favour  of  the
    Appellant.  He has been here since the age of  4.   The  Appellant  has
    been educated her.  He has strong family ties here.  Before he  started
    to offend, he  had  unarguably  established  significant  cultural  and
    social ties here.  He had been here 9 years. He started to offend as  a
    youth.  Whilst there has been a significant pattern of offending over a
    period of time, I find that he was deeply integrated before  then.   If
    his offending and imprisonment broke integration, by the time  I  heard
    his appeal, on the evidence before me, they have  been  re-established.
    He has been out of trouble for at least three years.  He has deep roots
    in this country.  Not only has he been educated here, but he has worked
    here.  However, as stated it is not open to the Respondent to challenge
    the finding of the FtT.

65. The Appellant has visited Turkey.  My understanding is that members  of
    his family travel there and have property there.  However, he  has  not
    lived there since he was very young.  Visiting a  country  is  not  the
    same as living there.  While the Appellant has grown up  in  a  Turkish
    family and will be familiar with some aspects of  Turkish  culture  and
    language, he has never been to school or worked there.  He is  unlikely
    to remember much about living there because he left  at  such  a  young
    age.  I accept that the Appellant's family here could financially  help
    him.  This kind of support would  typically  enable  a  person  in  the
    Appellant's position to build a private and/ or family life  to  enable
    some kind of meaningful integration.  However,  this  case  is  unusual
    because the Appellant has serious mental health problems as  identified
    by Dr Salter.  I find that he is very dependent on his family.   He  is
    currently  experiencing  psychosis  and  has  been   on   antipsychotic
    medication for some time.  While in theory, a person would be  able  to
    access  necessary  drugs  in  Turkey,  I  conclude  that  an  essential
    ingredient to ensure that this Appellant  is  able  to  access  medical
    services is  the  support  and  stability  of  his  family.   I  attach
    significant weight to what Dr Salter says in  his  most  recent  report
    namely that "the most significant factors in his  substantial  progress
    over the last decade have without doubt arisen more from  psychological
    stability of his family and social environment and  his  moderation  of
    substance misuse, as from simple antipsychotic medication."  His family
    could give him some support if he is to return to Turkey, for  example,
    via social media and visits, but this is  a  poor  substitute  for  the
    support they give him here.

66. I accept that the support  of  his  family  has  not  always  kept  the
    Appellant on the straight and narrow and he  has  not  always  complied
    with treatment; however, this is not the issue.  I  find  that  without
    their  support,  it  is  reasonably  likely  that  his  condition  will
    significantly deteriorate in the light of the very real difficulties he
    will face in Turkey and his sense of isolation.   I  find  that  it  is
    reasonably likely that he will be unable to access services without the
    necessary emotional support from which he benefits  and  receives  from
    his extensive loving family here.  I take into account  that  there  is
    some stigma attached to those with mental health issues in Turkey.   It
    is reasonably likely without support of his  family;  he  will  relapse
    into drug misuse.  It is  reasonably  likely  that  his  mental  health
    issues and any further drug use will prevent him from being accepted in
    Turkey  to  any  meaningful  extent  to  enable  him  to  build   human
    relationships that will give substance to his family of  private  life.
    I find that without the level of emotional support and  stability  that
    his extensive family gives him  here,  the  Appellant  will  remain  an
    outsider.  There are very significant obstacles to his  integration  in
    Turkey.

67. For the above reason Exception 1 applies.  The  appeal  is  allowed  on
    Article 8 grounds.  There is no reason for me  to  go  on  to  consider
    proportionality and the public interest in deportation.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed under Article 8.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam           Date 16 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

