
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05374/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC                 |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 September 2018                    |  On 01 October 2018                |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   Mr N S
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss E Mottershaw, Counsel, instructed by First Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision sent on 23 May 2018 Judge A J Parker  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Pakistan, against the decision of the respondent made on 5  April  2018
    refusing his protection claim.  The basis of the appellant's claim  was
    that he would be at risk on return  to  Pakistan  because  of  his  gay
    sexual orientation.  His previous appeal  raising  the  same  basis  of
    claim had been dismissed by Judge James of the FtT on  22  April  2016,
    but he was granted a further right of appeal  upon  his  submission  of
    further representations.  Judge James had  comprehensively  disbelieved
    the appellant's claim to be gay.  It is Judge Parker's approach to  the
    findings made previously by Judge James that is at  the  heart  of  the
    appellant's grounds of appeal.

2.   It is unnecessary to set out the grounds in any detail as both  parties
    were in agreement that the judge's decision was vitiated by legal error
    and I am in concurrence with them regarding this.  The first  of  three
    obvious errors in the judge's decision was that he failed to note  that
    there was new evidence relating to his history of sexual  relationships
    at the time of the previous appeal in the form of a  witness  statement
    from Mr Z A dated 15 March 2018 referring to his gay relationship  with
    the appellant  dating  from  circa  2004.   The  judge's  statement  at
    paragraph 34 that there was no evidence from  any  of  the  appellant's
    previous partners predating the previous hearing was  simply  incorrect
    and it was wrong of the judge to rely on  the  total  absence  of  such
    evidence as a significant factor adverse to the appellant.

3.   A second obvious error arises at paragraphs 35 and 36:

         "35. I would therefore find the appellant is not gay  and  secondly
             if he is gay he would not live openly.


         36.  I do not find the appellant would live openly on return and be
             open about his sexual orientation and at best  he  would  live
             discreetly.  This is not because he fears persecution".


    The judge gives  no  reasons  whatsoever  for  these  findings  and  in
    particular why, if the appellant were to live discreetly, none  of  the
    reasons for doing so would be due to fear of persecution.


4.   A further evident failing was the judge's failure  to  make  any  clear
    findings on the evidence of the witnesses.  Simply to clarify  them  as
    "self-serving" (see paragraph 47) was insufficient.

5.   I would add (since the next judge dealing with the case  will  need  to
    bear it  in  mind)  that  the  judge's  undue  preoccupation  with  the
    appellant's sexual history is troubling.   In  light  of  the  guidance
    given by the CJEU in the A, B, C judgment and  what  was  said  by  the
    Supreme Court  in  HJ  (Iran),  it  is  necessary  to  consider  sexual
    orientation more broadly and not just in terms of sexual acts.  The  A,
    B, C case also cautions against treating delay in the making of a claim
    based on sexual orientation as a reason in itself to disbelieve it.

6.   I do not make any definitive finding on whether the judge  treated  the
    previous decision of Judge James as  an  end-point  rather  than  as  a
    starting point, but it will certainly be important for the  next  judge
    to clearly identify what evidence is now being relied on that  was  not
    before the judge and, within that body of evidence:

    (a)  what related to his sexual orientation prior to the hearing before
         Judge James; and


    (b)  what related to his sexual orientation  has  come  into  existence
         since.


    It will be important in respect of (a) for the appellant to explain why
    it was not produced earlier.


    Nothing I have said above should be taken as implying a view as to  the
    merits of the appeal.


7.   For the above reasons:

    The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Parker)


No anonymity direction is made.





Signed:                                 Date: 26 September 2018

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal



