
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05682/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2019                  |On 25 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                 Alison [J]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a Grenadian born on 8 September 1975.  On  arrival  in
    the United Kingdom on 15 November 2016 he was refused leave to enter as
    a visitor and then claimed to be entitled to subsidiary protection.  On
    1 June 2017 the Respondent refused his application.

 2. The Appellant appealed under s.82 Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 as amended. The Appellant did not attend the hearing  or  give
    any explanation for his failure so  to  do.  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal GJ Ferguson was satisfied that notice of the  time,  date  and
    place set for the hearing had been validly served  in  accordance  with
    the requirements of the Procedure Rules and by a  decision  promulgated
    on 02 August 2018 he dismissed the appeal.

 3. On 07 September 2018 the  Appellant's  application  for  permission  to
    appeal was refused by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The Appellant
    renewed his application to the Upper Tribunal and on  22  January  2019
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb extended time for  lodging  the  application
    and granted permission to appeal on that basis  that  at  the  material
    time the Appellant had been investigated for TB and advised to practice
    "home isolation".

 4. On 05 February 2019 the Respondent lodged a response to the grounds  of
    appeal under Procedure Rules 24. The response did not  seek  to  oppose
    the Appellant's appeal, noting the reasons given  for  the  Appellant's
    failure to attend the hearing.

 5. The Appellant attended the hearing on 21 February. Mr Kotas referred to
    the Respondent's Rule 24 response. I find that through no fault of  the
    Judge, he was unaware that the Appellant was under medical  instruction
    to remain at home. In proceeding with the hearing  in  the  involuntary
    absence of the Appellant the Appellant  has  not  had  a  fair  hearing
    because  he  did  not  have  the  opportunity  to  present  his   case.
    Consequently, the Judge's decision is fatally flawed and  must  be  set
    aside.

 6. With this in mind and having regard to s.12(2)  Tribunal's  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007  and  Practice  Statement  7.2.b,  I  consider  it
    appropriate for  the  appeal  to  be  heard  afresh  with  no  findings
    preserved in the First-tier Tribunal by a judge  other  than  Judge  GJ
    Ferguson.

Anonymity

7.   There was no request for an anonymity direction and  having  considered
    the appeal I find none is warranted.

SUMMARY OF DECISION


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and is
    set aside.

    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh.

    Anonymity direction not made.


Signed/Official  Crest                                            Date   21.
iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

