
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05453/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 29 April 2019                     |on 14 May 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     WS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, Counsel, instructed by Morden
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal  Skehen  (the  judge),  promulgated  on  27   June   2018,
         dismissing the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision
         dated 18 April 2018 refusing his protection and human rights claim.

   Background

      2. The appellant, a national of Pakistan, was born in 1993. He entered
         the UK on 19 June 2012 pursuant to a grant of entry clearance as  a
         Tier 4 (General) Student. He was granted further leave in the  same
         capacity, but this was eventually curtailed.  He  made  an  in-time
         application on 18 December 2015 for leave to  remain  based  on  an
         Article 8 spousal relationship, but this was refused on 16 February
         2016. The applicant's leave then expired. He made an  asylum  claim
         on 19 October 2017 based  on  his  actual  or  perceived  political
         opinion as a member of Muttahida Qaumi Movement (MQM).

      3. I summarise the basis of the appellant's asylum  claim.  He  joined
         the MQM at the age of 16 in September 2009. He was a general member
         of the party and undertook administrative work in the local  office
         in Hyderabad. He was responsible for  informing  local  members  of
         upcoming events and would go  to  houses  in  his  area  requesting
         attendance  at  meetings  and  conventions.   He   encountered   no
         difficulties in Pakistan as a result of his political association.

      4. Following his entry to the UK the appellant joined the  MQM  London
         faction (also known as the MQM (Altaf group), which is  split  from
         MQM-Pakistan.  According to his statement  dated  9  May  2018  the
         appellant highlighted MQM events on his Facebook  page  and,  since
         2014, attended MQM events. His personal Facebook  is  in  the  name
         "Vick Shapman." The appellant claimed it was commonly known to  his
         colleagues "and even opponents" that the account belonged  to  him.
         There  was  however  no  independent  evidence  to   support   this
         assertion. The appellant attended MQM events in the UK either  held
         in the Secretariat or in halls hired by the party. He  additionally
         claimed to have attended four demonstrations  between  August  2017
         and January 2018, 3 outside Downing  Street  and  one  outside  the
         Pakistani High Commission. He claimed to have distributed  leaflets
         during these demonstrations  and  would  decide  who  was  to  hold
         banners and where people would stand.

      5. The appellant started to receive  information  from  colleagues  in
         Pakistan and also  from  those  in  MQM-London  that  the  Pakistan
         authorities were targeting supporters  and  activists  of  MQM  and
         monitoring the activities of people abroad, especially London. As a
         result, the appellant claimed  asylum.  On  12  January  2018  four
         people who claimed to be agents of Pakistan  intelligence  came  to
         his  family  home  in  Hyderabad,  showed  the  appellant's  father
         photographs of the appellant participating in demonstrations  which
         they claimed were obtained from social media, and  threatened  that
         unless  the  appellant  stopped  his  activities  and  returned  to
         Pakistan  there  would  be  problems  for  the  family.  After  the
         appellant's father said that his family had  no  contact  with  the
         appellant the offices forced him into a car, took him to an unknown
         location  and  punched  and  kicked  him.  The  appellant's  father
         attempted to report this incident the following day at  the  police
         station but was told that the police could not register any  report
         against officials of an  intelligence  agency  and  threatened  the
         appellant's father that he would be arrested if he  ever  attempted
         to make such a report again. The appellant stated, "since  then  my
         family abstains from attending my phone calls and the  only  person
         who I can sometimes talk to  is  my  sister."  In  his  substantive
         asylum interview (question 187) the  appellant  described  how  his
         father phoned him two days  after  he  was  beaten  to  inform  the
         appellant not to return to Pakistan and to  ask  the  appellant  to
         make no further contact with the family because he  was  told  this
         would cause a "big problem" for him.

      6. The respondent accepted that the appellant was a general member  of
         the MQM party as his answers in his asylum interview  were  "highly
         consistent" with the background  evidence  available  to  the  Home
         Office. The respondent accepted that the appellant participated  in
         four open-air demonstrations, but it was  not  accepted  that  such
         attendance would bring the appellant to the  adverse  attention  of
         the Pakistani  authorities.  The  respondent  considered  that  the
         appellant provided "a  detailed  and  plausible  account  of  [his]
         membership of the MQM party", and it was accepted  that  he  was  a
         member  of  the  MQM  party  and  had  some  involvement  with  MQM
         activities in  the  UK.  The  respondent  noted  however  that  the
         appellant's Facebook account was not in his name and  that  he  had
         only submitted evidence of 14 political links covering a  five-year
         period. Given the general nature of his membership of the MQM party
         and his attendance at only four small-scale protests in the UK  the
         respondent was not satisfied that the appellant would come  to  the
         attention of the Pakistan  authorities  if  he  was  returned.  The
         application for asylum was refused.

      7. The appellant appealed the respondent's decision to the  First-tier
         Tribunal pursuant to  s.82  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act).

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. The judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant  and  considered
         several documents including,  inter  alia,  a  statement  from  the
         appellant signed and dated 9 May 2018, an  expert  report  from  Dr
         Antonio Giustozzi dated 20 May 2018, a letter from the convener  of
         the MQM in London dated 26 March 2018, several Internet screenshots
         and photographs showing the appellant's attendance at one  or  more
         demonstration and one or more meetings.

      9.  The  judge  set  out  the  appellant's  immigration  history   and
         summarised his claim and the evidence given orally by the appellant
         at the hearing. The judge summarised an MQM  letter  dated  22  May
         2018 which stated that the appellant was an active member in social
         media promoting the welfare of MQM and highlighting abuses faced by
         MQM workers in Pakistan. The letter said  the  appellant  was  very
         active in organising MQM events and demonstrations and "this is the
         place where  state-sponsored  agencies  identify  who  is  actively
         assisting in various activities which place a certain risk to their
         life". The judge  summarised  the  expert  report  prepared  by  Dr
         Giustozzi, including the expert's  view  that  the  fact  that  the
         appellant spent a long time in the UK would  be  interpreted  as  a
         sign of his closeness to the  MQM  leadership  and  was  likely  to
         compound his predicament, and that even  ordinary  members  of  the
         party were caught in repression.

     10. The judge summarised the submissions from both representatives  and
         then, under the heading 'Findings  and  Decision',  considered  the
         appellant's credibility. The judge noted that  the  appellant  only
         applied for asylum in October 2017, 5 years after  his  arrival  in
         the UK. The judge found it difficult to identify any real change in
         circumstances relating to the appellant's political activities that
         may have triggered his asylum application. Although  the  appellant
         claimed  to  have  received  information   from   colleagues   that
         intelligence agencies in Pakistan  were  targeting  supporters  and
         activists of the MQM and monitoring activity of people abroad,  the
         appellant provided no details of the information  he  received  and
         failed to identify those who  passed  information  to  him.  Having
         regard to the US State Department report covering the  period  2016
         the judge  found  there  was  little  material  difference  in  the
         situation in Pakistan.  The  judge  consequently  made  an  adverse
         credibility finding based on  the  appellant's  delay  in  claiming
         asylum. This finding has not been challenged in the appeal grounds.

     11. The judge then noted the absence of any  evidence  to  substantiate
         the links between the appellant's social media account in the  name
         Vick Shapman and his actual identity.  The  judge  then  noted  the
         absence of any corroborating evidence in respect  of  the  incident
         involving the appellant's father. The judge stated,

             "I was not  provided  with  any  witness  statement  from  the
             appellant's father. Nor was I provided with copies of  medical
             records, medical report or evidence of any injuries  from  the
             appellant's father. It is noted that this attack  is  said  to
             have  happened  at  a  time  when   the   appellant's   asylum
             application was already under-way and it would be  obvious  to
             the appellant that evidence of this attack is relevant to  the
             immigration appeal. The  appellant  describes  his  family  as
             'well off' and there is no obvious reason for this evidence to
             be absent."

     12. The judge  additionally  noted  that  since  the  alleged  incident
         involving his father the  appellant  had  participated  in  further
         protests and had not returned to Pakistan, as requested by the  men
         who abducted his father. The appellant's father and family had  not
         however  experienced  any  further  contact   from   the   Pakistan
         authorities. The judge  found  that  the  failure  to  produce  any
         supporting evidence surrounding this  alleged  attack  damaged  his
         credibility. The judge found that the attack was not likely to have
         occurred even to the lower standard of proof.

     13. The judge observed that she had not been provided with any  country
         background information specifically relating to MQM-London  members
         other than that set out by Dr Giustozzi.  The  judge  accepted  the
         express reference to kidnappings and extrajudicial killings of  MQM
         members in Pakistan. The judge then noted (at [15]) the appellant's
         evidence that he would continue to be a supporter of  MQM  Pakistan
         should he return to Pakistan.  In  the  same  paragraph  the  judge
         stated,

             "The appellant's  claim  seems  to  be  based  on  the  likely
             perception of the Pakistani authorities of the appellant being
             more highly integrated with MQM  London  and  that  particular
             ideology than he  actually  is.  This  point  is  made  by  Dr
             Giustozzi in that he comments that the fact that the appellant
             has spent a long time in the UK would be interpreted as a sign
             of his  closeness  to  the  MQM  leadership.  The  appellant's
             representative confirmed that there was no further  background
             country evidence available on risk posed to MQM London members
             or MQM members who have spent time in London."

     14. Then at [16] the judge stated,

             "I  have  carefully  considered  the  available  evidence   in
             relation to the likely risk the appellant would face on return
             to Pakistan. The inadequacies of the  Pakistani  police  force
             and  state   protections   highlighted   in   the   background
             information set out above are accepted. However, the appellant
             must show on the lower standard of proof that he has  a  well-
             founded fear of being persecuted by reason of MQM  support  or
             perceived  MQM  support  on  the   part   of   the   Pakistani
             authorities. I do not accept  that  membership  of  MQM  alone
             provides a well-founded fear of being persecuted  for  reasons
             of political  opinion.  There  is  no  country  guidance  that
             supports this conclusion. I consider that this  case  must  be
             considered on its individual facts and the factors that  would
             increase the risk faced by the appellant would include being a
             recognisable or high-profile senior member of MQM in London or
             potentially speaking in  support  of  the  more  controversial
             views expressed by MQM London since 2016. I  accept  that  the
             appellant is a current member of MQM and is likely to continue
             to be a supporter of MQM  should  he  return  to  Pakistan.  I
             accept that the appellant should not be  expected  to  lie  or
             conceal his political opinion in order to exclude persecution.
             The appellant does not claim to be a senior member of  MQM.  I
             have seen no evidence to suggest  that  the  appellant  has  a
             significant online presence  that  can  be  is  [sic]  readily
             linked to him. His online persona is one step removed from the
             appellant being in the name  of  Vick  Shapman.  There  is  no
             reason to expect the appellant  to  become  more  involved  or
             increase his profile in the event he returned to Pakistan.  It
             is the appellant's evidence that he was an  active  member  of
             MQM from 2009, going house to house in support of their causes
             and MQM London from  2012  until  2017  without  any  fear  of
             persecution."

     15. And at [17] the judge stated,

             "In my opinion, it is difficult to see any substantial  change
             in the appellant circumstances between [sic] he left  Pakistan
             in 2012, without any fear due to his potential beliefs and the
             current time. I have not been  provided  with  any  background
             evidence that would support the  claim  that  the  appellant's
             time in  the  UK  would  increase  the  intelligence  agencies
             interest in the appellant. In  reviewing  the  evidence  as  a
             whole I am unable to identify any objective well-founded  fear
             on the part of the appellant. In reviewing the evidence  as  a
             whole I conclude that the appellant has not shown a reasonable
             degree of  likelihood  that  he  faces  persecution  from  the
             Pakistani state and return to Pakistan due to his  support  or
             his perceived support for MQM London and-or MQM Pakistan.  For
             the reasons set out above  I  conclude  that  the  appellant's
             application for asylum fails and is dismissed."

     16. The judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

     17. The grounds of challenge are twofold.  The  first  ground  contends
         that the FtJ failed to  resolve  a  material  issue  raised  by  Dr
         Giustozzi's evidence relating to whether  the  appellant  would  be
         perceived as being close to the MQM if returned to Pakistan. Whilst
         the judge set out the salient parts of Dr Giustozzi's report, it is
         argued that she focused solely on the issue whether  the  applicant
         was in fact a senior member of the MQM rather than someone who  may
         be so perceived.  The  judge's  reference  at  [17]  to  not  being
         provided with any background evidence supporting a claim  that  the
         appellant's  time  in  the  UK  would  increase  the   intelligence
         service's interest in him was said to be at odds with  her  summary
         of Dr Giustozzi's evidence.

     18. The second ground contends that the judge failed  to  consider  the
         appellant's explanation for the absence of evidence relating to the
         attack on his father, contained in paragraph 27 of  his  statement,
         where he said that his family do not reply to his phone  calls  and
         that the only person he has occasional contact with is his sister.

     19. In her oral submissions Ms Solanki relied on the  grounds,  drawing
         my attention to the relevant parts of Dr Giustozzi's report and the
         letter from the MQM at page 40 of the applicant's bundle, and press
         releases issued by the MQM relating to the targeting of members  in
         Pakistan. She submitted that the activities of the  MQM  in  London
         were likely to be monitored by the security services in Pakistan as
         it was an illegal organisation. In respect of the second ground she
         relied on the appellant's statement and his answer in his interview
         relating to contact with his family. it  was  not  clear  that  the
         appellant's father needed to visit a doctor  as  a  result  of  his
         injuries, and he may be in fear of contacting the appellant.

     20. Ms Jones invited me to find that the  judge  was  entitled  to  his
         conclusions, that he gave adequate reasons and that he took account
         of all relevant circumstances.

     21. I reserved by decision.

Discussion

     22. It is appropriate to deal with  the  second  ground  first.  It  is
         apparent from [13] that the judge  was  concerned  that  a  serious
         event that was said to have occurred after  the  appellant  claimed
         asylum was unsupported by any evidence. There is no requirement for
         corroborative  evidence  in  this  jurisdiction,  but  a  judge  is
         entitled to take into account the  absence  of  evidence  that  one
         would reasonably expect to be available. Whilst I accept  that  the
         appellant  did  not  mention  whether  his  father  sought  medical
         treatment after the attack, his account was  that  his  father  was
         beaten, punched and kicked by intelligence agents. Given  that  the
         father contacted the appellant two days after this event, at a time
         when the appellant has already claimed  asylum,  it  is  surprising
         that no request or offer was made to provide any medical  evidence.
         There was no reason why such evidence could not have been  sent  by
         post without the authorities being alerted. Whilst  I  also  accept
         that the judge did  not  refer  to  the  appellant's  statement  at
         paragraph 27 (where the appellant stated that his  father  abstains
         from receiving the appellant's phone calls) or his  answer  in  his
         interview where he stated that his father told him not  to  contact
         him as this  would  cause  "big  trouble"  for  his  father,  these
         explanations could not reasonably explain the lack of any  contact.
         It was not the appellant's evidence that he and his father had  any
         falling out, and it is very difficult to discern any basis for  the
         father not wishing to have contact  with  his  son.  There  was  no
         suggestion in the appellant's evidence that the  authorities  would
         tap his family's phones, and there would be nothing preventing  the
         appellant's father from contacting his son by using other  people's
         mobile phones or by writing letters of by using an  Internet  based
         service. In these circumstances the judge was  unarguably  entitled
         to draw an adverse inference based on the absence of any  evidence,
         even a statement or letter from the appellant's father,  supporting
         the alleged attack. I find no error of  law  in  relation  to  this
         finding.

     23. I now consider the first ground. The issue  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal was whether there was a real risk that the appellant would
         be perceived as having an association with MQM-London sufficient to
         put him at risk of harm. The judge was well aware of this (see [15]
         and [17]). It was not in dispute  that  the  appellant  was  not  a
         prominent member of the MQM-London (see Dr  Giustozzi's  report  at
         [8] of page 36 of the appellant's bundle). The various  screenshots
         from a Facebook account and from the MQM.org website  contained  in
         the  appellant's  bundle   show   the   appellant's   presence   at
         demonstrations and meetings in the UK, but he is not named and  the
         screenshots do not indicate that the appellant  has  any  prominent
         role. There is no evidence that the various  photographs  contained
         in the appellant's bundle  showing  him  handing  out  leaflets  to
         members of the public and  his  attendance  at  meetings  had  been
         published online. The appellant's Facebook account was not  in  his
         name and there was simply no independent evidence  identifying  him
         with the name 'Vick Shapman' (determination, at [12]).  Given  that
         the judge was entitled to reject the  appellant's  claim  that  his
         father was targeted by the intelligence services,  there  was  very
         little other evidence capable of arousing  the  suspicions  of  the
         Pakistani authorities that  the  appellant  might  be  more  highly
         integrated into the MQM-London.

     24. Whilst I accept that the judge's reference in [17]  (to  not  being
         provided with any background evidence that would  support  a  claim
         that the appellant's time in London would increase the intelligence
         agencies interest  in  him)  does  not  sit  comfortably  with  her
         reference to Dr Giustozzi's report, it is apparent from  [15]  that
         the judge did consider this aspect of  Dr  Giustozzis'  report  but
         that  she  also  noted  (at  [15])  that  there  was  no  'further'
         background country evidence available on the  risk  posed  to  MQM-
         London members who had spent time in London. It  is  highly  likely
         therefore  that  the  judge  was  referring  the  absence  of  this
         'further' evidence in [17].

     25. Having referred at various paragraphs of her decision ([15],  [16],
         [17]) to the question whether the appellant would be 'perceived' as
         an MQM supporter, and having noted that  the  appellant  failed  to
         provide any details of the information he allegedly received  about
         the targeting of MQM members in London or the identities  of  those
         who passed him this  information  [11],  and  having  rejected  his
         account of the attack on his family and noting the absence  of  any
         evidence to  substantiate  his  identity  with  the  social  medial
         accounts of Vick Shapman [12], the judge was entitled to find  that
         the mere length of the appellant's residence in the  UK  would  not
         put him at risk of coming to the adverse attention of the Pakistani
         authorities. I consequently find there was no error of law  by  the
         judge requiring her decision to be set aside.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve with the  making  of
an error on a point of law.

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    10 May 2019

Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
