
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05029/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th December 2018                          |On 27th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                mR m.s.a.a.h.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cronin, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a national of Egypt (born 18th  November  1986)  appeals
    with permission against the decision of a  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Devittie) dismissing his appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  of
    9th April 2018 refusing his protection claim.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes  in
    the following terms:

         "The grounds  assert  that  the  judgment  is  far  too  short  and
         consequently  does  not  deal  with  any  of  the  detail  of  this
         appellant's claims.  The  grounds  are  arguable.   To  dismiss  an
         asylum claim in 10 paragraphs arguably does not do justice  to  the
         depth and breadth  of  the  appellant's  arguments.   There  is  no
         mention of HP, Article 2 or  3  or  8.   Permission  to  appeal  is
         granted."

 3. Thus the matter comes before me to determine whether  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal contains such error that it requires it  to  be
    set aside and remade.

 4. A Rule 24 response was served by the Respondent and that response  says
    the following:

         "The Respondent does not oppose  the  Appellant's  application  for
         permission to appeal and invites the Tribunal to remit the case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal in order  for  a  full  assessment  of  the
         Appellant's case and the risk on return to be made."

Consideration

 5. I  begin  my  consideration  by  setting  out  the  background  to  the
    Appellant's claim.  In summary he claims he would face  persecution  in
    Egypt on account of his  membership  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood.   He
    claims he joined that organisation in 2010, assisting in  meetings  and
    leading demonstrations.  His claim is that he was arrested and detained
    by the authorities in July 2012 and that he remained on  the  run  from
    the authorities from 2013 to 2016.  His brother  was  detained  by  the
    police in 2014 for one month.

 6. The last demonstration he attended was in Egypt was in March 2016.   By
    May 2016 he had arrived in the United Kingdom having travelled by  sea.
    He made no claim to asylum until July 2017 and claimed he had  attended
    a demonstration in London in August 2016.

 7. The FtTJ dismissed the appeal finding that he disbelieved much  of  the
    Appellant's  claim;  although  he  was  prepared  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant was a member of the Muslim Brotherhood.

 8. Having given careful consideration to the  decision  as  a  whole,  the
    Grounds of Appeal and the Rule 24 response served by the Respondent,  I
    am satisfied that the decision of Judge Devittie contains a  number  of
    omissions and errors such as to render it unsafe.

 9. The first and overarching difficulty  is  that  much  of  the  decision
    appears  to  be  a  recitation  of  the  Appellant's  claim   and   the
    Respondent's  refusal  letter.   The  judge  spends   several   lengthy
    paragraphs simply reciting this evidence together with a  note  of  the
    documentary/background evidence produced.

10. When it comes to assessing the evidence, the judge's analysis and fact-
    finding amounts to twenty or so short sentences [8 (1)  to  (3)].   The
    judge describes as unsatisfactory features, matters which he  sets  out
    as undermining the Appellant's claim.  Nowhere do I  see  that  he  has
    grappled with the relevant parts of the evidence which was before  him,
    including the Appellant's witness statement; letters from  two  lawyers
    in Egypt corroborating the Appellant's account of being wanted  by  the
    authorities; an arrest warrant,  and  a  letter  of  support  from  the
    Appellant's father together with  court  documents  pertaining  to  the
    Appellant's brother.

11. It is trite law to say that an Appellant is entitled to have  his  case
    considered  fully.   It  may  be  that  the  evidence,  when   properly
    evaluated, carries little or no weight.  However the point is that  the
    Appellant is entitled to have it considered. I find it appears  from  a
    reading of this determination that the judge has  failed  to  give  the
    evidence appropriate consideration.  That is a material  error  and  is
    especially so when, as in this case, credibility is in issue.   I  find
    therefore that the decision must be set aside and remade.

12. Ms Cronin asked that I preserve the finding made by Judge  Devittie  in
    which he said that he was prepared to accept that the Appellant  was  a
    member of the Muslim Brotherhood [8(1)].  I declined to do so.  It is a
    finding made without any proper reason being given for  the  making  of
    it. This issue forms the core of the Appellant's  claim  and  it  is  a
    matter which the Respondent disputes.  I informed the  parties  at  the
    hearing that the decision would be set aside in its entirety.

13. Because I find that it has not been demonstrated that the Appellant has
    had a fair hearing, I am satisfied that the appropriate course  is  for
    this matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing. This will be before a judge other than Judge Devittie.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Devittie promulgated on 24th August 2018 is set  aside
for material error.  The matter will be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
for the decision to be  remade  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Nothing  is
preserved from the original hearing.  The fresh hearing should be  before  a
judge other than Judge Devittie.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   C E Roberts       Date 14 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts








