
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05948/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th July 2017                 |On 18th July 2017              |
|                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly

                                   Between

                                    [H K]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Siddique,
For the Respondent: Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Manchester, promulgated on the 6th January 2017, to dismiss his  appeal
    against the respondent's refusal of his Protection Claim.

 2. The appellant's claim was that he had worked in a  family-run  bookshop
    in Kunduz, Afghanistan. One of the DVDs in  stock  was  a  film  called
    'Zindagi Hazrat Isha Masih', which was about the  life  of  Jesus.  The
    appellant had watched the video and felt inspired by  it.  It  did  not
    however occur to him that others might view it as un-Islamic.  This  is
    because Jesus is a respected prophet in the Muslim tradition in his own
    right. The appellant therefore sold the  video  to  his  customers  and
    thought nothing of it. However, he subsequently  became  aware  of  its
    potential to cause offence when the police came looking for him and his
    shop was burnt down by angry locals   whilst  he  was  away  purchasing
    fresh stock in  the neighbouring city of  Por-e  Khomri.  He  therefore
    fled to the UK, arriving on the 21st December 2015. He has since become
    a 'born-again Christian'.

 3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a citizen of  Afghanistan
    but  otherwise  found  his  account  lacking  in   credibility.   Judge
    Manchester was similarly unimpressed by the appellant's account. Having
    considered the "cumulative  effect  of  the  inconsistencies"  in  that
    account, as well as the other issues of credibility that he identified,
    the judge concluded that "no credence" could be attached to either  the
    appellant's  account  of  events  in  Afghanistan  or  to  the  claimed
    sincerity of his conversion to Christianity [paragraph 60].

 4. There are two grounds of appeal. The first  complains  that  the  judge
    adopted an unfair approach to the apparent inconsistency in appellant's
    account of the title of  the  DVD  that  led  to  his  difficulties  in
    Afghanistan. The second complains that the judge's findings  concerning
    the chronology of the appellant's first attendance  at  church  in  the
    United Kingdom and refusal of his Protection Claim was contrary to  the
    evidence. I shall consider them in turn.

 5. On the face of it, the appellant had variously described the  title  of
    the video as "The Life of Prophet Jesus Christ",  "The  Life  of  Jesus
    Christ", and "The Life of the Prophet Isha". The judge considered  that
    these differences were important because it was unlikely that  a  video
    including the words "Jesus Christ" within its  title  would  be  openly
    bought and sold in Afghanistan given the risk of  it  being  viewed  as
    heretical material by both the Afghan authorities and  customers  alike
    [paragraph 46]. Mr Siddique argued that the judge ought  to  have  been
    astute to the possibility that these apparent  discrepancies  were  the
    consequence of different translations of the same words,  and  that  it
    was thus unfair not to have canvassed this possibility at the  hearing.
    I reject that submission. It is apparent that the judge was fully aware
    of the possibility of variations in translation as is evidenced by  his
    observation that (referring to the appellant's replies  in  his  Asylum
    Interview) "this could  simply  have  been  a  matter  of  translation"
    [paragraph 45]. The  judge  nevertheless  discounted  that  possibility
    because it was not one that had  been  canvassed  in  a  post-interview
    letter from the representatives to the Home Office that  had  otherwise
    set out corrections and clarifications of the  appellant's  replies  in
    that interview. This fact was sufficient in my  view,  to  entitle  the
    judge to assume that any apparent anomalies relating to  the  title  of
    the video were due to inconsistencies in the appellant's description of
    it rather than to variations in its  translation.  There  was  thus  no
    unfairness in the judge not canvassing the  possibility  of  errors  in
    translation given that the appellant's own representatives had not seen
    fit to do so at an earlier stage in the proceedings.

 6. The second ground attacks the reasoning behind what the judge described
    as the "second limb" of the appellant's claim, namely,  his  conversion
    to Christianity following his arrival in the United Kingdom. The  judge
    noted that the appellant had  not  attended  church  in  the  UK  until
    roughly five months after his arrival and that his explanation for this
    was that he had had difficulty in  finding  one  that  included  Farsi-
    speakers amongst its congregation. The judge attached little weight  to
    that explanation given that the appellant  had  failed  to  detail  his
    attempts to do so prior to being introduced by a flatmate to the church
    that he now attends.

 7. The judge continued, at paragraph 55, as follows -

      "In those circumstances, it is in my view right  to  exercise  caution
      when considering the claim that his subsequent action  in  becoming  a
      regular church attender  and  having  been  baptised  was  an  organic
      development arising from the spark lit by  his  viewing  the  film  in
      Afghanistan.  Indeed, although he states that he attended  the  church
      for the first time on 8 May, this is not mentioned in  the  subsequent
      letter from his representatives and the date is not confirmed  in  the
      letter from David Lanstrom who only came to know him  from  July.   In
      those circumstances,  taking  into  account  in  any  event  that  the
      Appellant's attendance  at  the  church  started  on  3  July,  it  is
      difficult to avoid the distinct possibility that his attendance at the
      church may have been motivated more by the refusal of  his  protection
      claim than a genuine interest in Christianity."

 8. The letter to which the judge referred is dated the 21st October  2016.
    It states that the appellant "first came to St Aidan's  Church  in  May
    2016" and "started to attend ... regularly on the 3rd of  July".  Thus,
    although the judge was correct in stating  that  the  letter  does  not
    confirm "the date" of the appellant's first attendance  at  church,  it
    clearly confirms that  his  attendance  preceded  the  refusal  of  his
    Protection Claim, which was subsequently issued to him on the 31st  May
    2016. Moreover, whilst he recorded it at paragraph 31 of his  decision,
    this aspect of the  judge's  reasoning  makes  no  reference  to  David
    Lanstrom's oral testimony, which was to the effect that the church  had
    made a contemporaneous written record of the appellant's attendance  in
    May 2016. The clear implication of this is  that  it  would  have  been
    possible to verify the precise dated in  May  when  the  appellant  had
    first attended church.

 9. It is right to say that at paragraphs 56, 57, and 58 of  the  decision,
    the judge explained at some length why he  attached  little  weight  to
    David Lanstrom's belief that the appellant was  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity before concluding that,  whilst  sincerely  held,  it  may
    nevertheless, "have been  over-influenced  by  his  evangelical  aims".
    There is however no suggestion that the judge found David  Lanstrom  to
    be anything other than a truthful witness.  I  am  therefore  satisfied
    that the reasoning at paragraph 55 of  the  decision  was  inconsistent
    with evidence that the judge found to be broadly credible. This was  an
    error of law.

10. I have considered whether this error of law was material to the outcome
    of the appeal given the  other  sustainable  reasons  (including  those
    based upon the inconsistencies relating to the title of the video) that
    the judge gave for finding that the credibility of  the  appellant  was
    wanting. However, I have concluded that this aspect  of  his  reasoning
    cannot be isolated from the remainder of the decision due  to  (i)  the
    apparent emphasis that the judge attached to it in the  final  sentence
    of paragraph 55, and (ii) the cumulative basis  upon  which  he  stated
    that he had arrived at  his  conclusion  [paragraph  66].  It  is  thus
    impossible to say whether or not the flawed reasoning at  paragraph  55
    tipped the  balance  against  the  appellant  in  the  judge's  overall
    assessment of his credibility. I have  thus  reluctantly  come  to  the
    conclusion that the decision must be set aside and remade afresh in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11. The appeal is allowed, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set
    aside, and the appeal is remitted to First-tier Tribunal to  be  remade
    by any judge save Judge Manchester.

12. Any further directions concerning the future conduct of this appeal are
    reserved to the Acting Resident Judge at Bradford.

No anonymity direction is made.





Judge Kelly                             Date: 17th July 2017

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


