
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05465/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3rd & 8th May 2017                         |On 16th August 2017           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                              ALi RASULI MAHMUD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan and Ms J Blair of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr M Gullick of Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Hussain promulgated on 2 November 2016, in which his appeal against the
    Respondent's decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim dated
    19 May 2016 was dismissed.  That decision involved,  as  a  preliminary
    matter, whether the notice of appeal included a 'new matter' such  that
    section 85 of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (the
    2002 Act) applied to prevent the First-tier Tribunal  from  considering
    evidence on it in the absence of the Respondent  giving  consent.   The
    evidence concerned the Appellant's relationship with his  new  partner,
    Ms P and her son, which was first raised in the notice of appeal[1].

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iran, born  on  23  November  1994,  who
    arrived in the United Kingdom 23 January 2012 and claimed asylum.  That
    application was refused by the Respondent but the appeal  against  that
    refusal was allowed by Judge Pirotta in a  decision  promulgated  on  2
    October 2012 on the basis that the Respondent had failed to  take  into
    account section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
    and failed  to  carry  out  obligations  as  to  family  tracing.   The
    application was referred back to the Respondent to remake the  decision
    in light of that.  It is that remade decision of 19 May 2016 which  was
    the subject of the appeal before Judge Hussain.

 3. The Appellant's asylum claim was based on a fear of return to Iran from
    the authorities there because of his brothers' involvement  with  PJAK,
    the Kurdistan Free Life  Party,  which  is  banned  by  the  state  and
    considered a terrorist organisation.

 4. The Respondent refused the application on the basis that the  Appellant
    was not considered to be credible and it  was  not  accepted  that  his
    brother was involved with PJAK, that his brother was arrested, nor that
    the Appellant was wanted by the authorities in Iran.

 5. Judge  Hussain  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all  grounds  on  which  he
    considered he had jurisdiction to determine, which was the asylum claim
    and claims for humanitarian protection and under Articles 2  and  3  of
    the European Convention on Human  rights  which  arose  from  the  same
    facts.  Judge Hussain did not find the Appellant to be credible and  in
    particular was not satisfied that the Appellant's brother was  involved
    with PJAK, that his brother had been arrested, nor that there  was  any
    outstanding arrest warrant for the Appellant who had not  come  to  the
    adverse attention of the Iranian  authorities.   As  such  it  was  not
    considered that he would face any risk on return to Iran.   There  were
    no findings of, nor any express decision on the appeal on Article 8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant appeals on five grounds as follows:

    a) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge materially misdirected himself in
       law when finding that he had no jurisdiction to consider evidence of
       the Appellant's relationship with his new partner and her son.   The
       Appellant claims that there was no new  ground  of  appeal  on  this
       basis, it was simply a matter of new  evidence  as  to  private  and
       family life which was already in issue such that  section  85(5)  of
       the 2002 Act did not apply;

    b) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  take  into  account  a
       material matter by conflating the lack of  existence  of  an  arrest
       warrant for the Appellant before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with  a
       question of whether it was ever issued or served on the  Appellant's
       family;

    c) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  take  into  account  a
       material matter, namely that the Appellant's evidence was  that  his
       brother was detained and still in detention and made  findings  that
       in situations such as that claimed  by  the  Appellant,  all  family
       members would be arrested and detained as  the  Iranian  authorities
       would act strictly according to a set procedure and follow the  rule
       of law;

    d) that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to  take  into  account  a
       material matter by placing weight on a  conclusion  that  an  arrest
       warrant could only be served on the Appellant's  family  where  they
       have divulged the whereabouts of the Appellant  without  considering
       whether the Appellant's family had given a truthful account  of  his
       whereabouts and the plausibility  of  risk  this  may  pose  to  the
       family;

    e) that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take into account a  material
       matter by placing insufficient weight on the fact that the Appellant
       was a child when he first claimed asylum and was  first  interviewed
       and that he had suffered a  head  injury,  with  little  information
       available about his short or long-term memory/mental state.   It  is
       claimed that there was a failure to give  any  real  effect  to  the
       Appellant's mental health or his age when  he  claimed  asylum  when
       considering the evidence and issues of credibility.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Saffer on 22 November 2016 on
    all grounds.

 8. This appeal first came before Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce for hearing on
    17 January 2007, when it was adjourned with directions for the  parties
    to address the following four issues  in  relation  to  the  Article  8
    appeal:

      i) Having regard to the statutory scheme, was the  Tribunal  empowered
         to consider for itself whether the material relating to Ms P was  a
         'new matter'?

     ii) If so, what were the relevant factors for consideration?

    iii) Was there any identifiable error in the Tribunal's conclusion  that
         the material relating to Ms P was a 'new  matter'  given  that  the
         Appellant had raised Article  8  family  life  grounds  before  the
         Respondent's decision, and in  the  grounds  of  appeal,  some  six
         months prior to the hearing?

     iv) Was the failure to address Article 8 at all in the determination an
         error of law regardless of the answers to (i) to (iii) above?

 9. To determine the above questions, it is first  necessary  to  determine
    what a 'new matter' is for the purposes of section 85(5) and (6) of the
    2002 Act and to determine the meaning of 'consent' in section 85(5)  of
    the 2002 Act.

Relevant law and procedure

10. Part V of the 2002 Act  makes  provision  for  appeals  in  respect  of
    protection and human rights claims and  so  far  as  relevant  to  this
    appeal provides as follows:

         82. Right of appeal to the Tribunal
         (1)  A person "P" may appeal to the Tribunal where -
             (a)  the Secretary of State has decided to refuse a protection
                 claim made by P,
             (b)  the Secretary of State has decided to  refuse  the  human
                 rights claim made by P, or
             (c)   the  Secretary  of  State  has  decided  to  revoke  P's
                 protection status.

         84. Grounds of appeal
         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1)(a) (refusal of protection claim)
             must be bought on one or more of the following grounds -
             (a)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's  obligations  under  the
                  Refugee Convention;
             (b)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in  relation
                  to  persons  eligible  for   a   grant   of   humanitarian
                  protection;
             (c)  that removal of the appellant  from  the  United  Kingdom
                  would be unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights  Act
                  1998 (public authority not to act contrary to Human Rights
                  Convention).
         (2)  An appeal under section  82(1)(b)  (refusal  of  human  rights
             claim) must be bought on the  grounds  that  the  decision  is
             unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.

         85. Matters to be considered
         (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) against the  decision  shall  be
             treated by the Tribunal as including  an  appeal  against  any
             decision in respect of which the  appellant  has  a  right  of
             appeal under section 82(1).
         (2)  If an appellant under section 82(1) makes  a  statement  under
             section 120, the Tribunal shall consider any matter raised  in
             a statement which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a  kind
             listed in section 84 the decision appealed against.
         (3)  Subsection (2) applies to a statement made under  section  120
             whether the statement was made before  after  the  appeal  was
             commenced.
         (4)  On an appeal under section 82(1) ... against  a  decision  the
             Tribunal may consider... any matter which it  thinks  relevant
             to the  substance  of  the  decision,  including...  a  matter
             arising after the date of decision.
         (5)  But the Tribunal must not consider a new matter and unless the
             Secretary of Status has given the Tribunal consent to do so.
         (6)  A matter is a "new matter" if -
             (a)  it constitutes a ground of appeal of  a  kind  listed  in
                  section 84, and
             (b)  the Secretary of State has not previously considered  the
                  matter in the context of -
                  (i) the decision mentioned in section 82(1), or
                  (ii) a statement made by the appellant under section 120.

         86.  Determination of appeal
         (1)  This section applies on an appeal under section 82(1).
         (2)  The Tribunal must determine -
             (a) any matter raised as a ground of appeal..., and
             (b) any matter which section 85 requires it to consider.

         96.  Earlier right of appeal
         (1)  A person may not appeal under section 82 against the  decision
             ("the  new  decision")  if  the  Secretary  of  State  or   an
             immigration officer certifies -
             (a)  that the person was notified of a right of  appeal  under
                  that  section  against  another...  decision   ('the   old
                  decision') (whether or  not  an  appeal  was  brought  and
                  whether or not any appeal brought has been determined),
             (b)  that the claim or application to which the  new  decision
                  relates relies on a ground that could have been raised  in
                  appeal against the old decision, and
             (c)  that, in the opinion of the Secretary  of  State  or  the
                  immigration officer, there is no satisfactory  reason  for
                  that ground not having been raised in  an  appeal  against
                  the old decision.

         113. Interpretation
         (1) In this Part, unless a contrary intention appears -
         ...
         'human rights claim' -
          a) means a claim made by a person that  to  remove  him  from  or
             require him to leave the United Kingdom or to refuse him entry
             to the United Kingdom ... would be unlawful under section 6 of
             the Human  Rights  Act  1998  (public  authority  not  to  act
             contrary to Convention) ...

11. So far as is relevant to this appeal, Rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014  (the
    "Procedure Rules") provides as follows:
          1) Except in appeals in which rule 23 applies, when a  respondent
             is provided with a copy of a notice of appeal, the  respondent
             must provide the Tribunal with -
               a) the notice of the decision to which the notice  of  appeal
                  relates and any other document the respondent provided  to
                  the appellant giving reasons for that decision;
               b) any statement of evidence or application form completed by
                  the appellant;
               c) any record of an interview with the appellant in  relation
                  to the decision being appealed;
               d) any other unpublished document which is referred to  in  a
                  document mentioned in sub-paragraph (a) or relied upon  by
                  the respondent; and
               e) the notice  of  any  other  appealable  decision  made  in
                  relation to the appellant.
          2) The respondent must, if the respondent intends  to  change  or
             add the grounds or reasons relied upon in the  notice  or  the
             other documents referred to in paragraph (1)(a),  provide  the
             Tribunal and the other parties with a statement of whether the
             respondent opposes the appellant's case and  the  grounds  for
             such opposition.
          3) The documents  listed  in  paragraph  (1)  and  any  statement
             required under paragraph  (2)  must  be  provided  in  writing
             within 28 days of the date on which the Tribunal sent  to  the
             respondent a copy of the notice of appeal and any accompanying
             documents or information provided under rule 19(6).

Discussion & findings

Appellant's application to adduce further evidence under Rule 15(2A)

12.  We  deal  first  with  the  preliminary  matter  of  the   Appellant's
    application  under  Rule  15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure   (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 to adduce further evidence which was not available
    at the date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  This further  material
    included statements from the Appellant's solicitor and previous Counsel
    relating  to  what  occurred  at  the  First-tier   Tribunal   hearing;
    correspondence to/from the Respondent's solicitors; correspondence with
    the   First-tier   Tribunal   and   Tribunals   Rules   Committee   and
    minutes/statements held on  file  by  the  Appellant's  solicitor.   We
    refuse to admit the further material under Rule 15(2A) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the basis  that  it  does  not
    assist in the determination of the issues in the present appeal for the
    following reasons:
       - Part of this material relates to the conduct of  the  Home  Officer
         Presenting Officer at the First-tier Tribunal  hearing,  which  for
         the reasons set out below, is not relevant to any of the grounds of
         appeal nor are the allegations made out on the face of the decision
         under appeal itself.
       - Part of the material is a copy of documents received from a subject
         access request  and  appears  to  be  relied  upon  to  support  an
         inference as to when the Respondent was  first  aware  of  the  new
         matter raised by the Appellant, which is also not relevant  to  the
         issues in this appeal for the reasons given above and below.
       - Part of the material relates to correspondence  on  behalf  of  the
         Appellant which  is  said  to  show  his  attempts  to  engage  the
         Respondent and the Tribunal as to the application of rule 24 of the
         Procedure Rules and any  guidance  on  its  application.   For  the
         reasons set out below, the Appellant's reliance on rule 24 for  the
         purposes  of  statutory  construction  does  not  assist  and   the
         correspondence on this point is also irrelevant.
       - The remaining material as  to  the  knowledge  of  the  Appellant's
         solicitor may be relevant to any future determination  of  the  new
         matter but does not assist in determination of the issues  in  this
         appeal.

First ground of appeal - statutory construction of section 85(5) and (6)  of
the 2002 Act

13. On the facts of the present case, in relation to the  first  ground  of
    appeal, it was submitted on behalf of the Appellant that he had  relied
    upon private and family life having  been  established  in  the  United
    Kingdom under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and
    more specifically that the matter considered by the Respondent in  this
    regard was whether his removal from the  United  Kingdom  would  be  in
    breach of section 6 of the Human Rights Act  1998  (the  "Human  Rights
    Act").  As such, it was submitted  that  further  evidence  as  to  the
    Appellant's family life with Ms P and her child, which built  upon  the
    existing ground of appeal that the Appellant's removal from the  United
    Kingdom would be a disproportionate  interference  with  his  right  to
    respect for private and family life and therefore contrary to section 6
    of the Human Rights Act, was not therefore  a  'new  matter'.   In  the
    alternative, it was submitted that even if the material  constituted  a
    'new matter', the Respondent is deemed to have consented to the  First-
    tier Tribunal considering it and/or the  failure  to  make  a  positive
    decision to consent  was  in  any  event  procedurally  unfair  to  the
    Appellant.  Two distinct issues of construction therefore arise, first,
    as to the meaning of 'new matter' in section 85(6) and secondly, as  to
    the requirements and procedures of consent in section 85(5) of the 2002
    Act.

14. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Chelvan's primary  submission  was  that
    for the purposes of section 85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act, a new matter
    meant a new ground of appeal, namely that removal would be contrary  to
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998, although for  present  purposes
    he did not need to put the claim this broadly and could confine himself
    to a new matter being a specific Article of the European Convention  on
    Human Rights which would fall under the umbrella  ground  that  removal
    would be contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act.  In this  case,
    reliance was placed on Article 8 which had already been  considered  by
    the Respondent in the reasons for refusal letter, albeit  based  on  an
    alternative factual premise which had been submitted by  the  Appellant
    at that time.  It was submitted that a 'new matter' could not merely be
    new facts or evidence relating to an extant ground of appeal but  would
    have to constitute an entirely new ground of appeal.

15. The construction contended for by the Appellant is said to be supported
    by a variety of sources, including parliamentary material (for which  a
    Pepper v Hart application was  made  only  during  the  course  of  the
    hearing and only in response  to  questions  from  the  panel  and  the
    Respondent's submissions as to whether this material  could  be  relied
    upon at all); rule 24 of the Procedure Rules and section 96 of the 2002
    Act.  We deal with each of these  matters  in  turn,  together  with  a
    number of  other  more  minor  submissions  made  by  Counsel  for  the
    Appellant which were not of assistance in dealing with  the  issues  of
    statutory construction in this case.

16. The Respondent contends that 'new matter' in section 85(5) and  (6)  is
    something broader than a ground of appeal and includes  evidence  which
    could, of itself, form  a  ground  of  appeal.   This  more  accurately
    reflects the wording of section 85(6) which states that a matter  is  a
    new matter if (a) it constitutes a ground of appeal of a kind listed in
    section 84 and not, as proposed on behalf  of  the  Applicant,  that  a
    matter is a new matter if it (a) constitutes a new  ground  of  appeal.
    There is no basis for reading in a requirement for there to  be  a  new
    ground of appeal contrary to the clear wording of the statute.

17. At the outset, we find that the interpretation  contended  for  by  the
    Appellant is one which, taken at its highest, would lead to the  absurd
    result that nothing could ever be a new matter in an  asylum  or  human
    rights appeal within the current statutory framework.  Under section 82
    of the 2002 Act, a person  may  appeal  to  the  Tribunal  against  the
    decision to refuse a protection claim, to refuse human rights claim  or
    decision to revoke a person's protection status.   In  accordance  with
    section 84(2) of the same, an appeal against the refusal of  the  human
    rights claim can be appealed on the single ground that the decision  is
    unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act.  If a new  matter  in
    the context of section 85 of the 2002 Act means a new ground of appeal,
    it would be impossible, where there is only a single ground of  appeal,
    for there ever to be a new matter arising.

18. Similarly, in accordance with section 84(1) of the 2002 Act, an  appeal
    against the refusal of an asylum claim must be bought on one or more of
    the grounds set out, namely that removal  of  the  appellant  from  the
    United Kingdom would breach obligations under the  Refugee  Convention,
    removal would breach obligations in relation to  persons  eligible  for
    grant of humanitarian protection and  where  removal  from  the  United
    Kingdom would be unlawful under section 6  of  the  Human  Rights  Act.
    Practically, in any asylum decision made by the  Respondent,  there  is
    always consideration of the claim on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds such that for practical purposes  it  is  also
    the case that on the Appellant's construction, there could never  be  a
    new ground of appeal outside of these matters that any appellant  could
    possibly raise which would be considered  to  be  a  new  matter  under
    section 85 of the 2002 Act.

19. In practice, it is unlikely given the frequency with which reliance  is
    placed on Articles 2, 3 and 8  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights that for the same reasons a new matter  would  arise  frequently
    even on Mr Chelvan's secondary contention for  construction  of  a  new
    matter that it could be limited to a particular Article of the European
    Convention on Human Rights.

20. The absurdity of the outcome of the construction contended for  by  the
    Appellant, which would deprive section 85(5) and (6) of all meaning  on
    the wider basis and even on the narrow basis would significantly  limit
    its application to a very small  number  of  cases,  is  a  strong  and
    significant factor as to why we do  not  agree  with  the  construction
    contended for.  In any event, we go on to set out the reasons why we do
    not find support for that construction in any  of  the  points  further
    relied upon by the Appellant.

Appellant's reliance on parliamentary material

21. Mr Chelvan  sought  to  rely  on  parliamentary  material  support  the
    construction of a new matter for the purposes of section 85 of the 2002
    Act and only during the course of proceedings, with no  advance  notice
    to the Respondent, made an oral application to do so in accordance with
    the guidance set out by the House of  Lords  in  Pepper  (Inspector  of
    Taxes) v Hart and related appeals [1993] 1 All ER 42.  The  courts  are
    usually prohibited from referring to parliamentary material as  an  aid
    to construction save when  the  following  three  conditions  are  met.
    First, the legislation was ambiguous or obscure or the literal  meaning
    leads to an absurdity; secondly, the material relied  on  consisted  of
    statements by the Minister or other promoter of the Bill which leads to
    the enactment of the legislation together if necessary with such  other
    parliamentary material as was necessary to understand  such  statements
    and their effects; and, thirdly, the statements relied on were clear.

22. In relation to the first requirement, we do  not  accept  that  section
    85(5) or (6) of the 2002 Act is ambiguous, obscure or that the  literal
    meaning, would lead to an absurdity such that the first test is not met
    for reliance on this material.  We have however considered the passages
    relied upon by Mr Chelvan, which are set out below.

23. The explanatory notes to the Immigration  Bill  as  introduced  in  the
    House of  Commons  on  10  October  2013,  included  the  following  at
    paragraph 76:

         "Subsection (5) substitutes a new section 85(5)  of  the  2002  Act
         which provides that the Tribunal may  not  consider  a  new  matter
         unless the Secretary of State has given the Tribunal consent to  do
         so.  "New matter" is defined in new section 85(6) as being a ground
         of appeal within section 84, or any reason the  appellant  has  for
         wishing to enter or remain  in  the  UK,  and  a  matter  that  the
         Secretary of State has not previously considered in the context  of
         a decision in section 82(1) or a statement made under  section  120
         of the 2002 Act.  This is to prevent appellants  from  raising  new
         grounds before the Tribunal before the  Secretary  of  State  of  a
         chance to consider them."

24. In response to a proposed amendment to the relevant clause of the  bill
    from Lady Berridge at second  reading  in  the  House  of  lords,  Lord
    Wallace of Tankerness, the sponsor of the bill at that stage, stated on
    1 April 2014:

         "My Lords, one of the  examples  given  by  my  noble  friend  Lady
         Berridge was that a matter may suddenly be raised.  It is important
         to make the point that we  are  not  talking  about  the  appellant
         relying on new evidence to support  a  ground  already  before  the
         tribunal.  I know that the  noble  and  learned  Lord  accepts  and
         understand that.  For example, if there was an appeal about refusal
         of the family life settlement, new evidence on  family  life  would
         obviously be something which could be led.   Nor  will  the  clause
         prevent access to the court, because  the  individual  would  still
         have an appeal against the refusal.  If the new matter on which  an
         application was made was refused, then obviously the  matter  could
         be appealed to the tribunal.

         I note what the noble and learned Lord says, but  my  noble  friend
         Lady Berridge talked about a new ground of appeal  which  the  Home
         Office may have found out about only the night before.  When people
         talk about equality of arms, I'm  not  necessarily  persuaded  that
         someone  going  into  the  tribunal  will  find  that  there  is  a
         completely new ground of appeal which they only learnt about within
         the previous 12 hours.  That is an inequality of  arms.   My  noble
         friend and learned friend Lord Mackay  of  Clashfern  commented  on
         whether or not the Home Office had been  answering  the  telephone.
         These are practical issues that ought to be addressed, but I do not
         think they go to the principle we are discussing.

         I am always wary - as was the noble Baroness, Lady Smith - of using
         football analogies, but they were  mentioned  by  my  noble  friend
         moving her amendment.  If an FA Cup match  went  to  penalties,  it
         would not be for one party to say, "By the way, we will just go  to
         the referee and say, 'If we are having a penalty shootout, it  will
         do for the other cup tie that we are to play next  week.   We  will
         just do the two in one' ".  If it is a completely new case,  it  is
         not reasonable that that should happen.  I stress that this is  not
         a situation where person is going to be denied the  opportunity  to
         bring a separate case on the new matter.  They were still  be  able
         to bring it and, if they were dissatisfied with the  decision  made
         by the Secretary of State, the appeal would still be open to them.

         The proposed measure could create an incentive for an appellant  to
         raise a new matter at that late stage because  they  could  try  to
         persuade the tribunal that the matter should be heard  despite  the
         Secretary of State not having considered  and  decided  the  issue.
         The Secretary of State will have to strike that balance,  depending
         on whether or not she wishes to give her consent - if, indeed,  the
         case was adjourned.  Documents may suddenly have been produced  the
         veracity  of  which  the  Secretary  of  State  will  have  had  no
         opportunity to examine.  If it is  a  new  ground  of  appeal,  the
         Government argue that the primary decision-maker is  the  Secretary
         of State and the proper role of the tribunal  is  to  hear  appeals
         against the decision of the Secretary of State, if the applicant is
         dissatisfied with the original outcome.  As the noble  and  learned
         Lord, Lord Hope, said, I do not see that this is the case of  being
         a judge in one's own cause  because  the  cause  that  is  properly
         before the tribunal is one in which both parties will  argue  their
         case.

         When a new cause is introduced, the  Secretary  of  State  makes  a
         decision on it through his executive function.   What  in  fact  is
         been suggested is that that decision should not be  made  by  those
         from the executive branch but should be  a  judicial  decision.   I
         think that there is a blurring there.   If  we  are  arguing  as  a
         matter of fundamental principle that a  decision  is  one  for  the
         Executive, the question is whether, indeed,  the  primary  decision
         should be made by the judiciary.  I cannot ignore the force of  the
         comments that have been made.  The noble  and  learned  Lord,  Lord
         Hope, helpfully suggested where this might be  amended.   I  should
         make it very clear that  I  cannot  give  any  guarantee  that  the
         Government will come back  at  Third  Reading  with  an  amendment.
         However, it is only proper that we reflect on  the  very  important
         issues that have been raised."

25. In the House of Lords, the Government introduced an  amendment  to  the
    proposed clause to narrow the definition of 'new matter', as  explained
    in the explanatory notes dated 6 May 2014.  At  Third  Reading  in  the
    House of Lords, Lord Wallace of  Tankerness  explained  the  amendment,
    including the following:

         "... Our discussions were helpful and not least identified that the
         definition of a "new matter" is wider  than  necessary  because  it
         includes reasons for wishing to remain in the United Kingdom which,
         if refused, would not  give  rise  to  a  right  of  appeal.   This
         potentially extends the scope of the power to give  consent  beyond
         appealable  matters.   As  the  significance  of  "new  matter"  is
         restricted to circumstances in which an appeal  would  arise  as  a
         consequence of the decision, the  definition  should  be  similarly
         restricted - hence this amendment."

26. The material set out  above  originates  from  the  statements  by  the
    promoter of the bill in the House of Lords which satisfies  the  second
    criteria in Pepper v Hart but we do not find that the statements relied
    upon give any clear answer  to  the  issue  of  statutory  construction
    relevant to this appeal.  Much of the debate was not on the question of
    whether there was a 'new matter' or the definition of such,  but  about
    the issue of consent and the matter of principle as to who the  primary
    decision-maker is on any particular point.  In these circumstances,  we
    do not admit the parliamentary material as  it  does  not  satisfy  the
    requirements set out in Pepper v Hart to do so.

27. Counsel for the Appellant sought to rely on section 96 of the 2002  Act
    in support of the statutory construction advanced but during the course
    of the hearing was unable to identify on what basis a  section  dealing
    with the possibility of the Respondent at  some  point  in  the  future
    certifying a future of application for leave to remain could assist  in
    interpretation of section 85 of the 2002 Act.  We do however accept the
    implied suggestion that the  Appellant  was  right  to  raise  his  new
    relationship in  the  notice  of  appeal  to  protect  himself  against
    certification  under  section  96  of  the  2002  Act  of  any   future
    application which he would have been at risk of had  he  not  mentioned
    this information  when  he  did.   That  of  course  explains  why  the
    information was given and raised  when  it  was,  but  it  is  entirely
    irrelevant to the issue of statutory construction and an assessment  of
    whether the material itself was  a  new  matter  for  the  purposes  of
    section 85 of the 2002 Act.

28. The Respondent's policy at the date of the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, 'Rights of Appeal' version 3, contains the  Respondent's
    guidance as to what is a 'new matter' and the difference between a  new
    matter and new evidence.  It was not suggested  by  either  party  that
    this was a  suitable  aid  to  statutory  construction,  nor  were  any
    submissions made on the accuracy of the guidance in accordance with the
    statutory provision.  Although we would  express  some  caution  as  to
    whether it is entirely correct, particularly in the section  about  the
    difference between a new matter and new evidence, we  do  not  consider
    this further in detail given that a newer version of the  guidance  has
    since been issued and the Respondent will undoubtedly  reflect  on  her
    own guidance in light of this decision.

Conclusions on the meaning of a 'new matter' in section 86)

29. A matter is the factual substance of a claim.  A ground  of  appeal  is
    the legal basis on which the facts in any given matter could  form  the
    basis of a challenge  to  the  decision  under  appeal.   For  example,
    medical evidence of a serious health condition could be a matter  which
    constitutes a ground of appeal on human rights grounds based on Article
    3 of the European Convention on Human Rights which if  breached,  would
    mean that removal would be contrary to section 6 of  the  Human  Rights
    Act, a ground of appeal in section 84(2) of the 2002  Act.   Similarly,
    evidence of a relationship with a partner in the United  Kingdom  could
    be a matter which constitutes a ground of appeal based on Article 8 and
    for the same reasons could fall within section 84(2) of the 2002 Act as
    if made out, removal would be contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights
    Act.

30. A 'new matter' is a matter which constitutes a ground of  appeal  of  a
    kind listed in section 84, as required by section 85(6)(a) of the  2002
    Act.  Constituting a ground of appeal means  that  it  must  contain  a
    matter which could raise or establish a listed ground  of  appeal.   In
    the absence of this restriction, section 85(5) of the  2002  Act  could
    potentially allow the Respondent to give the Tribunal  jurisdiction  to
    consider something which is not a ground of appeal by consent,  thereby
    undermining sections 82 and 84 of the 2002 Act;

31. Practically, a new matter is a factual matrix which has not  previously
    been considered by the  Secretary  of  State  in  the  context  of  the
    decision in section 82(1) or a statement made by  the  appellant  under
    section 120.  This requires the matter to be  factually  distinct  from
    that previously raised by an appellant, as opposed to further or better
    evidence of an existing matter.  The assessment  will  always  be  fact
    sensitive.  By way of example, evidence that a couple had married since
    the decision is likely to be new evidence but not a  new  matter  where
    the relationship had previously been relied upon and considered by  the
    Secretary of State.  Conversely, evidence that a couple had had a child
    since the decision is  likely  to  be  a  new  matter  as  it  adds  an
    additional  distinct  new  family  relationship   (with   consequential
    requirements to consider the best interests of the child under  section
    55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009)  which  itself
    could separately raise or establish a ground of appeal under Article  8
    that removal would be contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act.

32. In accordance with the construction  of  section  85(6)(a)  of  a  'new
    matter' contended for by Counsel for the Appellant, he  submitted  that
    on the facts of this case, the Respondent had  considered  the  matter,
    (namely whether the Appellant's removal from the United  Kingdom  would
    be contrary to section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  on  the  grounds
    that there would be a disproportionate interference with his  right  to
    respect for private and family life  protected  by  Article  8  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights) so that no further matter  raising
    the same ground could be a 'new matter' within section  85(6)(b).   For
    the reasons set out above, the primary submission fails  and  therefore
    so does the submission that in fact, the Respondent had considered  the
    matter.  The fact that the Respondent had, in her decision dated 19 May
    2016, considered the Appellant's private and family life on  the  basis
    of information known to her at that date, was not  sufficient  to  show
    consideration  of  the  matter  now  relied   upon:   the   Appellant's
    relationship with a new partner and her child.  Actual consideration in
    a decision letter of the new factual matrix relied upon is required for
    a matter to fall outside section 85(6)(b) and therefore not be  a  'new
    matter'.

The Secretary of State's consent to the Tribunal to consider a  new  matter,
section 85(5)

33. The second part of construction with which  we  have  to  deal  is  the
    meaning of consent in section 85(5) of the 2002 Act.   A  Tribunal  may
    consider new matters if the Secretary of State has given  the  Tribunal
    consent to do so.

34. Mr Chelvan submitted that the procedure to give or withhold consent  is
    contained within rule 24 of the Procedure Rules, which itself acts as a
    gatekeeper to ensure equality between the parties.  Emphasis was placed
    on  rules  24(2)  and  (3)  which  are  said  to  contain  a  mandatory
    requirement for the Respondent to provide a statement in opposition  to
    all matters, specifically including those raised in box E of the notice
    of appeal form (the new matters section).  This requires a  reading  of
    rule 24(2) to include a requirement that if the  Respondent  takes  the
    view that something raised in the notice of  appeal  is  a  new  matter
    governed by section 85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act, she  is  obliged  to
    indicate that and to indicate if she intends to withhold consent.

35. It was further submitted that the failure  to  file  such  a  statement
    means that by omission, the Respondent does not oppose the  new  matter
    being raised in the appeal notice and is deemed by that conduct to have
    given consent for the new matter to be  considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Reliance was placed on the Upper Tribunal's decision  in  MH
    (Respondent's bundle: Documents  not  provided)  Pakistan  [2010]  UKUT
    00168 to support the submission by analogy with a situation  where  the
    Respondent was found to have been required to submit a document to  the
    Tribunal in accordance with a different  requirement  in  former  rules
    (rule 13 of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005)
    which was designed to ensure that an appellant knew the  case  that  he
    had to meet on appeal.  It was held in that case that the tribunal  was
    entitled to conclude that a document not furnished under that rule  was
    not a document on which the Respondent relied.

36. First, we express caution  in  using  procedure  rules  as  an  aid  to
    statutory construction  generally  and  specifically  for  the  purpose
    construing the meaning of 'consent' in section 85(5) of the  2002  Act.
    The procedure rules govern the procedure to be applied to matters  that
    are before the Tribunal to determine  in  an  appeal,  whereas  in  the
    present situation, the effect of section 85(5) is that the Tribunal has
    no jurisdiction to consider a new matter.   Procedure  rules  governing
    determination of an appeal can therefore offer little if any assistance
    on the interpretation of statute which determines the  jurisdiction  of
    the Tribunal itself.   Secondly,  we  do  not  consider  that  rule  24
    contains any such mandatory requirement on the Respondent  in  relation
    to consent for new  matters.   Thirdly,  in  any  event,  it  would  be
    contrary to the clear language in section 85(5) requiring the Secretary
    of State to have given consent, to find that  by  means  of  procedural
    rules, deemed consent can be inferred by inaction.   Section  85(5)  of
    the 2002 Act requires actual consent by the Respondent which cannot  be
    deemed or implied.

37. Rule 24(2) expressly states that the Respondent must, if the Respondent
    intends to change or add to the grounds or reasons relied upon  in  the
    notice or the other documents referred to in paragraph (1)(a),  provide
    the Tribunal and the other parties with  a  statement  of  whether  the
    Respondent opposes the  appellant's  case  and  the  grounds  for  such
    opposition (emphasis added).  The requirement to make  a  statement  is
    clearly conditional.  The  condition  that  the  Respondent  wishes  to
    change or add to the grounds reasons relied upon, does not include  any
    requirement to make a new decision on a new matter  identified  in  the
    notice of appeal or in a section 120 notice, nor to indicate if consent
    is withheld for such a new matter to be  considered  by  the  Tribunal.
    The decision in MH (Pakistan) is not applicable  to  the  present  case
    which significantly differs on its facts as to the type of document  or
    statement in issue.  MH Pakistan was concerned with a failure to submit
    a specified document in the old rule 13, such that the  document  could
    not be relied upon by the Respondent.  Rule 24  does  not  require  the
    Respondent to make any statement or new  decision  as  to  new  matters
    raised by an appellant which is qualitatively different to the  failure
    to submit an existing document used at the time of the decision.

38. Further it appears that if the Respondent had made a statement pursuant
    to rule 24, the effect would inevitably be that the matter would not be
    a 'new matter' because it had in fact been considered by the Respondent
    in the context of the decision under appeal  and  would  therefore  not
    meet the definition in  section  85(6)(b)(i)  of  the  2002  Act.   The
    construction of rule 24 contended for by the Appellant would  have  the
    result of rendering section  85(5)  of  the  2002  Act  devoid  of  any
    application in practice.

39. Mr Chelvan made further submissions as to whether there was in place an
    appropriate procedure for the Respondent to give or withhold consent to
    the First-tier Tribunal to deal with a new matter if rule  24  was  not
    applicable.  Relevant to these submissions  are  the  contents  of  the
    Respondent's policy 'Rights  of  Appeal'  version  3,  which  sets  out
    guidance for those acting on behalf of the  Respondent  as  to  how  to
    handle 'new matters'.  This includes when any 'new  matter'  should  be
    considered, before the appeal hearing if possible and if not at  a  CMR
    or substantive appeal hearing; together with guidance on the process of
    giving or refusing consent.  There was no  specific  challenge  to  the
    contents of this part of the guidance, only to the effect that  it  had
    not been complied with by the Respondent in the present appeal.

40. There is no dispute between the parties that  the  Respondent  has  not
    followed the process for refusing consent set out in  the  guidance  in
    this case as no  written  reasons  have  ever  been  provided  for  the
    refusal.  However, that is not a matter which assists this Appellant in
    the context of this statutory appeal and it cannot constitute a  ground
    of appeal which can be pursued in this  Tribunal.   A  failure  by  the
    Respondent to follow her own guidance is a public law issue which could
    potentially be challenged by an application  for  Judicial  Review  but
    that is outside the scope of this appeal.  We do not consider that this
    raises any issues of procedural fairness in the conduct of a  statutory
    appeal and unless and until the Respondent expressly gives consent  for
    the consideration of a new matter by the Tribunal, an appellant must be
    aware the issues may not be considered.  There  is  no  power  for  the
    First-tier Tribunal, nor the Upper Tribunal to  determine  whether  the
    Respondent has appropriately for fairly withheld consent: again that is
    a matter only challengeable in Judicial Review  proceedings  on  public
    law grounds.

41. In the light of the above, we turn now to answer the specific questions
    raised  initially  by  Judge   Bruce   when   giving   directions   for
    determination of this appeal.

Question (i)  Having  regard  to  the  statutory  scheme  was  the  Tribunal
empowered to consider for itself whether the material relating to Ms  P  was
a 'new matter'?

42. The Respondent accepts that her view  in  any  particular  case  as  to
    whether a matter is a 'new matter' is not determinative of  the  issue,
    nor must it be accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.  Whether  something
    is or is not a 'new matter' goes to the jurisdiction of the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the appeal  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  must  therefore
    determine for itself the issue.

43. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the  First-tier  Tribunal  was
    not empowered to consider for itself whether the  material  as  to  the
    Appellant's new relationship was a 'new matter' but this  was  premised
    on the basis that as a matter of fact in the context  of  this  appeal,
    the Respondent had  already  considered  the  Appellant's  private  and
    family life and the new relationship could not therefore as a matter of
    law be a new matter.  The Appellant did  not  make,  and  realistically
    could not make any objection to the proposition that it  was  a  matter
    for the First-tier Tribunal to determine its jurisdiction to  hear,  or
    not to hear, issues raised in the notice of appeal.

44. Section 85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act place limits on the  jurisdiction
    of the First-tier Tribunal, which is a statutory tribunal: the Tribunal
    must determine issues of jurisdiction for itself.

Question (ii) - If  the  Tribunal  was  empowered  to  consider  for  itself
whether the material relating to Ms P was a  'new  matter',  what  were  the
relevant factors for consideration?

45. Counsel for the Respondent submitted  that  the  following  provides  a
    structure for a Tribunal to  assess  whether  it  has  jurisdiction  to
    consider particular material, as follows:

    1) What is the 'matter' which it is alleged constitutes a 'new  matter'
       for the purpose of section 85(5)?  What are its ingredients both  in
       fact and in law?

    2) Does the 'matter' constitute a ground of appeal  of  a  kind  listed
       under section 84?

    3) Has the Respondent previously considered the 'matter' in the context
       of the decision referred to in section 82(1)?

    4) Has the Respondent previously considered the 'matter' in the context
       of a statement made by the appellant under section 120?

    5) If the 'matter' is a 'new matter', has the Respondent given  consent
       for the Tribunal to deal with the 'new matter'?

46. This proposed structure approaches the matter by way of  identification
    of the relevant law and facts and then follows through consideration of
    the constituent parts of section 85  of  the  2002  Act.   That  is  an
    appropriate and sensible process to adopt as a matter of practice.  The
    issue of whether a 'matter' is a 'new  matter'  is  inevitably  a  fact
    sensitive one to be assessed in each appeal, but should be identifiable
    by something being raised that is distinguishable from and  outside  of
    the context of the original claim and decision in response  to  it,  as
    well as something which constitutes a ground of appeal in section 84 of
    the 2002 Act.

Question (iii)  -  Was  there  any  identifiable  error  in  the  Tribunal's
conclusion that the material relating to Ms P was a 'new matter' given  that
the  Appellant  had  raised  Article  8  family  life  grounds  before   the
Respondent's decision, and in the grounds of appeal, some six  months  prior
to the hearing?

47. Judge Hussain dealt with  the  preliminary  issue  of  jurisdiction  to
    consider the material relating to the Appellant's relationship with  Ms
    P and her child in paragraphs 7 to 11 of his decision.  Having set  out
    the chronology, including that  the  first  reference  to  a  different
    partner was in the notice of appeal and it was not until two  or  three
    days prior to the appeal  hearing,  when  the  Appellant's  bundle  was
    served, that any evidence in connection with claimed  relationship  was
    provided.  Judge Hussain rejected the submission that this  was  not  a
    new matter but merely a new circumstance  given  that  the  substantive
    issue of the Appellant being in a relationship had already been raised,
    albeit a relationship with a different person.  Judge Hussain  went  on
    to record that the Respondent had not given any consideration  to  this
    claimed relationship and had not consented to  this  new  matter  being
    determined by the First-tier Tribunal.  As such he found that he had no
    jurisdiction to consider the material and to have determined  otherwise
    would have made the First-tier Tribunal  the  decision-maker  at  first
    instance.

48. There is no error of law in the consideration of the factual background
    or application of section 85(5) and (6) of the 2002 Act by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in this case and we therefore dismiss the appeal  on  the
    first ground.   The  Appellant  had  previously  claimed  to  be  in  a
    relationship with a different person and it was on that basis that  the
    Respondent had determined and refused his claim based on family life  -
    particularly as there  was  no  evidence  in  support  of  the  claimed
    relationship.  In the notice of  appeal,  the  Appellant  relied  on  a
    different, new relationship and in his bundle in support of his  appeal
    provided evidence of that relationship.   A  new  relationship  with  a
    different partner coupled with an entirely new type of relationship  of
    a parent/child type with Ms P's child, is factually distinct  from  the
    claim made by the Appellant originally.  Although  the  Respondent  had
    broadly considered the Appellant's right to respect  for  family  life,
    she had not considered these specific relationships.   The  new  matter
    consisted of new evidence which itself could support an appeal that the
    Appellant's removal would be contrary to section 6 of the Human  Rights
    Act and which had not been considered by the Respondent in the  context
    of the original decision nor a section 120 statement (the Appellant has
    not to date made a statement pursuant to the section 120 notice  served
    by  the  Respondent).   In   these   circumstances,   the   Appellant's
    relationship with Ms P and her child is a  new  matter  within  section
    85(6) of the 2002 Act and it is accepted that there has been no express
    consent by the Respondent for this to be considered such that the First-
    tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction to consider it  pursuant  to  section
    85(5).

Question (iv) - Was  the  failure  to  address  Article  8  at  all  in  the
determination an error of law regardless of the  answers  to  (i)  to  (iii)
above?

49. The Appellant raised Article 8  as  a  ground  of  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's decision, and the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to
    determine it.  As confirmed in  paragraph  11  of  the  decision  under
    appeal, this ground of appeal was not pursued orally at the hearing  by
    Counsel for the Appellant  appearing  on  that  occasion;  however  the
    ground of appeal based on the right to respect for private  and  family
    life  under  Article  8  was  not   formally   withdrawn.    In   these
    circumstances,  it  would  have  been  preferable  for  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to have specifically recorded whether the appeal  was  allowed
    or dismissed on this specific ground (rather than a simple dismissal on
    all grounds): however, in the absence of jurisdiction to  consider  the
    new relationship relied  upon,  there  were  no  remaining  aspects  of
    private or family life of substance on which any  tribunal  could  have
    allowed the appeal.

Further matters raised by the Appellant

50. Outside of the grounds  of  appeal,  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  also
    submitted that there was a material error  of  law  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's  decision  in  relying  on  an  inaccurate  and   misleading
    statement made by the Home Office Presenting Officer during the  course
    of proceedings.  That statement was said to be  that  the  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer had submitted that there had been no  prior  mention
    of the Appellant's new relationship and  no  opportunity  for  the  new
    relationship to be assessed by the  Respondent  had  been  given,  that
    submission being recorded in paragraph 8 of the decision.   Technically
    that statement is not entirely accurate given that the new relationship
    was raised in the notice of appeal form, some six months prior  to  the
    hearing of the appeal, which gave  the  Respondent  an  opportunity  to
    assess it.  Although Counsel appearing for the Appellant at the hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal accepted, wrongly, that no prior  notice
    had been given of the relationship; neither submission was in any event
    relied upon by Judge Hussain, nor was it material to his decision  that
    the Appellant's relationship was a new matter which  he  did  not  have
    jurisdiction to consider.  In accordance with section 85  of  the  2002
    Act, the issue was not whether the Respondent had had an opportunity to
    consider a new matter put forward but whether,  if  a  new  matter  was
    raised, she had actually considered it (if she had, it could not  be  a
    'new matter') or whether she had consented to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dealing with it.  There is no error  of  law  and  this  point  has  no
    bearing on the actual grounds of appeal.

51. Linked to this point, was a submission on behalf of the Appellant, that
    pursuant to rule 24(1)(a) of the Procedure Rules,  the  Respondent  was
    required, as part of the documentation to be sent to the  Tribunal,  to
    send back to it the notice of appeal which was originally sent  to  her
    from the Tribunal.  The submission seemed to stem from a  concern  that
    the Respondent had no procedure in  place  to  consider  or  deal  with
    matters raised in the grounds of appeal and the  deliberate  separation
    of the grounds from the appeal bundle, contrary to rule  24,  prevented
    such consideration.  In the present appeal, this was submitted to  have
    arguably led to the Presenting Officer's  submission  to  the  Tribunal
    that there was no prior notice of the relationship.

52. Mr Chelvan submitted that rules 24(1)(a), read together  with  (2)  and
    (3) require  that  the  notice  of  appeal  is  a  document  which  the
    Respondent must provide to the Tribunal.  Specifically,  rule  24(1)(a)
    lists three documents, (i) the notice of the decision; (ii) the  notice
    of appeal; and (iii) any other document the respondent provided to  the
    appellant giving reasons for that decision.

53. On any sensible reading of  rule  24(1)(a)  this  is  not  one  of  the
    documents which the Respondent was obliged to provide to the  Tribunal.
    The phrase "the notice of the decision to which the  notice  of  appeal
    relates" refers to a single document  and  cannot  be  split  into  two
    separate requirements.  In any event, there is no doubt that the notice
    of appeal was before the First-tier Tribunal.  It is expressly referred
    to in paragraph 7 of the decision and was obviously available  to  both
    parties at the hearing.  There is no dispute that as a matter  of  fact
    this document raised the Appellant's new relationship.  The  submission
    that there was some kind of error by the Respondent  in  the  documents
    that she provided to the Tribunal is unsustainable in  accordance  with
    the clear words of rule 24(1)(a) and on the facts  where  it  is  clear
    that the document was available to all.

54. Finally, Counsel for the Appellant made  broad  submissions  about  the
    impact  of  the  Respondent's  delay  in  decision-making  between  the
    Appellant's first appeal being allowed on 2 October 2012 and the  fresh
    asylum and human rights decision being taken on 19 May 2016 and whether
    there is or should be a general duty on the Respondent in  cases  where
    there is such a delay in a decision being taken, to invite an applicant
    to provide further submissions  and  up-to-date  information.   It  was
    submitted that as a matter of good practice, the Respondent should send
    out a questionnaire requesting submissions and supporting  evidence  of
    new matters as a matter of routine.

55. The issue of the impact, if any, on the lapse of time between the first
    appeal being allowed and the fresh decision being  taken  is  a  matter
    which would be relevant to  the  assessment  under  Article  8  in  the
    context of consideration of the Appellant's claim to  have  established
    family life with Ms P and her child.  For the reasons  set  out  above,
    that is not a matter which the First-tier Tribunal had jurisdiction  to
    consider; it remains a point which is a matter for future consideration
    in a different context and not an issue which  we  need  to  determine.
    Similarly, as to whether there is a general duty on the  Respondent  to
    request up to date information in  outstanding  cases  is  outside  the
    scope of the present appeal.  In any event, there is no doubt that  the
    Appellant was at liberty to present new material to the  Respondent  at
    any time he chose to do so.

Grounds of appeal (b) to (d) - asylum

56. We heard argument from both parties as  to  the  remaining  grounds  of
    appeal on the substantive asylum decision in  this  case.   It  is  not
    necessary to make any findings as to whether there was a material error
    of law on any of these grounds because in any event, for  the  separate
    reason set out below, the decision must be set aside  and  remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for fresh determination.

57. It became apparent during the course  of  the  oral  hearing  that  the
    Appellant's bundle submitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  missing
    every other page.  Judge Hussain queried with Counsel for the Appellant
    appearing before him as to whether a particular page was missing in the
    Appellant's written statement and was told that there  was  no  missing
    text: the page was intentionally blank and had been the subject  of  an
    error in numbering  only.   That  was  clearly  a  further  mistake  by
    Counsel: there was a page missing, and it was not  blank.   No  further
    queries were made as to the other blank pages in the Appellant's bundle
    despite the fact that it was evident  that  every  other  page  of  the
    bundle was missing.   For  example,  the  Appellant's  bundle  included
    documents containing internal pagination including  only  odd  numbered
    pages.

58. We allow the appeal on asylum grounds on  the  basis  of  a  procedural
    irregularity in the hearing of the appeal.  In the context of an asylum
    appeal where there were missing  pages  from  the  Appellant's  written
    statement and medical evidence as well as the Respondent's own  country
    information, is not possible  for  us  to  find  that  this  procedural
    irregularity was immaterial.  We therefore set aside  the  decision  on
    the asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  as  well  as  under
    Articles 2 and 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights  and  remit
    the appeal on these grounds to be determined afresh by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the light of our decision on s 85  and  on  the  article  8
    grounds.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of a material error of law.  We set it aside.  We remit the  appeal  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for redetermination by a different judge and  we  direct
that issues other than the protection appeal  be  determined  in  accordance
with what is set out above.


No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   [pic]         Date         14th August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson


-----------------------
[1] Counsel for the Appellant could not accept in submissions that this was
the very first time that there was any mention to the Respondent of this
relationship, relying on an assertion that, in the context of the
Appellant's NASS application in January 2016 and contact from the
Appellant's social worker, this information would have been disclosed to
the Respondent at that stge.  There was no clear evidence of this before us
and we declined to draw any inference from the limited documentation
referred to by Mr Chelvan that this was the case.  In any event there is no
dispute that no detailed evidence as to that relationship was available
until immediately prior to the appeal hearing before the First-tier
Tribunal.

