
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05778/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9th January 2018                  |On 31st January 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     mnk
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Collinwood
                    Immigration Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Iran, born on [ ] 1979.  His is known  by
    an alias as well as his other name quoted above.   He  arrived  in  the
    United Kingdom on 17th March 2009 and claimed asylum at the port on the
    ground that he was a member of a particular  social  group,  namely  an
    adulterer.

2.   He made a second claim for asylum on  5th  April  2013,  based  on  his
    claimed political activities in the United Kingdom, together  with  his
    mental health issues and this was  similarly  refused.   The  appellant
    then made a third application for asylum on 16th January 2017, based on
    his claim to have converted to Christianity from Islam.  The respondent
    refused that claim in a Reasons for Refusal Letter dated 26th May 2017,
    for reasons set out in his Reasons for Refusal Letter of that day.

3.   The appellant appealed, and his appeal  was  heard  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at North Shields on 14th July,  2017  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Arullendran.   The  judge  properly  applied  Devaseelan  (Second
    Appeals - ECHR - Extra-Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * UKIAT 00702  and
    noted the determinations of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  Zucker,  and
    Manchester, in making his first finding.  The judge said  that  he  was
    satisfied that the appellant first attended church after he  knew  that
    Judge Manchester had rejected his fictitious account of his  sur  place
    political activities and that this was his trigger for his decision  to
    do so.  The judge went on to say, "he  did  so  in  my  judgment  in  a
    deliberate attempt to construct  a  new  sur  place  claim".   That  is
    contained at paragraph 67 of the judge's determination.  The judge went
    on to make other adverse credibility findings and  then  dismissed  the
    appeal.

4.   The appellant challenged the determination on the basis that  the  fact
    the evidence before the judge showed that the  appellant  had  attended
    church long before 2016,  when  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Manchester
    heard the appellant's second asylum claim.  Today, Mr Harrison accepted
    before me that there was a factual error at paragraph 67, but suggested
    that it really did not affect the reasons given by the judge.   It  was
    surprising that, despite two earlier asylum claims, the  appellant  had
    not previously claimed that his conversion to Christianity was a reason
    why he needed to claim international protection.

5.   I have concluded that the determination  cannot  stand  and  I  set  it
    aside.  There is clearly an error of  fact  at  paragraph  67  of  this
    determination and it is the first of several adverse findings  made  by
    the judge.  The judge actually says in paragraph 67 that he believed it
    was a deliberate attempt to construct a new sur place claim and it was,
    having said that, that the judge went on  to  make  his  other  adverse
    findings such that they were tainted by what he said at  paragraph  67.
    Were I to adjourn the proceedings and hear the  appeal  myself  in  the
    Upper Tribunal there would inevitably be lengthy  delays.   Given  that
    this appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2009 it is important  that
    further delays should be avoided.

6.   In the interests of justice, therefore, I  remit  this  appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and direct that it should be heard by a judge other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judges  Zucker,  Manchester  and  Arullendran.
    Three hours should be allowed for the hearing of the appeal and a Farsi
    interpreter should be booked.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley                                Date 30th January 2018.
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


