
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05395/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 26th January 2018                   |On 27th February 2018               |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    R S S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel instructed by Sriharans
Solicitors, Southall


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. [RSS] is a citizen of Afghanistan, whose date of birth is recorded as [
    ] 1963.  He made application for international protection as a  refugee
    on the basis of his being persecuted as a Sikh.  The Secretary of State
    refused his application and he appealed.  On 5th July 2017  his  appeal
    was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Greasley  sitting  at
    Taylor House.  Judge Greasley made  positive  findings  throughout  and
    having regard to the guidance in various cases, including TG and others
    [2015] UKUT 595 (IAC, allowed the appeal on all grounds.

 2. Not content with that decision the Secretary of State made  application
    for permission to appeal, which application was granted by Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal Andrew on 12th October 2017.

 3. It is not necessary for me to say very much in this appeal  because  Mr
    Clarke quite properly and fairly accepts that given the grounds do  not
    challenge any of the  findings  he  cannot  in  reality  challenge  the
    eventual finding of the judge that  the  Appellant  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal would be at risk on return.  If it helps Mr Clarke in any way,
    my preliminary view was precisely the same.  The  findings  which  were
    made by the judge were clearly open to him.  Whether a different  judge
    would have made different findings is not  the  issue,  these  findings
    were made and they were based upon the evidence.  It is a well-reasoned
    decision and eventually the judge came to a conclusion, as I say,  that
    was open to him.  In those circumstances the appeal of the Secretary of
    State is dismissed.  The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  shall
    stand.

 4. The anonymity direction will be maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 22 February 2018





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker


