
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05088/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th June 2017                       |On 27th July 2017                    |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON

                                   Between

                                     S r
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors
     (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  Report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent to refuse him refugee protection, humanitarian protection or
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on human rights grounds, pursuant
    to Article 8 ECHR.  There is no challenge to the  Article  8  decision,
    either within or out with the Immigration Rules.

 2. The appellant is a national of Iran, of Kurdish ethnicity who  came  to
    the United Kingdom in December 2015 and claimed asylum  the  same  day.
    In his grounds of appeal,  the  appellant  challenged  the  failure  to
    anonymise the  asylum  decision.   That  would  not  have  changed  the
    outcome, but the point is properly taken and I make an anonymity order.



 3. The appellant challenged the assessment of his credibility, both on the
    basis of the weight given to various discrepancies in his evidence, and
    in relation to items of correspondence, a letter from KDP-Iran dated  6
    April 2016 and an email from KDP  UK  dated  19  December  2016,  which
    purport to confirm his association with KDP-Iran and the risk  he  says
    arises therefrom, both from the  contents  of  the  documents,  and  by
    reason of the KDP UK email and its terms.

 4. The appellant claims to have been a supporter of the KDP Party in  Iran
    which, at some point, split into two parties: the  KDP-Iran,  which  is
    the successor of the original KDP Party,  and  the  KDPI,  which  is  a
    splinter party.  Once that is borne in mind the  appellant's  interview
    and screening interview  are  reasonably  clear,  except  that  in  the
    screening interview the party  to  which  he  belonged  is  erroneously
    recorded as the KDPI, that is the splinter party, rather than the  KDP-
    Iran, the successor to  the  original  KDP.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision refers throughout  to  KDP-I,  which  is  none  of  the  above
    organisations.

 5. The appellant challenges the weight given to a number of  discrepancies
    in his account identified at paragraphs 41, 42, 44, 47 and  48  of  the
    decision, in the assessment of his credibility.  The  First-tier  Judge
    used infelicitous language in paragraphs 41, 44, 46 and  49,  since  in
    each case he said "This inconsistency persuades me that the account  is
    not credible", but it is clear on the totality of his reasoning that it
    was  the  discrepancies  overall  which  caused  him  to   reject   the
    credibility of the core account, rather than any one individual factor.

 6. The more complex question is that of the letter and email purporting to
    confirm the appellant's connection with  KDP-Iran  and  the  risk  that
    entails on return. The confusion between the KDPI and the  KDP-Iran  is
    of  relevance  because  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  before  it  two
    documents, a letter from KDP-Iran and an email from KDP UK, and country
    evidence about the source,  type  and  language  of  such  confirmatory
    documents, contained in a Danish Immigration  Service  Report  "Iranian
    Kurds : On Conditions for Iranian Kurdish  Parties  in  Iran  and  KRI,
    Activities in the Kurdish Area of Iran, Conditions in Border  Area  and
    Situation of Returnees from KRI to Iran - 30 May to 9 June 2013"  ('the
    Danish Report')which  at  paragraph  2.1.5  described  the  letters  of
    recommendation from the splinter group KDPI:




         "2.1.5. Letters of recommendation issued by KDPI

         Regarding letters of recommendation, KDPI's representative in Paris
         informed the delegation that when the representation  in  Paris  is
         requested  to  verify  whether  a  person  is  a  party  member  or
         sympathizer, it will ask the  party's  headquarters  in  Khoysanjak
         Camp in KRI to investigate the case. Upon receiving the answer from
         Khoysanjak, the representation in Paris  will  issue  a  letter  of
         recommendation. In the letter, in  addition  to  the  name  of  the
         person in question, it is stated in French whether the  recommended
         person  is  a  KDPI  member  or  a  sympathizer.  The   letter   of
         recommendation, which is signed by KDPI's representative in  Paris,
         will be sent by fax directly to the asylum  administration  in  the
         country in question; it will never be  handed  to  the  recommended
         person himself. If the given  asylum  administration  requests  the
         original letter, the KDPI representation in  Paris  will  send  the
         letter by post directly to that asylum administration.  ...Mohammad
         Nazif Qadiri encouraged asylum authorities in Europe  to  cooperate
         with the KDPI office in Paris in order to avoid fraud. He  stressed
         that a letter of recommendation proving a  person's  membership  of
         KDPI will not be handed over to the KDPI member  him-  or  herself,
         but it will be sent directly to the relevant asylum authorities  in
         Europe from the Paris office. ...."           [Emphasis added]

 7. At paragraph 2.2.5, the Report describes the  letters  issued  by  KDP-
    Iran, the successor to the original KDP:

         "2.2.5.  Letters  of  recommendation  issued  by  KDP-Iran  Mustafa
         Moloudi, (KDP-Iran) informed the delegation that  the  headquarters
         of the party in Khoysanjac, KRI issues letters of recommendation to
         members going abroad to seek asylum. Since all members  have  their
         names listed in the headquarters, it is possible to  identify  each
         one of them. The party issues letters of  recommendation,  but  the
         source emphasized that letters of recommendation are not  delivered
         to asylum seekers and they will only  be  issued  directly  to  the
         asylum authorities or the asylum seekers' lawyers in Europe.  Every
         member has a written file within the headquarters which  forms  the
         basis of the description of the situation of the asylum  seeker  in
         the letter of recommendation. If a party member for  instance  goes
         to Denmark to seek asylum, he or she must address the  local  party
         committee that will then ask the headquarters to issue a letter  of
         recommendation. The party's sympathizers can also get a  letter  of
         recommendation if the KDP-Iran is certain that  the  person  asking
         for the letter had to flee due to political activism. In such  case
         it will be stated  in  the  letter  that  he  or  she  is  a  party
         sympathizer and not a member."
                                                            [Emphasis added]

The KDP-Iran letter

 8. The KDP-Iran letter on which the appellant  relies  was  written  on  6
    April 2016, the day of the appellant's asylum interview.  It is written
    in English and purports to have been sent from  Koya  Iraqi  Kurdistan.
    The letter is addressed 'to whom it may concern', and says this:

         "This is to certify that [the appellant]  is  a  supporter  of  our
         Party.

         Undoubtedly, he cannot return home, and  by  that  if  he  ever  be
         deported to Iran, he would be definitely arrested and certainly run
         the risk of being  persecuted  by  the  repressive  agents  of  the
         Islamic Regime of Iran.

         It is much appreciated your consideration of accepting and granting
         his asylum which is absolutely based on Human Rights and  Political
         cause according to Geneva Convention.

         Most Sincerely Yours,


         Qadir Wirya
         Kurdistan Democratic Party
         Organization Department"

    In the bundle before the First-tier Judge there was an excerpt from the
    party website which indicated that there was a Qadir Wirya in the  KDP.



The KDP-UK email

 9. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also had before him  an  email  dated  19
    December 2016,  the day before the First-tier Tribunal hearing, sent to
    the appellant's solicitors, Elder Rahimi, by KDP UK, a United  Kingdom-
    based organisation, as follows:

         "Dear Elder Rahimi,

         Many  thanks  for  assisting  our  party  member  [the  appellant].
         Recently I have  noticed  that  you  contacted  another  [KDP-Iran]
         department  in  the   UK   regarding   [the   appellant's]   asylum
         application.  Therefore, we are really sorry we have not  responded
         you (sic) on time.

         Basically according to information we have [the  appellant]  was  a
         strong [KDP-Iran]  supporter  during  he  was  in  Iran  and  as  a
         consequence of his activities he fled the country.  It  has  to  be
         mentioned unfortunately the nature of his activities, who  else  he
         was working with and other specific details not even be shared with
         us due to the security of our other supporters and members in Iran.
          I am sure that you are aware of strict rules  and  zero  tolerance
         for opposition parties' activities from Islamic  Republic  of  Iran
         inside the country.  However, in the UK [the  appellant]  has  been
         trough (sic) membership process of KDP-Iran and he is currently  in
         position of our full party member.

         The organisational department of KDP-I in United  Kingdom  strongly
         supports [the appellant's] asylum application and we  have  already
         requested for a new confirmation letter for  [the  appellant]  from
         our  party's  main  organisational  department   based   in   Iraqi
         Kurdistan.

         Please do hesitate (sic) to contact us for  any  further  enquiries
         regarding [the appellant] or our party.

         Yours faithfully,

         Yunes Mukri"

First-tier Tribunal decision

10. The First-tier Tribunal dealt with these letters as follows:

         "27. The appellant has a letter dated 6 April 2016 from  the  KDP-I
         in Iraq.  This says the appellant is a supporter of the Party.  The
         appellant says he contacted his friend in Iran and  asked  him  for
         it.  The appellant has not met the author of the letter.  He is one
         of the Chairmen of KDP-I.

         28.  There is an email from the KDP UK Committee dated 19  December
         2016.  ...The email says the appellant is a  Party  member  in  the
         United Kingdom.  He joined after his asylum  interview  which  took
         place on 6 April 2016. ...

         46.  The background evidence says  that  the  KDP-I  do  not  issue
         letters of recommendation to an individual. Rather,  this  will  be
         sent to the relevant government department.   The  letter  dated  6
         April 2016 says the appellant is a  supporter  of  the  Party.  The
         appellant said he did not know the author of  the  letter  and  his
         friend obtained  it  for  him.   I  place  limited  weight  on  its
         contents.  The author does not know the appellant.  It is not clear
         how he could say the appellant is a supporter.  It  appears  to  be
         based on information his friend passed on.   The  contents  of  the
         letter did not persuade me that the appellant was  a  supporter  of
         the KDP-I while he was in Iran. ...

         48.  The email dated 19 December 2016 says that  its  contents  are
         based on information held on the appellant. It says  the  appellant
         was a strong supporter of the Party when in Iran.  It is not  clear
         how the author is in possession of this information.   Furthermore,
         the email says information cannot be given on what work he  carried
         out for the Party, or who he worked with.  The author of the letter
         is however happy to name the appellant as a  strong  supporter.  If
         the  KDP-I  were  concerned  for  the  appellant's  safety,  it  is
         surprising that the author is happy to disclose  his  identity  and
         his links to the party.

         49.  The email also goes against the background information in  the
         Danish Report mentioned above.  This says that the KDP-I correspond
         with the relevant government, rather  than  an  individual.   As  a
         result I place limited weight on the email dated 19 December  2016.
         It did  not  persuade  me  that  the  appellant's  account  of  his
         activities in Iran is credible. "

Discussion

11. The appellant's case is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  decision
    conflated the three organisations, KDP-Iran (the  April  2016  letter),
    KDPI (no letter or email) and KDP UK (the December  2016  email).   The
    question is whether such conflation, and referring to the  organisation
    in question in the First-tier Tribunal  decision  throughout  as  KDP-I
    (which is the name of none of the organisations in the  Danish  Report)
    is an error of fact at a level of seriousness capable of  amounting  to
    an error of law.

12. The type of letter of  recommendation  which  is  written  by  the  two
    organisations,  KDP-Iran  and  KDPI,  varies.   The  reference  in  the
    decision to letters of recommendation being sent only to governments is
    consistent with paragraph 2.1.5 of the Danish Report, but the  6  April
    2016 letter is not  in  French  and  does  not  originate  from  Paris.
    Paragraph 2.2.5 says that KDP-Iran sends letters in English, from Iraq,
    which is more consistent with the April 2016 letter, but  again,  those
    documents are sent only  to  governments  or  to  appellants'  lawyers.
    There is no guidance in the Report as to what  KDP-UK  does,  but  that
    email was addressed to the appellant's lawyer.

13. I am guided by the judgment of Lord Justice Brooke at [90] in R  (Iran)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982,  that
    the Upper Tribunal may not interfere with a finding of fact  unless  it
    is contrary to the weight of the  evidence,  incomprehensible,  or  one
    which  no  reasonable  judge  properly  directing  himself  could  have
    reached.  Given the vagueness of  the  letters  and  the  lack  of  any
    personal detail, I am  satisfied  that  a  reasonable  Judge,  applying
    Tanveer Ahmed principles, and directing  himself  properly  as  to  the
    evidence in the Danish Report and the source of the April  2016  letter
    and December  2016  email,  could  and  would  have  reached  the  same
    conclusion, that no weight could be placed on the letters.

14. It follows that the First-tier Tribunal's error as  to  the  applicable
    organisation is not material and that it  is  not  open  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal to go behind the finding that no weight can be placed on  this
    correspondence.

15. The final point which is made on the appellant's  behalf  is  that  the
    December 2016 email from the KDP UK showing that  he  had  joined  that
    organisation in the United  Kingdom  after  his  6  April  2016  asylum
    interview, but without specifying on which date he did so, is enough by
    itself to create a sur place risk to this appellant on return  to  Iran
    because he cannot be required to lie and would have no explanation  for
    this act undertaken by him.

16. That is a point which the Secretary of State was not  given  sufficient
    opportunity to consider, given the lateness  of  the  document,  and  I
    remind myself that the letter gives no personal information at all  and
    notes that the appellant failed  to  share  with  the  organisation  he
    joined any evidence as to who he was working with or what he did whilst
    in  Iran.   The  verification  from  the  party's  main  organisational
    department based in Iraqi Kurdistan has never materialised, despite the
    passage of five months since the writing of that  email,  and  again  I
    consider that it was open to the judge  to  conclude  as  he  did  that
    nothing in that email would be likely to put the appellant at  risk  on
    return.

Conclusions

For these reasons, I find that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
First-tier Tribunal decision and I uphold it.

Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson           Date:         26 July 2017
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

