
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/05450/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 21 December 2017                        |On 03 January 2018               |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                                  ss (iraq)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Iain Palmer, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C. Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Lal sitting at Taylor House on 6 July  2017)
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to
    refuse to recognise him as a refugee on account of him being  an  Iraqi
    Kurd whose former home area is Kirkuk.  The First-tier Tribunal made an
    anonymity direction, and I consider that the appellant should  continue
    to be accorded anonymity for these proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

 2. In his decision promulgated on 18  July  2017,  Judge  Lal  found  that
    Kirkuk was a contested area, and hence that it was unsafe. However,  he
    dismissed  the  appeal  because  he  held  that  the  appellant   could
    reasonably relocate internally to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  ("IKR")
    which is under the control of the Kurdistan Regional Government.

 3. Mr Palmer, who appeared below, settled the application  for  permission
    to appeal to the Upper Tribunal. He submitted that the Judge had  erred
    in law in finding that the appellant could internally relocate because:
    (a) he had made no  findings  on  the  crucial  issue  of  whether  the
    appellant would be able to obtain a CSID within a reasonable period  of
    time after being returned to Baghdad - which  would  be  the  point  of
    return as he had never lived in the IKR; (b) he had not  addressed  the
    question of  whether  the  point  of  return  would  be  safe  for  the
    appellant; and (c) he had  not  given  any  reasons  why  none  of  the
    background material  or  expert  evidence  assisted  the  appellant  in
    establishing the unviability of him relocating to the IKR when  he  did
    not originate from IKR.

 4. On 9  October  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons:

         2.   It is arguable that the judge has made a material error of law
             in failing to make findings in relation to  documentation  and
             internal relocation and to properly apply the country guidance
             in regard thereto.

         3.   It is also arguable that the judge has  erred  by  failing  to
             give reasons why none of the  background  material  or  expert
             evidence assists the appellant.

 5. In a Rule 24 Response dated  8  November  2017,  Hilary  Aboni  of  the
    Specialist Appeals Team said that the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal was not opposed, and she invited the Tribunal to determine at  a
    fresh (oral) continuance hearing whether the appellant could be  safely
    returned to Iraq. She added that the respondent maintained the position
    set out in the Reasons for Refusal letter that the appellant  could  be
    safely returned to Kirkuk "which is no longer a contested area"  or  he
    could relocate to IKR.

Discussion

 6. At the hearing before me, Mr Avery confirmed that the position  of  the
    respondent was that the  decision  of  Judge  Lal  was  vitiated  by  a
    material error of law such that it should be set aside in its  entirety
    and remade. I was satisfied that the concession was rightly made. As  I
    ruled orally at the hearing, the decision of Judge Lal is erroneous  in
    law for the reasons given in the application for permission to appeal -
    as summarised by me in paragraph 3 above.

 7. So the only issue to be resolved was the forum in  which  the  decision
    should be remade. Mr Palmer suggested  that  one  option  was  for  the
    appeal to be retained by the Upper Tribunal with a view  to  converting
    it into a country guidance case  on  the  question  of  whether  Kirkuk
    should or should not continue to  be  regarded  as  a  contested  area.
    However Mr Avery was opposed to this. He  submitted  that  this  was  a
    simple question of fact which the First-tier Tribunal was  equipped  to
    determine. The situation on the ground continued to improve  since  the
    assessment made by the Upper Tribunal in BA (Returns to  Baghdad)  Iraq
    CG UKUT 18 (IAC) (23 January 2017): as of  the  date  of  the  decision
    letter - 17 May 2017 - Daesh no longer occupied Kirkuk (except  Hawijia
    and surrounding areas) according to the decision letter at page 5.

 8. Having heard from both representatives, I was satisfied that  this  was
    not an appropriate case for retention by the Upper Tribunal,  but  that
    it should be remitted to The First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on
    all issues. This was for two reasons: (a) the extent of judicial  fact-
    finding that was going to be required to remake the decision;  and  (b)
    the fact that both parties had been deprived of a fair hearing  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal, as the Judge had not adequately engaged  with  the
    principal important  controversial  issues  in  the  appeal,  including
    whether by the date of the hearing the situation in Kirkuk had improved
    to  a  point  where  a  returnee  would  no  longer  be  at   risk   of
    indiscriminate violence in a situation of internal armed conflict;  and
    whether he accepted as credible  and  probative  the  evidence  of  two
    supporting witnesses on the topic of the appellant's  alleged  attempts
    to obtain documentation from the Iraqi Consular office in London.

Conclusion

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law, such that it shall be set aside.

Directions

10. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Taylor House for a
    de novo hearing before any judge apart from Judge  Lal.   None  of  the
    findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal shall be preserved.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
