
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05177/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 3rd April 2019                       |On 01st May 2019                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                   m N B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith instructed by L T & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a  national  of  Tunisia,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 5th April
    2018 to refuse her application for asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego dismissed the appeal in a
    decision promulgated on 31st January 2019.

 2. The background to this appeal is that the Appellant  left  Tunisia  and
    arrived in the UK on 21st September 2017 by plane, she  claimed  asylum
    on 10th October 2017.  In summary the basis of her claim is that she is
    at risk of violence from her former husband and his family.   She  also
    claims to fear her maternal grandfather's extended family  because  her
    mother reported the abuse she suffered at the hands of her father as  a
    child to the authorities. The  Appellant's  mother  and  siblings  were
    granted asylum in the UK on the latter basis.

 3. There are four Grounds of Appeal challenging  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision.  It is contended in the first ground that  the  judge
    did not give adequate reasons for finding that the Appellant was not  a
    victim of domestic violence as claimed.  It is contended in the  second
    ground that the judge erred in finding that the Appellant  had  delayed
    in raising her claim about the risk from her maternal  relations  as  a
    result of her mother's allegation of sexual abuse against  her  father.
    The third ground contends that the judge erred in his approach  to  the
    previous decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Harris  promulgated  on
    9th March 2018 who allowed the appeal of  the  Appellant's  mother  and
    siblings and failed to give adequate reason for  departing  from  those
    findings given the overlapping issues in this case.  It is contended in
    the fourth ground that the judge's approach to Article 8 was flawed  in
    that he found that the Appellant and her minor children do not  have  a
    private or family life in the UK.

 4. The judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the  allegations  of  domestic
    violence are found in paragraphs 69 and 80.  At paragraph 69 the  judge
    said;

         "The claimant's marriage was unhappy, with  a  controlling  husband
         and interfering parents-in-law.  She lived in a flat above them  at
         one point.  There were rows with her husband and her  mother-in-law
         physically  ill-treated  the  children.   Her   husband   did   not
         physically assault her or the children. There has been no threat to
         her from her husband or his family since she came to the  UK.   She
         speaks to the children on the telephone from time to time".

 5. The judge found at paragraph 80

         "The first claim for asylum is untenable.   The  Appellant  had  an
         unhappy marriage.  There was no reason why she could not leave  him
         and live on her own.  Divorce in Tunisia is a commonplace  and  the
         objective evidence is that women seek divorce as often as  do  men.
         The husband of the Appellant may well have  been  unreasonable,  in
         controlling behaviour and  in  his  conduct  towards  her  and  the
         children.  That is not a reason to  grant  asylum  or  humanitarian
         protection in another country.  It is no more and no  less  than  a
         reason to leave him.  The chronology supplied (A1:2) refers  to  an
         attempt by the husband  to  strangle  in  her  November  2015.   No
         details are given of this and I do not  find  (even  to  the  lower
         standard) that this is reasonably likely  to  have  occurred.   The
         translations of transcripts show only rows, and in one of  them  it
         is the husband telling the Appellant to go away.  Those in  unhappy
         marriages have rows.  Then they get divorced.  That is the  picture
         painted by the very long witness statement of  the  Appellant  (and
         why I have set out what it said, in brief).  There was no  domestic
         violence."

 6. In her Grounds of Appeal and in oral submissions Ms  Smith  pointed  to
    evidence before the  judge  in  relation  to  domestic  violence.   She
    pointed to evidence in the screening interview,  the  asylum  interview
    and  the  witness  statements  dealing  with  allegations  of  domestic
    violence.  She also pointed to photographs of the  children's  injuries
    and the medical report of the clinical psychologist Dr Agnew Davies who
    assessed the Appellant's psychological presentation in the  context  of
    her allegations of domestic violence.  The judge considered that report
    at paragraph 97 where  he  said  "it  is  not  a  history  of  domestic
    violence".  However at paragraph 4.2.1 Dr Agnew Davies referred to  the
    Appellant's history and presentation and said that;

         "It is highly consistent with her accounts of prolonged, escalating
         domestic violence after a childhood marred by exposure to  domestic
         abuse and more recent rejection and threats by some  relatives,  in
         the context of having socialised into a culture  which  values  so-
         called family honour".

 7. Ms Smith also referred to evidence from Home Start in  Liverpool  dated
    27th November 2017 and the principal of one of the children's school in
    Rochdale dated 3rd May 2018.

 8. It would of course have been open to the judge to reject the account of
    domestic violence put before him.  However, in my view, it is not clear
    from the decision that the judge  engaged  with  the  evidence  in  the
    Appellant's  screening  interview,   asylum   interview   and   witness
    statements as to the allegations of domestic violence  before  reaching
    the conclusion at paragraph 69 that the  Appellant's  husband  did  not
    physically assault her or the children and at paragraph 80  that  there
    was no domestic violence.  The judge's conclusion  that  there  was  no
    domestic violence [80] has not been adequately reasoned.

 9. I have considered Mr Tufan's submission that, even if the judge  failed
    to take account of all of the evidence and  the  findings  on  domestic
    violence were not  sound,  any  error  was  not  material  because  the
    domestic violence was not likely to recur and would not lead to a grant
    of asylum under the Refugee Convention in any event.  He also  referred
    to  evidence  about  contact  between  the  father  and  the  children.
    However, I accept Ms Smith's submission that it is not possible to  say
    with certainty that the inadequacies in relation to the finding  as  to
    domestic violence could not affect the rest of the decision.  I  accept
    that there had to be adequate findings on this matter before any proper
    assessment  could  be  made  as  to  risk  on  return,  sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation if required.  I accept also that any
    finding on this matter would be relevant to an assessment under Article
    8.

10. The second and third Grounds of Appeal go to how the judge treated  the
    allegations of risk on return from the Appellant's maternal family  and
    the treatment of Judge Harris' decision.  In light of my finding  above
    I do not need to make any separate findings in relation to this matter.
     I would observe however that it does appear that  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Housego may have made a factual error at paragraph 87 in relation
    to the restraining order which he  found  applied  to  the  Appellant's
    siblings whereas it applied to the Appellant's mother and other  family
    members.

11. I also observe that the factual findings made by Judge  Harris  in  the
    appeals of the Appellant's mother and siblings could form the  starting
    point for an assessment of the Appellant's claim. However I  accept  Mr
    Tufan's submission that the assessment of risk on return  and  internal
    relocation made by Judge Harris may not have direct application to this
    Appellant.

12. In any event in my view the error I have identified in the findings  as
    to domestic violence cannot be separated from the rest of the decision.
     For this reason I consider it appropriate to set aside the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

13. I  agree  with  the  view  of  both  parties  that,  in  light  of  the
    Presidential Practice Statements the nature or extent of  the  judicial
    fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the appeal to be re-
    made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule  2
    of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,   it   is
    appropriate to remit the asylum appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and I set it aside in its entirety.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable therefore there is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 25th April 2019

A Grimes
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


















