

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05134/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard in Liverpool                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On Tuesday 17 January 2017                |On Tuesday 24 January 2017       |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     S M

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sadiq, Legal Representative, Adam solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal.   However,  as
this is  a  protection  claim,  it  is  appropriate  to  make  an  anonymity
direction in this case.

                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Herwald promulgated on  17  September  2016  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 8 May 2016 refusing his protection claim.


    2. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq.  He arrived in the UK via Turkey
       and Serbia, he claims on 12 November 2015.  He claims to  have  been
       assisted in his flight to the UK by criminal traffickers, funded  he
       says by his uncle.  He claims to have become separated from the rest
       of his family during the journey.  On arrival, he claimed to  be  an
       unaccompanied minor.  That was not accepted by the Respondent.   His
       protection claim centres around a general fear  of  ISIS.   He  also
       raised a specific risk based on previous targeting of him  by  ISIS.
       That too was not accepted.


    3. The Appellant is from a village called Abu Najm.  He and his  family
       left there when it was attacked by ISIS in 2014 and fled  to  Kirkuk
       and from there to Mosul where the Appellant was living before coming
       to the UK. It was accepted by the Respondent that Article  15(c)  of
       the  Qualification  Directive  applies  to  prevent  return  of  the
       Appellant to his home area.  She says however that he can internally
       relocate to Baghdad or, since he is Kurdish, to  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
       Region ("IKR").


    4. The Judge found the Appellant not to be credible both in relation to
       events which the Appellant said occurred before he came  to  the  UK
       and in relation to his age. The Appellant does not  challenge  those
       adverse credibility findings. The Judge accepted that the  Appellant
       could not be returned to his home area but found that it  would  not
       be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Baghdad or the  IKR.   It  is
       that finding which the Appellant challenges.


    5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pedro
       on 10 October 2016 on the basis that the Judge may have  misdirected
       himself in his application  of  the  country  guidance  case  of  AA
       (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) ("AA (Iraq)").   The
       matter comes before me to decide whether  the  Decision  contains  a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Submissions

    6. Mr  Sadiq  relied  on  the  Appellant's  grounds.   He  directed  my
       attention to [19] to [21] of the Decision which contain the  Judge's
       findings as to internal relocation.  He  submitted  that  the  Judge
       erred in failing to take into account all factors relevant to  undue
       hardship.  He said that the findings made were questionable.


    7. In relation to relocation,  the  Judge  finds  that  there  are  two
       options - return to Baghdad or return to the IKR.  The  findings  in
       relation to return to Baghdad are challenged for three reasons.  The
       first relates to the viability of return.  It has not been  disputed
       by the Respondent that the Appellant does not have a  passport.   Mr
       Sadiq drew my attention to [11] of the Appellant's witness statement
       which makes that assertion.  On that basis he submitted that it  was
       not feasible for the Appellant to be returned to Iraq at all.   This
       undermined, he said, the Judge's finding that feasibility was not at
       issue.


    8. The second reason why the Appellant says that  the  Judge  erred  in
       relation to internal relocation to Baghdad is  the  Judge's  finding
       that the Appellant could apply to the National Status Court in order
       to obtain a CSID (identity document) which the Appellant would  need
       to access services in Baghdad.  Mr Sadiq drew my attention  to  what
       is said at [187] of AA (Iraq) about the functioning of that Court.


    9. The third reason why the Appellant says that the Judge erred  is  in
       relying on the Appellant's  "street  wisdom"  by  reference  to  his
       ability to survive in the UK.  The reality of the situation  in  the
       UK is that the Appellant is supported by NASS.  The  Judge  was  not
       entitled therefore to rely on the fact of his survival in the UK  as
       a reason for finding that he would be able  to  support  himself  in
       Iraq.


   10. Mr Sadiq also submitted that the Judge has failed to deal  with  the
       issues identified at  [15]  of  the  headnote  in  AA  (Iraq).   The
       Appellant contends that the Judge's findings in  relation  to  those
       issues are inadequate.


   11. In relation to the second of the relocation options - the IKR  -  Mr
       Sadiq drew my attention to the  Judge's  findings  at  [21]  of  the
       Decision.  The  Appellant  is  not  from  the  IKR.   As  a  result,
       therefore, Mr Sadiq submitted that the Appellant would  be  returned
       in the first instance to Baghdad.  He made the same point also about
       the Judge's findings in  relation  to  the  Appellant's  ability  to
       survive in the IKR, bearing in mind that he was not from there,  had
       never been  there  and  knew  no-one  there.   In  relation  to  the
       Appellant's access to employment, the Appellant was a  labourer  and
       it was questionable whether he could be said to have skills to  find
       employment.  As to the support which the Judge found he could access
       in order to fund return to  IKR,  Mr  Sadiq  pointed  out  that  the
       Appellant's case is that his journey to the UK  was  funded  by  his
       uncle who remains in an  ISIS  dominated  area.   It  was  therefore
       difficult to see how his uncle could send funds to the Appellant.


   12. In response, Mr Harrison pointed out that the situation in Mosul  is
       fluid.  Since the Decision, the situation had changed  considerably.
       However, in relation to internal relocation, Mr Harrison pointed  to
       the Judge's adverse credibility findings which were not  challenged.
       The Appellant is found to have lied about his age and events  before
       he came to the UK.  Those findings  play  in  to  the  documentation
       issue.


   13. Both representatives agreed that, if I found an error  of  law,  the
       appeal could remain in this Tribunal  for  re-making.   The  adverse
       credibility findings would be  preserved  but  both  representatives
       accepted that a further oral hearing would be required in  order  to
       deal with the internal relocation issue,  particularly  as  to  what
       documentation could be accessed and how.
    Discussion


   14.  The Judge dealt with the internal relocation issue at [19] to  [21]
       of the Decision as follows:-


           "[19] I have  taken  into  account  the  country  guidance,  and
           accorded anxious scrutiny to the  assertion  by  the  Respondent
           that the Appellant can relocate to Baghdad.  Interestingly,  the
           refusal letter is almost silent on this question,  but  Mr  Khan
           said that it was feasible for the Appellant  to  return  to  the
           capital although it was claimed by the  Appellant  that  he  had
           never been there.  The Appellant's claim  was  that  he  had  no
           financial or economic resources and access to  employment  would
           be uncertain there, or indeed in the IKR.
           [20]  There was no argument before me as to the  feasibility  of
           return and on that basis no suggestion that  such  return  could
           not be put in motion.  There was nothing before  me  to  suggest
           that the Appellant could not obtain the  relevant  documentation
           reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq, and I note  paragraph  11
           of the summary of the country guidance case.  If  there  are  no
           family or other members likely to be able to  provide  means  of
           support, then the Appellant may face a real risk of  destitution
           if by the time any funds provided to him  by  the  Secretary  of
           State to assist return have been  exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
           likely that he would still not have CSID.  I note that there are
           alternative offices where the  Appellant  could  obtain  such  a
           document, in Baghdad, as the Appellant  cannot  be  expected  to
           return to his home area.   He  could  thus  apply  to  something
           called the National Status Court,  if  necessary,  according  to
           paragraph 13 of the AA headnote.  At paragraph  14,  I  am  told
           that "as a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
           harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to  Baghdad
           City."  I find that the  Appellant  could  obtain  the  relevant
           documentation, and that he can speak at least some  Arabic.   He
           is a mature young man who  had  the  wherewithal  to  leave  his
           homeland, travel across Europe, and relocate  to  a  country  in
           which he claims not to speak the  language.   He  also  had  the
           wherewithal to  attempt  to  dupe  the  authorities  here,  into
           believing that he was not his real age.  This is clearly a young
           man who has the street wisdom to survive on return  to  Baghdad,
           even though he is from a minority community,  and  I  note  that
           returned asylum seekers are provided the support generally given
           to internally displaced persons.
           [21]  If it were unduly harsh to return to Baghdad,  then  there
           is no evidence before me that the  Appellant  cannot  travel  by
           plane to the IKR.  I note that he was able to access a vast deal
           of money,  before  his  departure  from  his  homeland,  to  pay
           criminal traffickers, and there is no reason to believe that his
           supporters would not assist him again.  I have already commented
           on his ability to  relocate  to  Europe  from  Asia,  and  I  am
           therefore satisfied that he could secure employment in the  IKR,
           where he speaks the language, and where, given  his  history  of
           travelling here, he  can  fend  for  himself.   I  am  therefore
           satisfied that the  Appellant  may  reasonably  be  expected  to
           relocate within his homeland."


   15. The crux of the error of law asserted in relation to the Decision is
       that the Judge failed to properly apply the country guidance  in  AA
       (Iraq) when dealing with internal relocation.  The Judge clearly has
       regard to the  headnote  in  the  Decision  and  it  is  accordingly
       convenient at this juncture to set out what that  says  (so  far  as
       relevant):-


            "B.  DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)
            5.   Return of former residents of  the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
           (IKR) will be to the  IKR  and  all  other  Iraqis  will  be  to
           Baghdad.  The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)
           in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is  in  possession
           of a current or expired Iraqi  passport  relating  to  P,  or  a
           laissez passer.
            6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not  in
           possession of one of these documents.
            7.   In the light of the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  HF
           (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
           [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection claim made  by
           P cannot succeed by  reference  to  any  alleged  risk  of  harm
           arising from an absence of Iraqi  identification  documentation,
           if the Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible,
           given what is known about the state of P's documentation.
            C.   POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE
            8.   It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied  that  the
           return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of  alleged  risk
           of  harm  arising  from  an  absence  of  Iraqi   identification
           documentation will require judicial determination.
            9.   Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is  one  of
           the ways in which it is possible for an Iraqi  national  in  the
           United Kingdom to obtain a passport or a laissez passer.   Where
           the Secretary of State proposes  to  remove  P  by  means  of  a
           passport or laissez passer, she will be expected to  demonstrate
           to the Tribunal what, if any, identification  documentation  led
           the Iraqi authorities to issue P with the  passport  or  laissez
           passer (or to signal their intention to do so).
            10.  Where P is returned to Iraq on a laissez passer or expired
           passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of
           return by reason of not  having  a  current  passport  or  other
           current form of Iraqi identification document.
            11.  Where P's return to Iraq is found by the  Tribunal  to  be
           feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether P has
           a CSID, or will be able to obtain  one,  reasonably  soon  after
           arrival in Iraq.  A CSID is generally required in order  for  an
           Iraqi to  access  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities;
           employment; education; housing; and  medical  treatment.   If  P
           shows there are no family or other members likely to be able  to
           provide means of support, P is in general likely to face a  real
           risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time
           any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her  agents
           to assist P's return  have  been  exhausted,  it  is  reasonably
           likely that P will still have no CSID.
            12.  Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
           should as a general matter be able to obtain one from the  Civil
           Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi
           passport (whether current or expired), if P has one.  If P  does
           not have such a passport, P's  ability  to  obtain  a  CSID  may
           depend on whether P knows the page and volume number of the book
           holding P's information (and that of P's family).   P's  ability
           to persuade the officials that P is  the  person  named  on  the
           relevant page is likely  to  depend  on  whether  P  has  family
           members or other individuals who are prepared to vouch for P.
            13.  P's ability to obtain a CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
           hampered if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs Office
           of P's Governorate because it is in an area where Article  15(c)
           serious harm  is  occurring.   As  a  result  of  the  violence,
           alternative CSA Offices for Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin  have
           been established in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does  not
           demonstrate that the "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad,
           is in practice able to provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.
           There is, however, a National Status Court in Baghdad, to  which
           P could apply for formal recognition of identity.   The  precise
           operation of this court is, however, unclear.
            D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN  IRAQ  (OTHER  THAN  THE  IRAQI
           KURDISH REGION)
            14.  As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly
           harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to  Baghdad
           City or (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.
            15.  In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh
           for P  to  relocate  to  Baghdad,  the  following  factors  are,
           however, likely to be relevant:
            (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
       Part C above);
            (b)  whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
           likely to find employment);
            (c)  whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
           accommodate him;
             (d)   whether  P  is  a  lone  female  (women   face   greater
           difficulties than men in finding employment);
            (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
       rent accommodation;
            (f)  whether P is from a minority community;
            (g)  whether there is support available for  P  being  in  mind
           there is some evidence that returned failed asylum  seekers  are
           provided with the support generally given to IDPs.
            16.   There  is  not  a  real  risk  of  an  ordinary  civilian
           travelling from Baghdad airport to  the  southern  governorates,
           suffering serious harm en route to such governorates  so  as  to
           engage Article 15(c).
            E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION
            17.  The Respondent  will  only  return  P  to  the  IKR  if  P
           originates from the IKR and P's identity has been  'pre-cleared'
           with the IKR authorities.  The authorities in  the  IKR  do  not
           require P to have an expired or  current  passport,  or  laissez
           passer.
            18.  The IKR is virtually violence free.  There is  no  Article
           15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.
            19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can  obtain
           entry for 10 days  as  a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
           permission for a further 10 days.  If K finds employment, K  can
           remain for longer, although K will need  to  register  with  the
           authorities and provide details of the employer.   There  is  no
           evidence that the IKR authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from
           the IKR whose permits have come to an end.
            20.  Whether K, if  returned  to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be
           expected to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by
           travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is likely  to
           involve an assessment of (a) the  practicality  of  travel  from
           Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood
           of K's securing employment in the IKR; and (c) the  availability
           of assistance from family and friends in the IKR.
            21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk  in  a
           home area in Iraq is unlikely to be  able  to  relocate  to  the
           IKR."


   16. Before considering the Judge's  application  of  AA  (Iraq),  it  is
       appropriate to have regard to the  evidence  which  was  before  the
       Judge on this particular issue.  As noted at [7] above, the evidence
       from the Appellant  about  his  documentation  is  at  [11]  of  his
       statement which states as follows:-


            "I also wish to confirm I have never held an Iraqi passport  or
       ID card."


       That follows a passage which is also of relevance as follows:-


            "[8] The Home Office say that I should relocate  to  Kurdistan.
           I wish to say that I genuinely  do  not  believe  that  this  is
           possible for me.  I have never been  to  Kurdistan  and  I  know
           nobody there.  I do not believe that I have any rights to go  to
           Kurdistan anyway.  I have lived all my  life  in  Kirkuk  as  my
           family.
            [9]  The only work I have ever done is farming as  a  labourer.
           I do not have any financial or other resources to assist  me  in
           relocating anywhere.  I confirm that the only language  I  speak
           is Sorani.  I do not speak Arabic.
            [10] I confirm that in relation to Baghdad that  I  have  never
           been there.  Also I do not know anybody there.  I simply do  not
           know how I would live or survive there."


   17. The Judge also had before him a skeleton argument which  dealt  with
       this issue in the following way.  Firstly, it was asserted  that  as
       the Appellant does not originate from IKR, his return could only  be
       to Baghdad.  At [11] of the skeleton argument it is  said  therefore
       that "The  Appellant  will  thus,  theoretically  be  returnable  to
       Baghdad."  Reference is then made to [15]  of  the  headnote  in  AA
       (Iraq) and submissions are made about how those issues apply in  the
       Appellant's case.  Although it is there  said  that  "relocation  to
       Baghdad [is] not reasonably viable", that submission appears in  the
       context of the factors such as ability to  speak  Arabic,  financial
       support and family and friendship ties.  The submission is silent as
       to the first factor (the ability to obtain a CSID). However,  it  is
       rightly noted that the Respondent herself has contended that  return
       should be to IKR not Baghdad (see  below).  Secondly,  the  skeleton
       therefore continues  in  relation  to  relocation  to  IKR.   Again,
       reference  is  made  to  financial  resources,  the  fact  that  the
       Appellant knows nobody there and that access to employment would  be
       uncertain.  It is also submitted that practicality  of  travel  from
       Baghdad to IKR is uncertain although that submission is made in  the
       context of the contested areas between Baghdad and the North of Iraq
       rather than in relation to inability to finance travel.


   18. As noted above and as the Judge rightly  observes  at  [19]  of  the
       Decision, the Respondent's  primary  position  in  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter is that the Appellant could  reasonably  relocate  to
       Erbil or another part of the IKR.  It is not  there  suggested  that
       this would be the destination to which the Respondent would send the
       Appellant, nor could it be since it is accepted that  the  Appellant
       does not originate from there.  The position appears  from  [21]  of
       the decision letter to be that the Appellant could himself return to
       Erbil by air whether directly or from elsewhere in Iraq.


   19. Drawing the above together, I am satisfied that the  Judge  did  not
       err when finding at [20] of the Decision that feasibility was not at
       issue in this appeal.  Although the Appellant says that he does  not
       have a passport  or  other  identity  document,  that  is  simply  a
       statement of fact.  As Mr Harrison submitted, and I accept, that  is
       not evidence that the Appellant could not obtain a document to allow
       him to be returned.  The position before the Judge and before me  is
       that the Respondent simply does not know whether the  Appellant  has
       or had such a document or would or would not be able to obtain  one.
       I  also  accept,  as  Mr  Harrison  submitted,  that   the   adverse
       credibility findings are relevant to  this  position.   It  is  also
       notable that the Appellant's skeleton argument makes no reference to
       feasibility of  return  being  at  issue  in  relation  to  internal
       relocation. I also observe by reference to [7] of the headnote in AA
       (Iraq) that it is difficult to see how the argument now  made  about
       feasibility of return would assist the Appellant if  based  only  on
       the lack of available documentation.


   20. I am also satisfied that the Judge did not err in  relation  to  his
       consideration of the factors set out at [15] of the headnote  in  AA
       (Iraq) so far as those are raised in  the  skeleton  argument.   The
       Judge has faithfully followed the headnote in AA (Iraq) at  [20]  of
       the Decision through from [11] concerning the availability of a CSID
       to [14] where the general position is considered.  By  reference  to
       what follows in that paragraph,  it  is  clear  that  the  Judge  is
       considering precisely the  factors  which  he  was  required  to  by
       reference to [15] of the headnote.  The Judge by then had found that
       the Appellant was not to be believed in relation to his  ability  to
       speak Arabic ([13(e)]; that finding is not challenged. The remainder
       of that paragraph is directed at  whether  the  Appellant  could  be
       expected to relocate to Baghdad notwithstanding the lack  of  family
       or friends there.  I reject Mr  Sadiq's  submission  concerning  the
       Judge's reliance on the Appellant's "street wisdom".  Whilst  it  is
       undoubtedly the case that the Appellant is in receipt of support  in
       the UK, that will not have been the case throughout his  journey  to
       the UK.  The Judge was  also  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
       Appellant's credibility in relation to, in particular, his  age  and
       to note that this disclosed an  attempt  to  "dupe  the  authorities
       here".   It is also relevant to note what is said in the headnote at
       [15(g)] of AA (Iraq) about the possibility that the Appellant  could
       receive support on return to Baghdad based on that which is provided
       to IDPs.


   21. The final issue in relation to relocation to Baghdad is the  Judge's
       finding that the Appellant would be able to obtain  a  CSID  shortly
       after return to Baghdad.  This is based in part  on  access  to  the
       National Status Court and in part  on  there  being  an  alternative
       office for applications in Baghdad in relation  to  the  Appellant's
       home area.  Whilst I accept Mr Sadiq's submission that the  headnote
       in AA (Iraq) (repeating what is said at [187]  of  the  decision  in
       that case) does draw attention to the lack of information about  the
       functioning  of  the  Court,  that  appears   to   be   a   separate
       consideration as to whether the Appellant could obtain  a  CSID  via
       the alternative Civil Status Affairs Office for his home area.    On
       my reading of the headnote and  [187]  of  AA  (Iraq)  the  "Central
       Archive" is something  separate  to  the  alternative  Civil  Status
       Affairs Office.  Although it appears from [183] of  AA  (Iraq)  that
       the CSA for the Appellant's home area may be outside Baghdad  rather
       than within it, the fact remains that the Judge was entitled to find
       that the Appellant could obtain a CSID by that  means,  particularly
       in circumstances where it does not appear  that  the  Appellant  put
       forward evidence to suggest that this was not an option.


   22. In any event, it does not appear from the headnote in AA (Iraq) that
       the same consideration applies  in  relation  to  the  IKR  (see  in
       particular [17] of  the  headnote).   Whilst  I  accept  Mr  Sadiq's
       submission that the Appellant cannot be returned by  the  Respondent
       directly to the IKR as he does not originate from there, it  remains
       the position that, as a Kurd, the Appellant could decide to relocate
       to that area away from Baghdad.


   23. In that regard, it is relevant  to  turn  to  the  reasons  why  the
       Appellant said he could not do so.  Aside the factors relied upon as
       rendering return to Baghdad as unviable, which I have dealt with  at
       [20] above, the  remaining  issue  is  as  to  the  practicality  of
       relocation from Baghdad to IKR.  In that regard,  it  is  worthy  of
       note that the point now raised - that the  Appellant  would  not  be
       able to afford to travel - is not one made either in the Appellant's
       statement or skeleton argument. Although it appears from the Judge's
       notes that "cost" was raised in oral  submissions,  it  remains  the
       position that the point now made is not  addressed  at  all  in  the
       witness statement.  It is dealt with in the skeleton argument on the
       basis that there are contested areas between Baghdad and IKR.  It is
       not said that the Appellant could not financially afford to make the
       journey.


   24. Whilst I have some sympathy with  the  Appellant's  position  as  to
       evidence in relation to relocation to Baghdad  since  this  was  not
       directly raised in the Respondent's decision letter, the same is not
       true in relation to relocation to IKR.  This was clearly the  option
       which the Respondent favoured.  It was therefore for  the  Appellant
       to provide reasons why he could not take that  option.   The  reason
       now put forward is not one which was in evidence before the Judge.


   25. For those reasons, I am satisfied that the errors  asserted  in  the
       Appellant's grounds  are  not  made  out.   The  Decision  does  not
       disclose any errors of law.  The grounds are in truth a disagreement
       with the Judge's findings in relation to internal relocation.  Those
       findings were open to the Judge on the evidence before him.

      DECISION
    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material error of
    law for the reasons given above. The decision of Judge Herwald
    promulgated on 17 September 2016 is therefore upheld.


      Signed           [pic]      Dated:  23 January 2017

      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
