
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05537/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 September 2020                          |On 24 September 2020          |
|At a remote hearing via Skype                 |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Selway, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a decision  of  the
         First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Hands, sent on 8  November  2019,
         allowing his appeal on humanitarian protection ('HP') grounds.  The
         FTT did not accept the SSHD's submission that the respondent ('AB')
         should be excluded from HP as a consequence of alleged  war  crimes
         in Libya, pursuant to Article 1F(a) of the 1951 Refugee Convention.



Background

      2. AB is a citizen of Libya. His immigration history is lengthy but it
         suffices for the purposes of this decision to say that  he  applied
         for asylum in August 2014, with his three children (all born in the
         UK) and wife as his dependents.

      3. The appellant was interviewed in relation to his  asylum  claim  in
         2014 and 2016.   It  was  only  after  AB  obtained  permission  to
         challenge the SSHD's delay  in  making  a  decision  regarding  his
         asylum claim on  16 May 2019, that the asylum claim was refused  on
         30 May 2019.  This concluded that there were  serious  reasons  for
         considering that as a member of  the  Revolutionary  Committee,  AM
         played  a  significant  and  substantial  role  in  crimes  against
         humanity.  This conclusion largely turned upon AM's answers in  the
         2016 interview.

      4. The FTT noted at [14] that the issue in dispute between the parties
         was whether AM should be  excluded  from  international  protection
         status by reason of his role  as  a  member  of  the  Revolutionary
         Committee.  The FTT rejected the SSHD's submission  that  the  2016
         interview  contained  reliable  evidence  to  support  Article   1F
         exclusion.  Having accepted that AM would come to serious  harm  in
         Libya in the light  of  the  relevant  country  guidance,  the  FTT
         allowed his appeal on HP grounds.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal ('UT')

      5. The SSHD  applied  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the  FTT's
         decision in three grounds of appeal.

          i) The FTT's approach to  the  2016  interview  was  inadequately
             reasoned and perverse.




         ii) The FTT erred in law  in  giving  weight  to  the  appellant's
             demeanour when accepting his explanations.


        iii)  When  assessing  A's  claim  to  have  avoided  any   adverse
             facilitation of ill-treatment during his 16-year membership of
             the Revolutionary Committee, the FTT failed to  consider  this
             in the context of the country background evidence.

      6. UT Judge Kekic granted permission to appeal in a decision dated  23
         January 2020 observing that  whilst  it  may  be  that  the  SSHD's
         assertions and objections amount ultimately to  nothing  more  than
         disagreement, the grounds merit further consideration.  In  a  note
         and directions dated 6 July 2020, UT Judge Pickup  noted  that  the
         SSHD merely relied upon her written grounds of appeal and AB relied
         upon a rule 24 notice, but considered that  the  UT  would  benefit
         from oral submissions at  a  hearing.   The  matter  was  therefore
         listed as a remote hearing before me.

      7. At the beginning of the hearing before me Mrs Pettersen agreed with
         my summary of the grounds of appeal set out above  and  made  brief
         oral submissions in support of these.  Mr Selway  relied  upon  his
         rule 24 notice.  Although it was sent back in March, it was not  on
         the Tribunal file and was emailed to both myself and Mrs Pettersen.
          Mrs Pettersen was given time to consider this and she  made  brief
         submissions in response to these and Mr Selway's oral submissions.

      8. At the end of the hearing both representatives confirmed  that  the
         remote hearing had been conducted fairly and they had no issues  of
         concern.  After hearing from both representatives,  I  reserved  my
         decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Ground 1 - 2016 interview

      9. As Mrs Pettersen acknowledged, ground 1 turns on the FTT's approach
         to the 2016 interview.  The SSHD criticised this in three  respects
         which I address in turn below.  Before doing so it is important  to
         note that the FTT was aware of the competing submissions  regarding
         this interview, having set those out in a comprehensive and careful
         manner at [15] to [22].  The judge also made it clear at [23]  that
         she read the 2016 interview (which contained over 500 questions and
         answers, recorded over the course of four hours, set  out  over  32
         pages of closely spaced typing) very carefully.  At  [24]  the  FTT
         noted that  the  transcript  of  the  interview  was  confused  and
         confusing in many parts including the poor use of English.  The FTT
         was clearly prepared to accept AB's evidence that at  the  time  in
         order to obtain employment and get ahead in Libyan society  he  had
         to become a member of the  Revolutionary  Committee  as  consistent
         with the country background evidence - see [25] to [27].   However,
         the FTT was still obliged  to  reconcile  on  the  one  hand,  AB's
         evidence in his witness statements and his 2014 interview  that  he
         did not pass on information regarding dissidents, with on the other
         hand, several aspects of the  2016  interview  that  suggested  the
         opposite.

     10. Significantly, the FTT was satisfied that the  interview  contained
         inconsistencies,  contradictions  and  confusing   statements   and
         particularised examples of this at [28] - see in particular  [28(a)
         to (m)]  The FTT  expressly  noted  at  [28(k)]  that  AB  provided
         apparently contradictory evidence about his role, yet the interview
         did not seek to clarify  this  when  such  probing  was  necessary,
         before the SSHD could properly accept those answers implicating  AB
         and the answers containing clear denials which could not.

     11. It is in these circumstances, that the FTT  was  entitled  to  take
         into account AM's claim that some of the confusion within the  2016
         interview, emerged from his failure to explain himself  as  clearly
         as he wished because English was his second  language.   The  judge
         was fully aware of AB's experience of studying and teaching English
         and expressly directed herself  to  this  at  [23].   The  FTT  was
         entitled to find that  notwithstanding  his  background,  AB  still
         required assistance when using English and did so from time to time
         during the course of the FTT hearing.  Whatever his  expertise  and
         experience of English, it remained  his  second  language.   It  is
         widely accepted that when providing answers to difficult  questions
         in a formal environment, it can be difficult to use a language that
         is anything other than the person's first language - see the  Equal
         Treatment Bench Book, at Chapter 8 at [73] to [74].  The judge  was
         entitled to observe that she was satisfied that with the use of the
         court interpreter from  time  to  time,  AB  fully  understood  the
         proceedings.  It was open to the judge to contrast this with AB not
         using the interview interpreter and becoming confused at times.  In
         any event, it is noteworthy that the  FTT  did  not  conclude  this
         factor to be determinative of the interview being  unfair.   Rather
         it was with "this in mind" that the FTT considered the substance of
         the interview.  As set out above, the substantive assessment of the
         2016 interview was comprehensive and particularised.  The SSHD  has
         not sought to challenge any of the particularised findings at [28].
          Instead, in the grounds of appeal the SSHD focussed her  criticism
         upon the FTT's observations as to procedural requirements.

     12. At [24] the FTT noted that there was little time  (under  4  hours)
         for AB to give clear answers to over 500 questions.  Although  this
         has not been as clearly expressed as it  might  have  been,  it  is
         tolerably clear, when the decision is read as a whole, that the FTT
         was concerned that the questioning did not seek to resolve some  of
         the confusion and contradictions apparent in the  lengthy  answers.
         The FTT's observations in  this  regard  do  not  give  rise  to  a
         material error of law.

     13. The SSHD has  submitted  that  the  FTT's  finding  that  the  2016
         interview was an unfair one because the serious allegation that  AB
         was a war criminal, was not made in advance, is  perverse.   It  is
         important to note the FTT's comments in  this  regard  in  context.
         The FTT was already concerned that the way in which  the  questions
         were put and the failure to resolve contradictions, rendered  parts
         of the 2016 interview unreliable - see [28] and [30].  The FTT  was
         also clearly concerned that AB had already been interviewed in 2014
         and considered that in the circumstances of this particular case it
         would have been more helpful for him to be told  that  one  of  the
         purposes of the second interview was  to  explore  the  possibility
         that his role in the  Revolutionary  Committee  was  such  that  he
         should be excluded from international protection - see [32].  Here,
         the FTT also observed that AB was not specifically asked about  his
         own individual involvement with the Revolutionary  Committee.   The
         FTT was not suggesting that there is any general  duty  to  give  a
         warning  where  exclusion  is  considered.   The  FTT  merely  made
         observations that a warning before and during this interview  would
         have been helpful in eliciting clear responses, in  the  particular
         circumstances of this case - see [34].

     14. I asked Mrs Pettersen if the SSHD had any policy  guidance  on  the
         correct approach to follow when conducting  interviews,  where  the
         possibility  of  exclusion  was  being  considered.   She  did  not
         understand  there  to  be  any.   This  is  surprising  given   the
         seriousness of the allegation for the individual and the  need  for
         clear evidence over and above suspicion or mere  belief,  following
         individualised examination - see Al-Sirri v SSHD [2012] UKSC 54 and
         Al-Sirri (Asylum - Exclusion - Article  1F(c))  [2016]  UKUT  00448
         (IAC).  I am aware that there is international guidance  from  EASO
         and the UNHCR but neither representative took me  to  this,  and  I
         therefore say no more about it.

Ground 2 - demeanour

     15. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the FTT was required to go beyond  the
         appellant's  demeanour  when  reasoning  why   his   evidence   was
         considered credible.  This  fails  to  acknowledge  the  role  that
         "general demeanour" played in  [30].   The  consideration  of  AB's
         demeanour in this paragraph is not a  significant  or  'stand  out'
         matter.  I do not accept, as  the  SSHD  submits,  that  the  Judge
         relied  on  demeanour  alone  "as   rebuttal   for   his   previous
         inconsistent account". The use of  that  simple  phrase  is  not  a
         material error of law. The FTT has not focused upon AB's  demeanour
         but has rather explained that it was the content of the appellant's
         written and oral evidence together with his general demeanour  when
         giving that evidence, that persuaded the FTT to  regard  aspect  of
         the 2016 interview to be unreliable.  I  note  that  AB's  rebuttal
         witness statement is very detailed indeed  and  particularises  why
         many of the 2016 interview responses are unreliable.

     16. When the decision is read as a whole, the FTT's  findings  are  not
         predicated upon the impression made by AB at the hearing.   Rather,
         the FTT accepted the range of the evidence relied  upon  by  AB  to
         support the proposition that aspects  of  his  2016  interview,  as
         relied upon by the SSHD to displace the burden of proof  upon  her,
         were unreliable.

Ground 3 - country background evidence

     17. Mrs Pettersen clarified that it was not the  SSHD's  position  that
         every member of  the  Revolutionary  Committee  met  the  requisite
         threshold to be subject to exclusion.  Rather there was  sufficient
         evidence to exclude this  particular  individual.   The  difficulty
         with this submission is that it relies upon evidence from the  2016
         interview that the FTT regarded to  be  unreliable.   The  FTT  was
         clearly  aware  of  and  indeed  accepted  that  the  Revolutionary
         Committee did what the SSHD stated they did and AB was a member for
         a very lengthy period - see [30].   Notwithstanding  this,  it  was
         open to the FTT to conclude that on the evidence available and  for
         the reasons provided, AB could not be held individually responsible
         in the manner alleged by the SSHD.



Conclusion

     18. It follows that the grounds of appeal relied upon by Mrs  Pettersen
         do not identify a  material error of law.

Notice of decision

19. The FTT decision does not contain an error of law and I do not  set  it
    aside.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed: UTJ Melanie Plimmer                  Dated:
Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer                     22 September 2020


