

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/05150/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Determination Promulgated        |
|On Monday 8 July 2019                    | On  Thursday 8 August 2019       |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                   J M S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge and the appeal no longer involves a protection claim, I  continue  the
anonymity direction because the case involves  minor  children.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant,  J  M  S  M,  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Bazini, Counsel instructed by JJ Law Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer






                            DECISION AND REASONS

      BACKGROUND

      Procedural Background

    1. By a decision promulgated on 15 February 2019  ("the  Decision"),  I
       (sitting with Lord Beckett as an  Upper  Tribunal  Judge)  found  an
       error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge S J  Steer
       allowing the Appellant's  appeal.   We  therefore  set  aside  Judge
       Steer's decision and  gave  directions  for  the  re-making  of  her
       decision.  The Decision is appended to this  decision  for  ease  of
       reference.


    2. By a decision promulgated on 4 April 2019,  I  adjourned  a  resumed
       hearing in order to permit the Appellant to obtain  expert  evidence
       in relation to the position of his children.  That was to have  been
       served by 14 June 2019.  Under cover of a letter dated 4 July  2019,
       the Appellant's solicitor filed and served  a  psychological  report
       from Dr Christopher Wood dated 3 July 2019.  Although that was filed
       and served out of time, I admitted the  evidence  without  objection
       from Mr Tufan.


    3. In the Decision, we expressly preserved that part  of  the  decision
       which dealt with the Appellant's appeal on  protection  grounds  and
       Judge Steer's conclusion that the appeal should be dismissed on this
       ground ([3] to [40] of that decision).  The Respondent was therefore
       entitled to revoke the Appellant's refugee status.

    4. The appeal is therefore now confined to  human  rights  grounds,  in
       particular under Article  8  ECHR.   When  appealing  Judge  Steer's
       decision, the Secretary of State did not take issue with the Judge's
       factual findings.  The appeal was on the basis that the Judge failed
       properly to apply the law  to  those  facts.   Accordingly,  I  also
       preserve [45] and [48] to [54] of Judge Steer's decision which  sets
       out the evidence which she heard and the findings at [60] to [64] of
       the decision.  I have taken account of those parts of  the  decision
       when carrying out my assessment below.


    5. However, given our earlier conclusions that Judge  Steer  failed  to
       give appropriate weight to the public interest, it is necessary  for
       me to conduct a fresh assessment of the extent of  and  interference
       with the private and family lives of the Appellant  and  his  family
       and to balance that against the public interest.  I will  also  need
       to supplement what is there said as there  was  additional  evidence
       before me, both documentary and oral, for  that  reason,  I  do  not
       preserve any other part of Judge Steer's decision.


    Factual Background


    6. The Appellant is a national of Colombia.  He came to the UK in  1997
       to join his mother who had been granted refugee status.   On  8  May
       2000, he was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  line  with  his
       mother.  On 10 May 2011, the Appellant  was  convicted  of  offences
       relating to the supply of Class A drugs and sentenced to nine years'
       imprisonment.  A deportation order was signed against him along with
       the decision  under  appeal  on  20  March  2017  following  various
       representations about why he should not be deported, and steps taken
       by the Respondent to cease the Appellant's refugee status.

    7. The Appellant has been in a  relationship  with  a  British  citizen
       since 2004 and they have four children, [N] born September 2004, [S]
       born February 2006, [R] born August 2009 and [SC]  born  June  2011.
       Those children are  therefore  aged  fourteen,  thirteen,  nine  and
       eight.  The Appellant maintains a relationship with his partner  and
       children although he does not live with them.  I  was  told  by  his
       partner, [JS], that the reason is because she  is  living  with  her
       parents and brother, sharing one room with the children and it would
       be too overcrowded if the Appellant were to live with them.  I heard
       evidence, however, that the Appellant sees the  children  daily.   I
       will come on to the detail of his  relationship  with  his  children
       below.

    8. The Appellant has only been convicted of one offence.  However, that
       offence was a very serious one  as  is  evident  from  the  sentence
       passed.   It  concerned  involvement  in  the  importation  of  five
       kilogrammes of cocaine.   The  Appellant  and  his  co-accused  were
       involved in the delivery of a parcel containing the drugs which were
       addressed to the property of his co-accused.  The Appellant stood to
       obtain �700 in payment and said that his financial circumstances  at
       that time were the reason he became involved.  He has a  history  of
       some use of drugs (mainly cannabis) but the OASys report dated  July
       2015 suggests that he no longer takes any substances.  The Appellant
       pleaded guilty to the offence.  I will deal with the offence in more
       detail below.  He has an earlier caution in 2003 for  possession  of
       cannabis.

    9. The Appellant was released from prison in May 2015  but  remains  on
       licence to November 2019.  He told me that, due to a mix up, he  was
       not tagged when initially released  but  after  two  years,  he  was
       tagged and remains with a tag and subject to conditions  which  make
       it very difficult for him to carry out his work and involve  himself
       in family occasions.  He  has  not  reoffended.   The  OASys  report
       indicates a low risk of reoffending.  Again, I will  deal  with  the
       detail of that evidence below.

   10. The Appellant was served with a notice of liability  to  deportation
       on 1 September 2011.  The decision notifying the  Appellant  of  the
       deportation order against him was served on 26 August 2015.  He made
       representations leading to the decision dated 15 March 2017 which is
       under appeal, refusing the Appellant's protection and  human  rights
       claim.  The Respondent also certified under section 72  Nationality,
       Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 that the Refugee Convention did  not
       prevent the Appellant's removal because he had been convicted  of  a
       serious crime and constituted a danger to the community.  At [25] of
       Judge  Steer's  decision,  she  concluded  that  the  Appellant  had
       rebutted the presumption in that regard and refused  to  uphold  the
       section 72 certificate.  I have preserved that finding.


    LEGAL FRAMEWORK

   11. The Appellant was sentenced to a term of imprisonment of four  years
       or more.   As  such,  whether  under  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the
       Rules") or in accordance with Section 117C Nationality,  Immigration
       and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C") the test is whether  there  are
       very compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions set  out
       in the Rules and Section 117C.   The relevant parts of the Rules and
       Section 117C are set out at [14] of the Decision and I do  not  need
       to set them out again.

   12. In summary, therefore, in order to succeed, the Appellant  needs  to
       show that  the  factors  in  his  case  amount  to  very  compelling
       circumstances over and above the exceptions in Section 117C and  the
       Rules which would, if his sentence had been  lower,  permit  him  to
       succeed based on either or both of his private and family life.

   13. However, it is also relevant to that question whether the  Appellant
       could meet either of those exceptions if they did apply. The way  in
       which the test operates was explained by the Court of Appeal  in  NA
       (Pakistan) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016]  EWCA
       Civ 662 ("NA (Pakistan)") as follows:


         "[29]    In our view, the reasoning of the Court of  Appeal  in JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used  in  section
         117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have  held  is
         to be read into section  117C(3)  does  not  mean  that  a  foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from  seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope  of  the  circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above  those  described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As  we  have  indicated  above,  a  foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he  would  need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned  in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the  2014  rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances  described  in  those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which  made  his  claim  based  on
         Article 8 especially strong.
         [30]     In the case of a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
         circumstances in his own case which could be said to correspond  to
         the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and  2,  but  where  he
         could only just succeed in  such  an  argument,  it  would  not  be
         possible to describe his situation  as  involving  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2. One might describe that as a bare case of the kind described  in
         Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if he could point to  factors
         identified in  the  descriptions  of  Exceptions  1  and  2  of  an
         especially compelling kind in support of an Article 8 claim,  going
         well beyond what would be necessary to make out a bare case of  the
         kind described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
         constitute "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2", whether taken by themselves or in
         conjunction with other factors relevant to application  of  Article
         8."

   14. Again, in short summary, the first of the exceptions referred to  in
       that extract concerns private life.  The  Appellant  would  need  to
       show that he has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of  his
       life, that he is socially and culturally integrated in  the  UK  and
       that there would be very significant obstacles to his integration in
       Colombia.  In terms of his family life, the Appellant would need  to
       show that he has  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
       partner who is settled in the UK or British or with a child  who  is
       British or has lived in the UK for at least seven years and that  in
       either event, the effect of his deportation would  be  unduly  harsh
       for that partner or child.

   15. The Supreme Court has recently provided guidance in relation to  the
       way in which the test of "unduly harsh" is to apply in order to meet
       the second exception in KO (Nigeria) and others v Secretary of State
       for the Home  Department  [2018]  UKSC  53  ("KO  (Nigeria)").   The
       Supreme Court concluded that the  question  whether  the  effect  is
       unduly harsh has to be assessed based solely on the  impact  on  the
       partner and/or child, taking no account of the  public  interest  in
       deportation which is already built in to  the  exception.   However,
       the Supreme Court drew attention to the high threshold  required  to
       satisfy the test as follows:


         "23.          On the other hand the expression "unduly harsh" seems
         clearly  intended  to  introduce  a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of
         "reasonableness" under section 117B  (6),  taking  account  of  the
         public interest in the deportation of  foreign  criminals.  Further
         the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It assumes that
         there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a level which may be
         acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies
         something going beyond that level. The relevant context is that set
         by section 117C (1), that is the public interest in the deportation
         of foreign criminals. One is looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any child faced
         with the deportation of a parent. What it does not  require  in  my
         view (and subject to the  discussion  of  the  cases  in  the  next
         section) is a balancing of  relative  levels  of  severity  of  the
         parent's offence, other than is inherent in the  distinction  drawn
         by the section itself by  reference  to  length  of  sentence.  Nor
         (contrary to the view of the Court of  Appeal  in IT  (Jamaica)  v
         Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department [2016]  EWCA  Civ
         932, [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55, 64) can  it  be  equated  with  a
         requirement to show "very compelling reasons".  That  would  be  in
         effect to replicate the additional test applied by section  117C(6)
         with respect to sentences of four years or more.
         ...
         27.              Authoritative  guidance  as  to  the  meaning  of
         "unduly harsh" in this context was  given  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
         (McCloskey J President and UT Judge Perkins) in MK (Sierra Leone) v
         Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department [2015]  UKUT  223
         (IAC), [2015] INLR 563, para 46, a decision given on 15 April 2015.
         They referred  to  the  "evaluative  assessment"  required  of  the
         tribunal:
         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult. Rather, it poses a considerably more elevated threshold.
         'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It  is
         the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.  Furthermore,   the
         addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard
         still higher."
         On the facts of that particular case, the Upper Tribunal held  that
         the test was satisfied:
           "Approached in this way, we have  no  hesitation  in  concluding
           that it would be unduly harsh for either of the two  seven  year
           old British citizen children concerned to be  abruptly  uprooted
           from their United Kingdom life setting and lifestyle and  exiled
           to  this  struggling,  impoverished  and  plague  stricken  west
           African state. No reasonable  or  right  thinking  person  would
           consider this anything less that cruel."
         This view was based simply on the wording of  the  subsection,  and
         did not apparently depend on any view of the relative  severity  of
         the particular offence. I do not understand the conclusion  on  the
         facts of that case to be controversial."

   16. In the context of considering whether the impact of the  Appellant's
       deportation on his children would be unduly harsh, I must of  course
       have regard to section 55 Borders, Citizenship and  Immigration  Act
       2009 ("Section 55") concerning what  the  best  interests  of  those
       children require.  In  so  doing,  I  note  that,  whilst  the  best
       interests of the child must be a primary consideration, they are not
       the only primary consideration - see  what  is  said  in  Zoumbas  v
       Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] I WLR 3690.   That
       is particularly important in a deportation  case  where  the  public
       interest in  removal  is  higher.   A  child's  best  interests  are
       considerations which have to be weighed in the balance against other
       competing interests. Indeed, one of the errors which  we  identified
       in Judge Steer's decision was  to  treat  those  best  interests  as
       determinative.

   17. Furthermore, as  I  have  already  observed,  the  Appellant  cannot
       succeed simply on the basis of satisfying  either  or  both  of  the
       exceptions and I have to consider whether there are very  compelling
       circumstances over and above the exceptions.  That  assessment  does
       import wider public interest considerations as is explained  in  the
       Presidential decision of this Tribunal  in  MS  (s.117C  (6):  "very
       compelling circumstances") Philippines [2019] UKUT 122 (IAC) ("MS"),
       the headnote to which reads as follows:

         "(1) In determining pursuant to section 117C(6) of the Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 whether there are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2
         in subsections (4) and (5), such as to outweigh the public interest
         in the deportation of a foreign criminal, a court or tribunal  must
         take into account, together with any other relevant public interest
         considerations, the seriousness of the particular offence of  which
         the foreign criminal was convicted; not merely whether the  foreign
         criminal was or was not sentenced to imprisonment of  more  than  4
         years. Nothing in KO (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for  the  Home
         Department [2018] UKSC 53 demands a contrary conclusion."

   18. The second paragraph of the headnote in MS refers to what is said by
       the Supreme Court in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department [2016] UKSC 60 ("Hesham Ali"). Although, as the  Tribunal
       notes in MS, the judgment in Hesham Ali pre-dates  the  introduction
       of Part 5A of the 2002 Act which includes, inter alia, Section 117C,
       that judgment is still helpful for what it  has  to  say  about  the
       public  interest  in  deportation  and  the   way   in   which   the
       proportionality  assessment   in   deportation   cases   should   be
       approached, in particular at [50] and [82] to [83] where Lords  Reed
       and Thomas advocated the following approach:

         "50.              In summary, therefore, the tribunal carries  out
         its task on the basis of the facts as it finds them to  be  on  the
         evidence before it, and the law as established by statute and  case
         law.  Ultimately,  it  has  to  decide   whether   deportation   is
         proportionate in the  particular  case  before  it,  balancing  the
         strength of the public interest in the deportation of the  offender
         against the impact on private and family  life.  In  doing  so,  it
         should give appropriate weight to Parliament's and the Secretary of
         State's assessments of the strength of the general public  interest
         in the deportation of foreign offenders, as explained in paras  14,
         37-38 and 46 above, and also consider all factors relevant  to  the
         specific case in question. The critical issue for the tribunal will
         generally be whether, giving due weight  to  the  strength  of  the
         public interest in the deportation of  the  offender  in  the  case
         before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently strong  to  outweigh
         it. In general, only a claim which is very  strong  indeed  -  very
         compelling, as it was put in MF (Nigeria) - will succeed."
         ...
         82.              I agree with the judgment of  Lord  Reed  and  in
         particular the matters he sets out at paras 37-38, 46 and 50. I add
         three paragraphs of my own simply to emphasise  the  importance  of
         the structure of judgments of the First-tier Tribunal in  decisions
         where article 8 is  engaged.  Judges  should,  after  making  their
         factual determinations, set out in clear and succinct  terms  their
         reasoning for the  conclusion  arrived  at  through  balancing  the
         necessary considerations in the light of the  matters  set  out  by
         Lord Reed at paras 37-38, 46 and 50. It  should  generally  not  be
         necessary to refer to any further authority in cases involving  the
         deportation of foreign offenders.
         83.              One way of structuring such a judgment would be to
         follow what has become known as the "balance sheet" approach. After
         the judge has found the facts, the judge would set out each of  the
         "pros" and "cons" in what has been described as a  "balance  sheet"
         and  then  set  out  reasoned  conclusions  as   to   whether   the
         countervailing factors outweigh  the  importance  attached  to  the
         public interest in the deportation of foreign offenders."

   19. As is made clear in Hesham Ali and also in the Tribunal's  decisions
       in MS and RA (s.117C: "unduly  harsh";  offence;  seriousness)  Iraq
       [2019] UKUT 00123 (IAC) ("RA"), the public interest  in  deportation
       includes not only the reduction of  risk  to  the  public  but  also
       factors such as deterrence  and  the  public's  view  of  particular
       crimes.  Although, as noted at [49] of the  decision  in  MS,   Lord
       Wilson, in Hesham Ali resiled from his comment made  in  an  earlier
       case  that  the  public  interest  in   deportation   includes   the
       "expression of societal revulsion" of particular crimes, he  did  so
       only in the context of  comments  made  at  [69]  and  [70]  of  the
       judgment which underlined the continued importance of deterrence and
       departed from the earlier comment only on the basis that it was  "on
       reflection, too emotive a concept to figure in this  analysis".  The
       point is also made in RA, as reflected in the headnote in that case,
       that "[r]ehabilitation will not ordinarily bear material  weight  in
       favour of a foreign criminal."


   20. Mr Bazini also urged me to have regard to Strasbourg  jurisprudence,
       in particular the cases of Uner v The Netherlands [2006] 45 EHRR  14
       ("Uner") and Maslov v  Austria  [2008]  EHRR  546  ("Maslov").   The
       continuing relevance of such cases is emphasised  by  the  Court  of
       Appeal in NA (Pakistan) at [38], particularly in relation to whether
       there are sufficiently  compelling  circumstances  to  outweigh  the
       public interest in deportation which is the test  which  applies  in
       this particular case.


    THE EVIDENCE


   21. The Appellant relies on a bundle of documents to which  I  refer  as
       necessary below as [AB/xx].  As I have already indicated, he  relies
       also on a psychological report of Dr Wood to which I will  refer  in
       more detail below.  I also heard oral evidence  from  the  Appellant
       and from his partner [JS].  I record at  this  stage  that  all  the
       Appellant's children attended the hearing and [N] and [S]  indicated
       that they would be prepared to talk to me  about  their  father  and
       their relationship  with  him.   However,  in  discussions  with  Mr
       Bazini, we agreed that this was neither  necessary  nor  appropriate
       given their ages.  We also agreed that it would probably  be  better
       if the children did not remain in the room for the hearing  as  they
       might find it upsetting to hear  their  father's  deportation  being
       discussed.  Although the children were initially resistant  to  that
       course, the Appellant agreed that it would be better  if  they  were
       not there to hear the  case  and  accordingly  asked  them  to  wait
       outside.  I had the  opportunity  to  see  the  interaction  of  the
       Appellant with his children at that point and to  observe  the  very
       evident closeness of their relationship.


   22. In relation to the Appellant's own evidence, I have a statement from
       him prepared for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   Judge  Steer
       accepted as do I that the Appellant came to the UK  aged  ten  years
       and was lawfully resident here from at the latest 2000 when  he  was
       granted indefinite leave to remain until 2015  when  he  was  served
       with the deportation notice.  As he noted in his oral  evidence,  he
       could have applied long ago and before the index offence for British
       citizenship, but it did not occur to him to do so.  However, he said
       that he is well integrated in to British society, having  spent  his
       formative years here and having been in secondary education here.


   23. As the Appellant also fairly accepted, he has returned  to  Colombia
       since he left.  He spent five months there in 2006  ([31]  of  Judge
       Steer's decision) and his mother has also returned there on occasion
       to visit relatives.  The Appellant spent his time with  his  uncle's
       wife.  He also told me that his grandmother lives in  Colombia  with
       one of his step cousins.  She is now  elderly.   Asked  to  describe
       their living conditions, he said they were very poor.  There  is  no
       free healthcare or benefits.

   24. The Appellant also told me something of his  circumstances  when  he
       came to the UK to be with his mother.  It  had  been  intended  that
       both he and his siblings and father would come to join  his  mother,
       but she could only afford flights for the children, so they had come
       ahead with the intention that their father would  join  them  later,
       but their father was murdered before he could make the journey.  His
       mother had been diagnosed with cancer around the same  time  as  his
       father was murdered so this had been a very difficult time  for  him
       and his siblings (an elder sister and younger brother).


   25. The Appellant expressed remorse for his offence.  I believe that  to
       be genuine.  He described it as the biggest mistake he had  made  in
       his life.  He was released from prison in 2015 and has not  offended
       since.  He was not initially tagged but is now  subject  to  tagging
       and a curfew.  That has made it difficult for him to be involved  in
       family events (as I note below) and properly to  run  his  business.
       The Appellant has set up his own company which deals  with  building
       contracts.  The company does work on site  and  finds  builders  for
       renovation projects.  The documents at [AB/44  to  AB/76]  show  the
       qualifications obtained and courses undertaken whilst the  Appellant
       was in prison and confirm that the Appellant  has  started  his  own
       business.


   26. The Appellant and his partner have been in a relationship since 2004
       as both confirmed.  [JS] is also originally from Colombia  but  came
       to the UK in 1991 aged five years.  She has since naturalised  as  a
       British citizen.  She has only returned to Colombia  once  with  the
       Appellant.  Their eldest child also went with them to Colombia  when
       she was aged ten months but none of the  other  children  have  been
       there.  [JS] says in her statement that she could not go to Colombia
       with the Appellant as she does not know the language.  I  view  that
       assertion with some scepticism given her evidence before Judge Steer
       confirming the Appellant's account that the children do  speak  some
       Spanish and can understand the language.  The  Appellant  said  that
       the children speak English at home and it was clear  from  his  oral
       evidence that he speaks English fluently and without an  accent.   I
       accept therefore that English is therefore the first language of the
       Appellant and [JS].  However, if the children  speak  some  Spanish,
       that is no doubt because their parents are able to converse also  in
       that language.


   27. However, I accept [JS]'s evidence that she would not go to  Colombia
       with the Appellant if he were deported as she is unfamiliar with the
       country and she and the children would be unable to integrate there.
        Her brothers are deceased and, although she has uncles,  aunts  and
       cousins there, she has no contact with them.  Neither  she  nor  the
       Appellant know the country well enough  to  support  the  children's
       integration.  Neither of them has  worked  there  as  both  left  as
       children and neither worked when they visited the country in 2005/6.


   28. [JS] works as a teaching assistant currently.  She  earns  �900  per
       month.  It is not however a secure job and she is due to finish  her
       contract shortly and will  then  have  to  find  another  job.   The
       Appellant contributes towards the family finances from his business.


   29. [JS] confirmed that the Appellant does not live  with  her  and  the
       children.  This is because they are  living  with  her  parents  and
       brother and she and the children are sharing one room.  It would  be
       overcrowded if the  Appellant  were  to  live  with  them.   If  the
       Appellant were permitted to stay, they would find a place  of  their
       own.  She confirmed that the Appellant sees the children every day.


   30. As regards the Appellant's relationship with his  children,  I  have
       already made the observation based on what happened at  the  hearing
       that there is a very evident  and  close  bond  between  father  and
       children.  One of the things which the Appellant spoke of during his
       evidence concerning  the  impact  of  his  tagging  was  the  family
       celebration planned to mark [N]'s coming of age.  She  will  shortly
       be fifteen years old.  The Appellant told me that this is seen as an
       important milestone for girls in Colombia and is marked with a large
       family celebration at which [N] has to perform a dance. He  will  be
       unable to attend due to his tag and curfew.  He told  me  with  very
       evident  pride  how  he  had  made  all  the  arrangements  for  the
       celebration and rehearsed [N]'s performance with her.


   31. Although I did not hear oral evidence from [N] and  [S],  they  have
       written letters ([AB/539-540]) which I  have  read  and  taken  into
       account.  [S] talks of his panic attacks and anxiety at the prospect
       of his father's deportation.  He confirms that he finds it  hard  to
       go to school because he is worried that his father could be deported
       at any time.  Indeed, I understood that one of the reasons that  all
       the children attended the hearing and wanted to stay in the  hearing
       room was because they were frightened that  their  father  would  be
       taken away from them at the end of the hearing.

   32. As a result of his anxiety and panic, [S] was hospitalised  for  two
       weeks with an extreme migraine.  He says that he is worried that, if
       the Appellant is deported, the family "will be broken"  as  he,  his
       mother and siblings would not be able to live in Colombia due to the
       violence and impact on their education so that he would not see  his
       father again.

   33. [N] says that her father is "the backbone of our family".  She would
       be "hurt and devastated" if he were deported.  She speaks  obliquely
       of an event at school (which appears to be some  form  of  bullying)
       when her father  supported  her  through  the  experience.   She  is
       worried that the family will be split, and she will  never  see  her
       father again.  She confirms that she is selecting her GCSE  subjects
       and therefore at a crucial stage in her education.


   34. Turning then to the psychological report, that  is  produced  by  Dr
       Christopher Wood (DClin, MSc, BSc, Psychology &  Neuroscience).   He
       has over fifteen years' experience  dealing  with  adult  and  child
       mental health.  He works as a psychologist in a school  for  six  to
       seventeen year' old children with  challenging  behaviour.   He  has
       also worked in medium secure hospitals and adult  and  child  mental
       health hospitals  with  in-patients  and  out-patients  and  in  the
       community across the full range of  chronicity  and  severity.   His
       report is based on some of the documentary evidence  and  a  meeting
       with the Appellant and [N] and [S].

   35. Dr Wood relies on a letter from Dr Caroline McHugh of Guy's  and  St
       Thomas' NHS  Foundation  Trust  ([AB/34])  and  a  letter  from  the
       headteacher of Trinity Academy, the school attended by [N]  and  [S]
       ([AB/537-538]).  Those are touched upon at  [61]  of  Judge  Steer's
       decision.  In the context of Dr Wood's report, I expand  however  on
       the content of the school's letter as follows:


           "We acknowledge [the Appellant] as a constant  figure  in  their
           lives.  He is listed on the priority contacts, he  came  to  the
           school to sign the Home  School  Agreement  and  Pupil  Code  of
           Conduct and has attended all meetings and parents' evening.   He
           often comes to collect his children  from  school  and  is  seen
           laughing and joking with them.  It is clear that he has  a  very
           close and constant relationship with his children.
           I think it is important to stress the emotional trauma  [N]  and
           [S] would be subjected to  if  there  was  any  change  to  this
           relationship.  [N] is currently in Year 9 and  is  preparing  to
           choose her options for her GCSEs.   She  is  a  bright,  popular
           child and is  a  member  of  the  Pupil  Council.   She  has  an
           excellent relationship with her father and it is clear  that  he
           supports her in an emotional capacity.  Recently, [N] was  in  a
           difficult position with another pupil at the school.  Her  first
           request was that we inform her father and let  him  know.   [The
           Appellant] was very supportive and  was  prepared  to  take  any
           measures in the best interests of his daughter.
           [S] is in year 8 and has fully settled in the school.  There was
           a period of time where he was unsettled, suffered  from  extreme
           anxiety which resulted in  numerous  trips  to  the  doctor  and
           absence from school.  It transpired that [S] was suffering  from
           this crippling anxiety because he was worried his  father  would
           be taken away from him.  He is now a happier child at school.
           It is very clear that any change to their  current  family  life
           would  have  a  detrimental  impact  on  the  children.    Their
           progress,  mental  health  and  emotional  well-being  would  be
           severely compromised.  [The Appellant]  is  a  constant,  active
           parent and has been a figure of support in his children's lives.
            They are used to seeing their father on a daily basis and it is
           obvious that they love each other very much.
           The children do not wish to  be  separated  from  their  father.
           They are happy, well looked after  physically  and  emotionally,
           and loved.  These factors, above all, should  be  considered  in
           regards to [the Appellant's] position in the UK."


   36. Dr Wood  observed  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  psychological
       difficulties when he met with [N]  and  [S].   However,  [N]  became
       tearful when discussing the possibility of her father being deported
       and [S] was also "visibly upset" when  asked  to  talk  about  this.
       The Appellant confirmed to Dr  Wood  that  his  children  were  "his
       primary concern over and above his own".


   37. In terms of the  impact  of  the  Appellant's  imprisonment  on  the
       children, Dr Wood confirmed that neither [N] nor [S] had any  mental
       health problems at that time but this appeared to  be  because  they
       recognised that he would come home at the end of his sentence.   [S]
       found it more difficult to cope  but  the  Appellant  reassured  him
       during visits that he would be coming home which [S]  had  accepted.
       Dr Wood confirms that [S]'s mental struggles began around the  start
       of 2017 which coincides with the decision to refuse the  Appellant's
       human rights claim and confirmation that the  Appellant  was  to  be
       deported.


   38. As to those problems, Dr Wood opines that [S]'s  symptoms  meet  the
       diagnosis for severe panic  disorder.   [S]  was  treated  with  six
       sessions of psychotherapy.  In Dr Wood's opinion, the high level  of
       anxiety  provoked  largely  by  the  threat   of   the   Appellant's
       deportation  contributed  to  the  panic  disorder.   The  Appellant
       supported [S] through this difficult period.  Dr Wood  records  that
       "[S] reported that he has developed a close emotional bond with  his
       father and sees and feels  comfortable  talking  to  him  about  his
       anxieties to seek reassurance and advice."

   39. Similarly, Dr Wood mentions the incident involving [N] which I  have
       mentioned previously.  [N] said that "she felt able to talk  to  her
       father about the problem and her father managed the situation  well,
       ensuring that [N] felt safe at school and minimising the possibility
       of this kind of incident occurring again."  [N]  accepted  that  her
       mother provides  her  with  emotional  support  but  said  she  felt
       stronger knowing that she has the emotional back up from her father.
        Although Dr Wood observed that  [N]  did  not  show  signs  of  any
       psychological difficulties, when assessed against the Strengths  and
       Difficulties  Questionnaire,  [N]  was  said   to   exhibit   raised
       indicators  of  conduct  problems.   As  indicated  in   Dr   Wood's
       conclusions,  [N]  herself  said  that  she  "struggles  to   manage
       aggression".

   40. Dr Wood provides the following opinion in relation to separation  of
       the children from their father:


           "If the children were to remain in the UK without  their  father
           they would, in my opinion, both experience  a  significant  loss
           and experience a bereavement.  Bereavement can  affect  children
           in different ways, but anxiety and confusion is  a  very  common
           experience.
           For  [S],  remaining  in  the  UK  without  his  father,   would
           significantly  increase  his  levels  of  anxiety  significantly
           increasing the probability of Panic Disorder.   In  addition  to
           grieving this would also negatively impact  on  his  mood.   [S]
           would  likely  miss  some   schooling,   either   due   to   the
           psychological symptoms or for therapy  appointments,  and  would
           find it difficult to concentrate and function  when  at  school.
           Overall, there would likely be a  significant  deterioration  in
           [S]'s mental well being which he  could  take  a  long  time  to
           recover from.
           For [N], remaining in the UK without her father, would impact in
           a number of ways.  As well as feeling anxious and confused there
           may be an increase in aggressive behaviour (as she explained  in
           the assessment how she currently struggles to manage aggression,
           but has found the support of her father and boxing as a  helpful
           outlet). [N] would likely experience the common stages of  grief
           which are denial, anger, bargaining, depression and  acceptance.
           This process could take anywhere from several months to  several
           years.  She would likely find it hard to concentrate  at  school
           and fall behind with  her  work  resulting  in  poorer  academic
           results."


   41. Based on that reasoning, Dr Wood concludes  that,  in  his  opinion,
       there can be no doubt that the children's best interests are  served
       by the Appellant remaining in the UK with them.   Dr  Wood  was  not
       asked to comment on the possibility of [JS] and the children  moving
       to Colombia with the Appellant.


   42. I turn then to the evidence weighing against the Appellant,  notably
       that surrounding his offence.  I begin by reiterating  the  point  I
       made earlier that, with the exception of a caution for possession of
       cannabis, the index offence is the only one which the Appellant  has
       committed.  That is  not  to  downplay  the  impact  of  the  public
       interest in this case.  It is clear from the sentence that this  was
       an extremely serious offence, also one involving the importation  of
       a large quantity of Class A drugs.  That  the  Appellant  is  not  a
       serial offender is however relevant both to the risk of  reoffending
       and remorse.


   43. The Appellant did not seek to minimise his  offending.   He  readily
       admitted that it was the biggest mistake he had ever  made,  and  he
       felt ashamed of what he had done particularly when he considers  the
       effect it has  had  on  his  family.   That  he  is  remorseful  and
       considered to be a low risk is confirmed  by  the  OASys  report  at
       [AB/133-489].  I note for example that when the  assessor  suggested
       to him that his offending might be the result of negative influences
       from criminal associates (with whom he no longer has  contact),  the
       Appellant "was honest in his reply and stated it was all  his  doing
       and if they had not offered it to him, he most probably  would  have
       found another illegal way to pay  back  the  loan"  ([AB/147]).   He
       vowed never to reoffend.  He previously used cannabis but, following
       awareness training during  his  imprisonment  and  as  a  result  of
       comments made by his children about a change  in  him,  he  has  re-
       evaluated his life style ([AB/149]).


   44. According to the OASys report, the motivation for the offending  was
       that the Appellant was in debt.  He allowed his co-accused's address
       to be used for the delivery of the package of drugs  and  passed  on
       the package for financial reward.   The OASys  report  records  that
       the  Appellant  had  some  problems  around  numeracy  but  attended
       education to overcome those  problems  whilst  in  prison.   He  has
       agreed a payment plan with his previous debtor.


   45. The Judge sentencing the  Appellant  and  his  co-accused  made  the
       following remarks:


           "..[JMSM], you are 24 years of age and you, [JG], are  29  years
           of age, and you now stand to be sentenced  for  the  offence  of
           conspiracy  fraudulently  to  evade  the  prohibition   on   the
           importation of class A drugs, namely cocaine.   We  are  dealing
           here with almost five kilogrammes of  cocaine  at  a  very  high
           concentration. I must have in mind the guidelines for sentencing
           in such cases, and I do so have those guidelines  very  much  in
           mind.  You, [JG] also have  to  be  dealt  with  in  respect  of
           possession of a number of class A drugs with intent, and  simple
           possession as well, and in one instance drugs of class C.
           It is agreed between prosecution and the defence  that  you  are
           both at or near the very bottom of the chain of offending  here,
           and that is clear from the facts of the case.  I take that  very
           much into account.  And also that you were involved for  a  very
           short period of time only; you were not involved in any  of  the
           wider and more detailed planning that would  have  gone  on  for
           this importation by those much higher up in the chain.  In  your
           case, [JG] you simply, albeit for payment, allowed your  address
           to be used for [JMSM] to receive the drugs in question, and you,
           [JMSM], received them and passed them on to further up the line;
           as it appears happened, although of course I am  conscious  that
           the drugs had already been intercepted and by the stage that you
           were involved there were no actual drugs, although you  believed
           them to be drugs.  But you are still guilty of  the  offence  of
           conspiracy fraudulently to evade the prohibition on  importation
           of drugs.
           I must have regard to the potential harm that  could  have  been
           caused by this vast quantity of cocaine,  as  well  as  to  your
           culpability and your role.  You  can  be  compared  to  what  is
           commonly called a mule, but in some ways you are  somewhat  less
           than a mule.  I have already said that you are both at  or  very
           near the very bottom of the chain of criminality; that is  clear
           from your bases of plea which were  accepted  and  you  will  be
           sentenced on the bases of plea.  It is a very great pity in view
           of the admissions that you made and your co-operation  with  the
           authorities that it took until the very day of  your  trial  for
           you actually to enter those pleas, somewhat to the  surprise  of
           your counsel.  But it seems to me there was always going to be a
           guilty plea one way or another at one stage or another; it never
           was going to be contested, and no additional court time was ever
           going to be used up. I just express the view that it is a  great
           pity that you could not have done it sooner because I could then
           have given you the absolute maximum credit.  As it is , I cannot
           do that, but I will give you  the  appropriate  credit,  perhaps
           more  than  you  actually  deserve,  according   to   a   strict
           application of the guidelines.  I want to make that  clear:  you
           get credit for your plea.
           Neither of you have any relevant convictions.  I will treat  you
           as persons of good character, and it is clear from  the  records
           that I have read that you are of good  families.   I  take  into
           account the two bundles of letters and references which you have
           placed before me and the constructive work that  you  have  both
           been doing in prison.  I take into account how you got  involved
           in this, the slight difference in your culpabilities.  There has
           to be a difference in the sentences passed for that  reason.   I
           take into account all that is said on your behalf, but no  other
           sentence when it comes to making the decision could be justified
           other than a substantial prison sentence...."


   46. The Judge sentenced the Appellant to nine years in prison.  His  co-
       accused, [JG] was sentenced to  seven  years.   I  note  from  those
       remarks the  reference  to  the  Appellant's  cooperation  with  the
       authorities and  his  good  character.   I  also  observe  that  the
       sentencing Judge clearly felt  compelled  to  give  such  a  lengthy
       sentence based on the guidelines.  It is evident from  his  comments
       that he would have liked to give a lesser sentence but did not  feel
       able to do so.  However, the Appellant did not appeal that  sentence
       and I have to decide the case based on what is a very lengthy period
       of imprisonment.


   47. The documents in the bundle reporting on the Appellant's  compliance
       during his incarceration note that he had no adjudications whilst in
       prison, that he engaged well with prison  and  probation  staff  and
       kept regular contact with his Probation  Service  Officer  following
       release.  His probation officer has written a letter in his  support
       ([AB/39]).  She describes him as compliant and confirms that he  has
       "demonstrated dedication to leading a law-abiding life".   She  also
       confirms the Appellant's dedication to his children.


   48. In addition, two previous employers have provided the Appellant with
       references ([AB/36 and 37]).  One recommends him for his workmanship
       and refers to him as "polite, honest and very  easy  to  communicate
       with".  The other describes him as "an exception and conscientiously
       hard worker who made a difference" and  says  that  "[h]is  conduct,
       work ethics and professionalism made him stand out  from  the  crowd
       and was very highly thought of."


    DISCUSSION


   49. Both representatives made oral submissions.  I do not set those  out
       in full.  I have taken account of those submissions  when  assessing
       the case below but refer only to those parts which are  relevant  to
       my assessment.


   50. I begin with whether the Appellant can meet either or  both  of  the
       exceptions set out in Section 117C (and  mirrored  in  the  relevant
       paragraphs of the Rules).  I do so whilst recognising that  even  if
       the Appellant could meet either or  both  of  those  exceptions,  he
       could not succeed on that basis alone.  He has to show that there is
       something compelling over and above those exceptions.  The extent to
       which he  satisfies  the  exceptions  is  however  relevant  to  the
       strength of his private and family life and therefore the degree  of
       interference which deportation  will  have  with  that  private  and
       family life.


   51. I begin with the first exception concerning the Appellant's  private
       life.  I accept that he has been here lawfully for most of his life.
        He arrived in 1997 and although it appears from his statement  that
       his mother was not immediately granted  status  as  a  refugee,  her
       appeal succeeded, and the Appellant was granted indefinite leave  to
       remain in May 2000.  He had leave from then  until  the  deportation
       order was made against him, it appears,  in  August  2015  (and  not
       March 2017 as  stated  by  me  at  [16]  of  the  Decision).     The
       Appellant was born in December 1986 and was therefore aged ten years
       when he arrived.  He spent about three years here without leave, but
       whilst his mother's asylum claim and appeal was pending. That period
       constitutes lawful residence (see Secretary of State  for  the  Home
       Department v SC (Jamaica) EWCA Civ 2112).  The Appellant then  spent
       just over fifteen years here with indefinite leave and status  as  a
       refugee.  He has spent about four years since the deportation  order
       without leave.  However, I accept that he has still spent more  than
       half his life here lawfully.


   52. The Appellant's refugee  status  was  revoked  by  the  Respondent's
       decision to  deport.  I  have  preserved  Judge  Steer's  conclusion
       dismissing the appeal on protection grounds.  It is however relevant
       that the Appellant was initially here as a refugee  with  indefinite
       leave to remain.  He will have expected that he  would  remain  here
       permanently.  Indeed, as the Appellant pointed out,  he  could  have
       applied for citizenship before he committed the  index  offence  but
       did not think to do so.


   53. That factor is also relevant to the Appellant's social and  cultural
       integration.  Mr Tufan referred me to the Court of Appeal's judgment
       in Binbuga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019]  EWCA
       Civ 551 and what is there said about the need for integration  as  a
       law-abiding  citizen.   I  accept  that  breaking  the  law  is  not
       indicative of social and cultural integration.  However,  whether  a
       person is integrated prior to the offence and whether the  offending
       breaks that integration is a matter of fact in each case.   This  is
       not a case of a person  with  a  long  history  of  offending  whose
       offending is moreover part of that person's way of life (Binbuga was
       a case involving gang-crime).  The Appellant had been in the UK  for
       about fourteen years by the date of the offence.  As the  sentencing
       remarks make clear, the offending was over a  short  period.   Other
       than one caution,  he  had  not  previously  been  involved  in  any
       criminal activity.

   54. The Appellant was educated in the UK and spent his  formative  years
       here.  Although his mother and siblings are Colombian as  indeed  is
       his partner, I accept his evidence that he had settled into the  UK,
       received his education here  and  worked  here.   He  speaks  fluent
       English as do his children.  Although he has maintained some of  the
       customs of Columbia (as indicated by the  party  being  planned  for
       [N]'s birthday), he considers himself to be British.  The reason  he
       did not apply for citizenship was, he said, because it did not occur
       to him to do so and  not  because  he  did  not  feel  British.  The
       Appellant was in prison for about 4 � years but in  the  context  of
       his overall time here, I am satisfied that the one-off  offence  and
       imprisonment which followed did not break the  social  and  cultural
       integration prior to the offence.  The relevance to  this  issue  of
       the Appellant's upbringing in the UK and strength  of  his  previous
       and ongoing family and social ties to this country is  supported  by
       what is said by the Court of Appeal at [72] to [74] in AM  (Somalia)
       v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ 774.


   55. However, the Appellant cannot meet the  first  exception  as  it  is
       accepted on his behalf that there are not very significant obstacles
       to his integration in Colombia. As we noted at [18] of the Decision,
       Judge Steer did not make any concluded finding  on  this  point.   I
       take into account the evidence recorded at [45] of her decision. The
       Appellant did not seek to exaggerate his case.   He  did  not  claim
       that because of the problems which his mother had faced in  Colombia
       or the  fact  of  his  father's  murder  there  prevented  him  from
       returning.  Nor could he do so, given the evidence that  he  had  in
       fact returned for a period of months in 2006 and that his mother had
       also returned to visit family.

   56. The background to this case is likely to make it more difficult  for
       the Appellant to return.  However, as Mr Bazini  accepted,  although
       it will be very difficult for the Appellant  to  adapt  to  life  in
       Colombia, the difficulties cannot meet the very high threshold.   He
       is a young, fit and healthy man who has  some  work  experience  and
       credentials which may enable him to find work in Colombia.  He  also
       speaks Spanish.  He also has family from Colombia living in  the  UK
       and gave evidence that he is still aware of and  observes  Colombian
       customs  (for  example  in  relation  to  [N]'s  fifteenth  birthday
       celebrations).


   57. I accept however that the area of Colombia from which he comes is  a
       very poor one.  I also accept that the evidence  about  Colombia  is
       that it has a very high crime rate, a high rate of gang crime linked
       to drugs  and  organised  crime  and  that  there  are  kidnappings,
       muggings and street crime in many  areas.   In  addition,  in  rural
       areas in particular, there is little State protection against crime.
         I also accept the Appellant's  evidence  that  there  is  no  free
       healthcare (although he does not currently need it) nor  any  system
       of benefits.  Although he is able to speak Spanish,  I  accept  that
       the Appellant may find it very difficult to find  work  due  to  the
       economic climate but has some skills which may enable him to do  so.
       I accept, based on [JS]'s evidence, that the Appellant's ability  to
       work may affect the family's financial circumstances in the UK.


   58. Taking the evidence as a whole on this aspect, I accept  that  there
       are obstacles to integration in Colombia which might be described as
       significant, but they are not very significant.   For  that  reason,
       the Appellant could not meet the first exception  even  if  it  were
       sufficient for him to succeed which it is not.


   59. I turn then to consider whether the second exception  could  be  met
       based on the effect of the Appellant's deportation  on  his  partner
       and children.  Mr Tufan did not concede  that  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh for [JS] and the children  to  return  to  Colombia  with  the
       Appellant. Accordingly, I have to consider the issue in the  context
       of return  of  the  whole  family  to  Colombia  and  the  Appellant
       returning on his own leaving his family in  the  UK.   I  accept  of
       course that since [JS] and the children are British  citizens,  they
       cannot be obliged to go to Colombia.  [JS]'s evidence is  that  they
       would not do so.  However, the issue for me is whether it is  unduly
       harsh for them were they to choose to accompany the Appellant.


   60. When assessing what can be expected to happen  to  the  children,  I
       begin as I must with what is  in  their  best  interests.   All  the
       children are British.  As such, they have access  to  the  education
       system and healthcare system here.  As was made clear by  the  House
       of Lords in  ZH  (Tanzania)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department [2011] UKSC 4, "[a]lthough nationality is  not  a  'trump
       card' it is of particular importance in assessing the best interests
       of any child. The UNCRC recognises the right of every  child  to  be
       registered and acquire a nationality (Article 7) and to preserve her
       identity, including her nationality (Article 8)". The Supreme  Court
       elaborated on the importance of citizenship as follows:


           "31.  They are British children;  they  are  British,  not  just
              through the "accident" of being born  here,  but  by  descent
              from a British parent; they  have  an  unqualified  right  of
              abode here; they have lived here all their  lives;  they  are
              being educated here; they have other social  links  with  the
              community here; they have  a  good  relationship  with  their
              father here. It is not enough to say that a young  child  may
              readily adapt to life in another country. That  may  well  be
              so, particularly if she moves with  both  her  parents  to  a
              country which they know well and where they  can  easily  re-
              integrate in their own community  (as  might  have  been  the
              case,  for  example,  in Poku,  para  20,  above).  But  it
              is very different in the case of children who have lived here
              all their lives and are being expected to move to  a  country
              which they do not know and will be separated  from  a  parent
              whom they also know well.
          32. Nor should the intrinsic importance of citizenship be  played
              down. As citizens these children have rights which they  will
              not be able to exercise if they move to another country. They
              will lose the advantages of growing up and being educated  in
              their own country, their own culture and their own  language.
              They will have lost all this when they come back  as  adults.
              As Jacqueline  Bhaba  (in  'The  "Mere  Fortuity  of  Birth"?
              Children, Mothers, Borders and the Meaning  of  Citizenship',
              in Migrations  and  Mobilities:  Citizenship,  Borders  and
              Gender (2009), edited by Seyla Benhabib and Judith Resnik, at
              p 193) has put it:
              'In short, the fact of belonging to a  country  fundamentally
              affects the manner  of  exercise  of  a  child's  family  and
              private life, during childhood and well beyond. Yet children,
              particularly young children,  are  often  considered  parcels
              that are easily movable across borders with their parents and
              without particular cost to the children.'"

   61. Those considerations apply to the Appellant's children. None of  the
       children except [N] has ever been to Colombia and then only when she
       was a baby.   Although  they  speak  and  understand  some  Spanish,
       English is the children's first language and the language they speak
       at home.  [N] and to a lesser extent [S] are at  crucial  stages  of
       their education.  A move might have  less  impact  for  the  younger
       children but would still be unsettling.  All were born  and  brought
       up in the UK.  All are British citizens and entitled to the benefits
       which that citizenship brings.  It is clearly in their interests  to
       remain in the UK.  I did not  receive  much  information  about  the
       younger two children.  Based on the evidence I have  about  [N]  and
       [S] though (including in particular Dr Wood's  report)  and  my  own
       observations of the evidently  very  close  relationship  which  the
       Appellant has with his children, I conclude  that  it  is  the  best
       interests of the children for the Appellant to remain with them  and
       for them to be brought up by both parents.


   62. I accept that the children's best interests are  not  determinative.
       They are a primary consideration but not the  paramount  factor  and
       are capable of being outweighed  by  the  public  interest  which  I
       accept in this case and based on the level of sentence is a  weighty
       consideration.


   63. Although the Respondent does not concede that  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh for the children to go to Colombia, I accept that it would be.
        As [JS] pointed out, she knows nothing of life  in  Colombia.   The
       Appellant has few links to  that  country.   As  I  have  indicated,
       although the Appellant's appeal has failed  on  protection  grounds,
       there is a high level  of  crime  and  violence  in  Colombia.   The
       children have not been  brought  up  to  deal  with  that  level  of
       violence.   They  would  be  moving  to   a   completely   different
       environment with no  knowledge  of  how  to  operate  there.   Their
       parents are likely to be of little assistance.   The  Appellant  has
       some relatives in Colombia, but I infer from his evidence that these
       are older people and they are living in poverty.  He has  not  lived
       there for some considerable time.  [JS] moved to the UK when she was
       even younger than the Appellant.

   64. The children also have family members in the  UK  and  friends  from
       whom they would  be  separated.   They  would  also  be  losing  the
       advantages of their British citizenship, particularly in relation to
       their education.  [N] is just about to  choose  her  GCSE  subjects.
       The  children's  life  chances  will  be,  as  Mr  Bazini  put   it,
       "shattered".

   65. I recognise that the threshold for what is unduly harsh  is  a  very
       high one.  It is more than just a difficulty and more than simply  a
       severe effect.  However, in the circumstances of this case and based
       on the evidence, I accept it is met in terms of the  effect  on  the
       children going with the Appellant to Colombia.


   66. The position is more finely balanced in relation to  [JS].   She  is
       originally from Colombia  but  left  when  she  was  aged  five  and
       although she says that she has some family members there, she has no
       contact with them.  Having regard to the high threshold,  I  am  not
       satisfied that it would be unduly harsh for  her  to  accompany  the
       Appellant.  However,  in  light  of  my  conclusion  concerning  the
       children, she could not be expected to go with the Appellant.


   67. Turning then to whether it is  unduly  harsh  for  the  children  to
       remain in the UK  without  the  Appellant,  I  have  regard  to  the
       evidence  about  the  particularly  strong  relationship  which  the
       Appellant has especially with the two older children.   The  impacts
       on those two children of  separation  are  likened  by  Dr  Wood  to
       bereavement.   There  has  already  been  some  impact  on  [S]   of
       threatened separation from his father.  I appreciate  that  [S]  was
       successfully treated with therapy on that occasion but that  was  in
       the context of the Appellant still being in the UK to  support  him.
       I cannot infer that the position would be the same if the  Appellant
       were actually deported.  Whilst neither [N]  nor  [S]  suffered  any
       notable, adverse effects whilst the  Appellant  was  in  prison,  Dr
       Wood's evidence is that this was because they were able to visit and
       knew that he would at some stage be coming home.


   68. Whilst obviously separation of parent  from  children  is  a  normal
       consequence of deportation and the upset caused to a child  by  such
       separation is commonplace, the evidence here is that the two  eldest
       children in particular would suffer  the  same  effects  as  if  the
       Appellant had  died.   They  would  in  effect  undergo  a  grieving
       process.  That goes beyond what would  normally  be  expected  in  a
       deportation case.  Moreover, the anticipated  consequences  for  [S]
       would be a relapse into his previous anxiety and panic disorder.  It
       may be possible to treat that condition with therapy but for a child
       aged just thirteen, that consequence cannot be said to  be  anything
       but unduly harsh.  The impact for  [N]  is  less  but  still  to  be
       equated with the position if her father died.

   69. Particularly in light of the very strong relationship between father
       and children, the effects are more than would  usually  occur  where
       the parent is deported.  This is a very closely bonded family.   The
       Appellant has been a committed father and remains so even though  he
       is not currently living  with  [JS]  and  the  children.   For  that
       reason, I accept that the impacts on the children, particularly  [N]
       and [S], if they were to remain in  the  UK  without  the  Appellant
       would be unduly harsh.


   70. Again, the position in relation  to  [JS]  is  different.   She  has
       family support in the UK and managed to look after the  children  on
       her own with that support whilst the Appellant was in prison.  There
       is no evidence that she  suffered  any  particular  adverse  effects
       during that period.   She and the children are currently living with
       her family and could continue to do so if the Appellant returned  to
       Colombia.  I am  not  satisfied  that  the  impact  on  her  if  the
       Appellant were to be deported and she remains would be unduly harsh.




   71. For those reasons, I conclude that the  Appellant  cannot  meet  the
       exceptions based on his  private  life  but  meets  exception  2  in
       relation to his family life with his children due to the  impact  of
       deportation on those children.

   72. In this case, that is not however sufficient  reason  to  allow  the
       appeal due to the length of the Appellant's sentence.  He  can  only
       avoid deportation if he can establish that there are very compelling
       circumstances over and above the exceptions.

   73. The public interest in this case is a very weighty consideration not
       only due to the length of the sentence but also the  nature  of  the
       offence, being one concerned with the  importation  of  drugs.   The
       sentence was not just over four years; it was a lengthy one of  nine
       years.  Although the Appellant was noted to  have  only  low-  level
       involvement in  the  criminal  enterprise,  I  anticipate  that  the
       enterprise in which  the  Appellant  conspired  was  itself  a  very
       serious one due to the length of the sentence passed (against  which
       he did not appeal).   The amount and concentration of  the  Class  A
       drug is also likely to have contributed to the length  of  sentence.
       As is made clear in Section 117C, "the more serious the offence  ...
       the greater is the public  interest  in  deportation...".    I  must
       therefore  give  significant  weight   to   the   public   interest.
       Deterrence is a significant factor in this  case  also  due  to  the
       nature of the crime committed.  The public's view of the seriousness
       of crimes involving drugs and the  impact  of  such  crimes  on  the
       community are also factors to which I give some weight on the public
       interest side of the balance.

   74. I accept the evidence that the Appellant  presents  a  low  risk  of
       reoffending.  I also accept his evidence that he has  rehabilitated.
       That is also reflected by other evidence from his probation officer,
       employers and the OASys report.  However, as is made  clear  in  RA,
       rehabilitation can be given only little weight.  The expectation  is
       that a person should obey the law in any event.

   75. Adopting the balance sheet approach advocated by the  Supreme  Court
       in Hesham Ali, therefore, there is a significant weight to be  given
       to the public interest side of the scales.

   76. Against that, I must balance the interference with  the  Appellant's
       family and private life.  I remind myself at this juncture  of  what
       was said by the European Court of Human Rights in  Maslov  and  Uner
       concerning the factors which are  to  be  taken  into  account  when
       looking at a case such as this.  Those are the nature and gravity of
       the offences committed by the Appellant (with  which  I  have  dealt
       above), the length of his stay in the UK, the period  which  elapsed
       between his offence and the date when I am  considering  the  issues
       and his conduct during that period and the solidity of  his  social,
       cultural and family ties with the UK and Colombia.

   77. In this case, the Appellant has been  in  the  UK  for  over  twenty
       years.  He came here as a young child and spent his formative  years
       here.  He has lived here not  for half his life but  for  two-thirds
       of it.  He was educated here and has worked here.   I  have  already
       found that he has socially and culturally integrated in the UK.   As
       the child of a recognised refugee given indefinite leave to  remain,
       his expectation would have been to stay in the UK and not to  return
       to Colombia.  As was pointed out  in  his  evidence,  the  Appellant
       could have become a British citizen  by  now  (and  well  before  he
       committed the offence) if he had thought to apply.  This  is  not  a
       case of someone with unlawful or  precarious  status.   The  private
       life he has developed whilst here is therefore something to which  I
       give weight.

   78. Although I have  concluded  that  there  are  not  very  significant
       obstacles to integration in Colombia where the  Appellant  has  some
       family members, I do not underestimate the difficulties for  him  in
       adjusting to life there, particularly given the  high  incidence  of
       violence and crime.  He may be able to find work  but  there  is  no
       doubt that he is going to find life there very difficult.  There are
       obstacles which can undoubtedly be described as significant.

   79. In addition, there will be a severe  interference  with  his  family
       life and the family life of his partner and children.   I  recognise
       that this is what deportation does but,  in  circumstances  where  I
       have found that the Appellant's partner and children  could  not  be
       expected to  accompany  him  to  Colombia,  the  effect  will  be  a
       permanent breakdown of a genuine and committed relationship  between
       the Appellant on the one hand and [JS] and  their  children  on  the
       other.   Given the  level  of  income  from  [JS]'s  employment  and
       particularly if the Appellant is unable to find work  to  supplement
       that income, the prospect of [JS] and the  children  being  able  to
       afford to visit the Appellant are slight indeed.  Furthermore, as  I
       have already  indicated,  given  the  conditions  in  Colombia,  and
       depending on the Appellant's own circumstances, they may well be ill-
       advised to do so.  They can keep in touch using Skype and  the  such
       like but that is not a real alternative to the  physical  and  full-
       time emotional  contact  provided  by  a  parent  and  child  living
       together.

   80. That permanent physical separation will have a traumatic  effect  on
       the children, particularly the elder two.  As I have already  found,
       the impact for them will be as if their father  had  died.   [S]  is
       likely to suffer a relapse  into  his  previous  anxiety  and  panic
       disorder. Those are extreme consequences and ones to  which  I  give
       substantial weight.  The elder children, in particular [N], are at a
       crucial stage of their education.  The deportation of the  Appellant
       is likely to have greater impact as a result.  The best interests of
       the children as British citizens are to remain  in  the  UK  and  to
       remain looked after by both their parents.  I also  give  weight  to
       their interests.

   81. Although I accept that rehabilitation is not a factor  to  be  given
       any significant weight, it is relevant to the public  interest  that
       this was a one-off offence albeit a very  serious  one.   I  do  not
       suggest that the public interest is less as a result, but I do  give
       some weight to the fact that the Appellant was  of  previously  good
       character as the sentencing Judge noted.

   82. I also give  some  weight  to  the  Appellant's  conduct  since  his
       offence.  He has obtained qualifications whilst in prison and is now
       running his own business.  He has not  offended  since.   Obviously,
       that would be as expected, particularly since he  currently  remains
       on licence.  However, I believed him when he said that  the  offence
       was the biggest mistake he had made in his life and it would not  be
       one that he would repeat.

   83. I have not found this an easy case to decide.  I recognise that  the
       level of the public interest in this case is significant.   However,
       as the Court of Appeal noted in Forrester v Secretary of  State  for
       the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ 2653, "in a sufficiently  strong
       case there may be factors relating to a particular  exception  which
       can amount to something over and above  the  exception  constituting
       compelling circumstances within the meaning of the  statute".   That
       may occur "because the exception is  not  merely  satisfied  but  is
       engaged in a particularly robust way so as to provide a very  strong
       article 8 claim capable  on  its  own  of  amounting  to  compelling
       circumstances".

   84. Here,  I  accept  that  the  consequences  of  deportation  for  the
       Appellant and for his family and, in particular, for his  two  elder
       children are significant.  The interference with the  lives  of  the
       two elder children if their father were deported would be  extremely
       serious.  Moreover, although the Appellant does not  meet  exception
       1,  the  interference  with  his  private  life   is   still   high,
       particularly given the time he has spent in the UK and his age  when
       he arrived and the conditions he would face  in  Colombia.   I  have
       found that those do not amount to very  significant  obstacles,  but
       they are significant.

   85. For the reasons given above, I am persuaded that albeit by a  narrow
       margin the public interest in deportation is in this case outweighed
       by the interference  with  the  private  and  family  lives  of  the
       Appellant, his partner and children.  I find  that  there  are  very
       compelling circumstances over and above the exceptions.  I therefore
       allow the appeal on the  basis  that  the  decision  to  deport  the
       Appellant is disproportionate and a breach of section 6 Human Rights
       Act 1998.


    DECISION


    I allow the Appellant's appeal on human rights grounds
      Signed           [pic]      Dated: 30 July 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05150/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Tuesday 29 January 2019                    |                             |
|                                              |......15 February            |
|                                              |2019...............          |


                                   Before
               LORD BECKETT SITTING AS AN UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                   J M S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity direction was not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge and the appeal no longer involves a protection claim, we continue  the
anonymity direction because the case involves  minor  children.  Unless  and
until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant,  J  M  S  M,  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Ahmed, Counsel instructed by J J Law Chambers

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       we refer to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.
        The Respondent appeals against a decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge S J Steer promulgated on  7  November  2018  ("the  Decision")
       allowing the Appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 15 March 2017  revoking  the  Appellant's  protection
       status and refusing his protection and  human  rights  claims  which
       decision was made in the context of an automatic deportation  order.




    2. The Appellant is a national of Colombia.  He came to the UK in  1997
       to join his mother who had been granted refugee status.   On  8  May
       2000, he was granted indefinite leave to remain  in  line  with  his
       mother.  On 10 May 2011, the Appellant  was  convicted  of  offences
       relating to the supply of Class A drugs and sentenced to nine years'
       imprisonment.  A deportation order was signed against him along with
       the decision  under  appeal  on  20  March  2017  following  various
       representations about why he should not be deported, and steps taken
       by the Respondent to cease the Appellant's refugee status.

    3. The Appellant has been in a relationship with a British citizen  and
       they have four children, aged fourteen, twelve, nine and  seven  (as
       at the date of Decision).  The Appellant  maintains  a  relationship
       with his partner and children although he does not live with them.

    4. At [39] and [40] of the Decision, the Judge concluded that there had
       been  a  significant  and  durable   change   in   the   Appellant's
       circumstances and conditions in Colombia such that he was no  longer
       in need of international protection.  She therefore  concluded  that
       the Respondent was entitled to  revoke  the  Appellant's  protection
       status and to refuse his protection claim.  There is no cross-appeal
       by the Appellant in relation to the outcome on protection grounds.

    5. The Judge concluded however  that  the  impact  on  the  Appellant's
       private and family life rendered deportation disproportionate.   She
       therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds under Article 8
       ECHR.

    6. The Respondent argues that the Judge has misdirected herself in law.
        He says that the Judge failed to note that the test is not  whether
       the exceptions in paragraphs 399(a) and (b) of the Immigration Rules
       ("the  Rules")  are  met  but  whether  there  are  very  compelling
       circumstances  over  and  above  the  exceptions.   Allied  to  that
       submission, the Respondent says  that  there  is  an  inadequacy  of
       reasons for the conclusions reached and that the Judge has failed to
       give due weight to the public interest.  He argues that in so doing,
       the  Judge  has  minimised  the  seriousness  of   the   Appellant's
       offending.

    7. Permission to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Lambert in the following terms so far as relevant:

             "..[2]    The judge found it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
             Appellant's 4 British citizen children to remain in the  United
             Kingdom without their father.  The grounds refer  to  the  fact
             that given the Appellant's 9 year prison  sentence  the  'undue
             harshness' exception at S117C(5) was not  sufficient  to  allow
             the appeal - there needed under S117C(6) to be very  compelling
             circumstances over and above those described  in  Exceptions  1
             and 2.
             [3]  The judge did at paragraph 68 recognise that there had  to
             be 'very compelling circumstances'.  However  the  Respondent's
             contention that the factors identified in  that  paragraph  are
             insufficient to amount to  very  compelling  circumstances  and
             that the paragraph demonstrates failure fully to appreciate the
             higher hurdle under  S117C(6)  is  arguable,  given  the  heavy
             reliance in that  paragraph  on  the  undue  harshness  already
             identified by the judge.
             [4]  There is therefore an arguable error of law  disclosed  by
             the application."

    8. The matter comes before us to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and if so either to re-make it or remit the
       appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for re-making.


    Submissions


    9. The grounds are quite discursive.  We have summarised them above.
       In his oral submissions, Mr Tufan pointed out that this was a
       substantial sentence of over four years to which the higher
       threshold in the Rules and Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and
       Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117C") applies.  It is difficult to see
       what it is in this case which comes close to meeting that threshold.
        The Appellant has four children, but he does not live with his
       partner and children.  Even if it were unduly harsh for them to
       return to Colombia with him, it is not clear why it would be unduly
       harsh for them to remain without him.  The Judge has focussed on the
       children's best interests but those are not determinative.


   10. Mr Tufan accepted that the Appellant has lived in the UK for a
       significant period but there are no findings by the Judge about why
       that is material in terms of compelling reasons.  The Judge relies
       on the Appellant's involvement in the offending being at a low
       level, but this was a nine years' sentence.


   11. Mr Ahmed submitted that cases of this nature are fact sensitive (as
       we accept) and that the Judge had properly adopted the "balance
       sheet approach" advocated in Hesham Ali v Secretary of State for the
       Home Department [2016] UKSC 60.  He submitted that the Decision is
       very detailed and that the Judge has in mind the Appellant's
       circumstances including that he had come to the UK as a child.  Mr
       Ahmed accepted that it was not clear from what is said at [45] of
       the Decision whether the Judge found there to be very significant
       obstacles to integration in Colombia but said that in the round
       there are.  The Appellant's length of residence and integration in
       the UK pointed in that direction.


   12. When asked to explain the Judge's reasons for finding there to be
       unduly harsh impacts on the Appellant's children if the Appellant
       were deported, Mr Ahmed pointed to what the Judge said at [59]
       onwards in relation to the children's best interests.  He submitted
       that the threshold was met because the four children live in the UK,
       may speak some Spanish but only a little and their father plays an
       active role in their upbringing.  That coupled with the Appellant's
       good behaviour since his release was sufficient to meet the
       threshold.  Although the Appellant was released from his custodial
       sentence in 2015, Mr Ahmed accepted that he was not released from
       immigration detention until November 2017.


   13. In conclusion, Mr Ahmed submitted that we should not interfere with
       the Decision merely because we might have reached a different
       conclusion from the Judge.  A different Judge might have reached a
       different conclusion but, he said, there was no material error of
       law disclosed.


    Discussion and Conclusions

   14. It is convenient to begin by reminding ourselves of the  legal  test
       which the Judge was required to apply in this case:

          "117C Article 8: additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
       foreign criminals
          (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public
          interest.
          (2) The more serious the offence committed by a foreign criminal,
          the greater is the public interest in deportation of the
          criminal.
          (3) In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has not been
          sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years or more, the
          public interest requires C's deportation unless Exception 1 or
          Exception 2 applies.
          (4) Exception 1 applies where-
          (a) C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
          of C's life,
          (b) C is socially and culturally integrated in the United
          Kingdom, and
          (c) there would be very significant obstacles to C's integration
          into the country to which C is proposed to be deported.
          (5) Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine and subsisting
          relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and
          subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, and the
          effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly
          harsh.
          (6) In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to a
          period of imprisonment of at least four years, the public
          interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
          circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and
          2.
          (7) The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to be taken
          into account where a court or tribunal is considering a decision
          to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason
          for the decision was the offence or offences for which the
          criminal has been convicted."


         Immigration Rules 398, 399 and 399A now provide:
         "398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations under Article 8 ... and

         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;
         (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but at least 12 months;
         or
         (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the public interest because, in the view of  the
         Secretary of State, their offending has caused serious harm or they
         are a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for  the
         law, the Secretary of State in assessing that claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest in deportation will only  be  outweighed  by  other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.
         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -
         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and
         (i) the child is a British Citizen; or
         (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the  7
         years immediately preceding the date of the  immigration  decision;
         and in either case
         (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country
         to which the person is to be deported; and
         (c) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in  the  UK
         without the person who is to be deported; or
         (d) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and
         (i)  the  relationship  was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
         (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their immigration status  was
         not precarious; and
         (ii) it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to  live  in  the
         country  to  which  the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
         compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those   described   in
         paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and
         (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the UK
         without the person who is to be deported.
         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -
         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and
         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and
         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported."
       [our emphasis]


   15. We accept that the Judge sets out the relevant provisions of Section
       117C at [44] of the Decision.  The issue is whether she properly
       applied those provisions.  In this regard, we disagree with the
       Respondent's suggestion that the Judge was not entitled to have
       regard to the exceptions simply because the Appellant as a highest
       category offender is not able to avail himself of those exceptions.
       The Respondent's argument runs counter to what is said at [29] and
       [30] of the Court of Appeal's judgment in NA (Pakistan) v Secretary
       of State for the Home Department [2016] EWCA Civ 662.


   16. We therefore turn to look first at the way in which the Judge dealt
       with the exceptions.  The first exception concerns the Appellant's
       private life.  The Appellant had been in the UK from 1997, lawfully
       until his ILR was effectively revoked by the deportation decision in
       March 2017.  He was born in December 1986 and accordingly there can
       be no disagreement with the Judge's conclusion that the Appellant
       had resided lawfully in the UK for most of his life.  Whilst the
       fact that he speaks English and is in employment in the UK may not
       amount to substantial reasons for finding that the Appellant is
       socially and culturally integrated, we accept for the moment that
       the Judge was entitled so to find.  He has formed a relationship
       with a partner here and has children who are also British nationals.
        There are also some other factors in the passage which we cite
       below which point to integration in the UK.


   17. The problem with this aspect of the Judge's reasoning is in relation
       to whether there would be very significant obstacles to the
       Appellant's integration in Colombia.  The Judge deals with this at
       [45(iii)] as follows:
           "(i)  There would be very significant obstacles to the
           Appellant's integration into Columbia
           I have dismissed the Appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian
           protection and under Articles 2 and 3, ECHR and Article 15(c) of
           the Qualification Directive, in relation to the security
           situation in Columbia.  As noted in the reasons for refusal
           letter, the Appellant is an adult male and in good health.  He
           was born in Columbia and resided there to age 10.  He was
           brought up by his Columbian mother after his arrival in the UK.
           He returned to Columbia for five months in 2006.  His mother
           retains good contacts with her siblings in Columbia, her last
           visit there being as recent as 2017.  The Appellant speaks
           Spanish.  There was no evidence given that  the Appellant's
           relatives in the UK - his mother and siblings - and in Columbia
           - his aunts - would be unwilling, or unable to assist him in
           reintegrating into life in Columbia now.  The Appellant has
           obtained qualifications and work experience in the UK including
           an IT technician qualification, and has established a multi-
           service company, dealing in construction and industrial
           cleaning/ housekeeping.  In cross-examination, the Appellant
           stated that he had undertaken "different jobs, kitchen porter to
           labourer, builder, coffee business and now building/
           construction company in development." Asked about the
           possibility of employment in Columbia, the Appellant replied,
           "Out of the equation. I can't see myself.  Job, life won't be
           the same.  Can't. Impossible for me to be in Columbia, away from
           my children, I would break down". Referred to the time that he
           had been away from his children, whilst in prison, the Appellant
           stated, "Maintained ties by family visits, and days, and did
           courses". There was no country, or other, evidence provided to
           support the Appellant's claim that he would be unable to secure
           self/employment in Columbia upon return there."


   18. We are unclear whether the Judge intended the italicised heading to
       this sub-paragraph to reflect a finding that there are very
       significant obstacles to integration in Colombia.  If she did, we
       struggle to discern what it is in the section which follows which is
       said to amount to very significant obstacles.  We do not accept Mr
       Ahmed's submission that, read in the round, the passage shows an
       acceptance that there are very significant obstacles; in fact, our
       reading is completely the opposite.  We should say though that when
       it comes to the reasons given for allowing the appeal to which we
       come below, there is no finding that there are such very significant
       obstacles and the Judge does suggest that there is an absence of
       such obstacles.  We proceed on the basis therefore that the Judge
       did not find exception one to be made out.


   19. Turning then to the impact on the Appellant's partner and children,
       the Judge considers that from [48] onwards.  The Judge was aware
       that the Appellant does not live with his partner and children but
       continues to have a genuine and subsisting relationship with them.


   20. At [52] of the Decision, the Judge records that "[t]he evidence of
       the Appellant and his partner was that the decision had been made
       that the Appellant's partner and their children would not relocate
       to Columbia".  That is perhaps unsurprising given that the Appellant
       does not live with his family.  However, that is not the same as
       concluding that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner
       and children to go to Colombia in the event that they decided to do
       so.  We note in the paragraphs which follow that the Judge records
       that the Appellant's partner has relatives in Colombia and has
       visited with her eldest child.  We assume from what is said at [54]
       of the Decision that she in fact comes from Colombia: she refers to
       having been in the UK since the age of five.  The Appellant's
       partner also records that the children speak Spanish although not to
       the level of their English.  The Appellant is recorded as saying
       that his partner and children would not go with him because they
       would have a better future in the UK.  The only reason given by the
       Appellant and his partner why his partner and children could not
       visit him if they did decide not to go is a financial one.  In any
       event, none of what is there said remotely equates to reasons why it
       would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner and children to go
       with him if he were deported.


   21. The Judge considers the best interests of the children at [59] to
       [62] of the Decision.  We have no difficulty in accepting and
       agreeing with the Judge's reasons for finding that it is in the
       children's best interests to remain in the UK even though they do
       have family links with Colombia and speak some Spanish. That
       reasoning is uncontroversial.


   22. There is some evidential support for the Judge's conclusion that the
       children's best interests also favour the Appellant remaining in the
       UK with them in spite of the fact that he does not live with them.
       The Judge records the lack of expert report as to the impacts of the
       Appellant's deportation on the children.  At best, the evidence is
       that one of the children sees the Appellant as "a very important and
       supportive figure" and he is said by the schools to be "an active
       parent" who is "fully supportive and committed to his children" and
       that "a close relationship between [the Appellant] and his children
       is, and always has been evident".  He is said to support the
       children academically and personally. The Judge goes on at [62] to
       note that the relationship between the Appellant and his children if
       he were deported would be limited to telephone and internet
       communication and the occasional visit.  She also finds that there
       will be some impact on the family's finances to which the Appellant
       has been contributing.


   23. Whilst we accept that it may have been open to the Judge to conclude
       that such factors supported a finding that it is in the best
       interests of the children that their father remain in the UK with
       them, we are quite unable to accept that the Judge was entitled
       without more to move directly from that finding to the conclusion
       that "it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK
       without their father", particularly in light of the elevated
       standard which that test is now said to encompass (see KO and others
       v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53).   As
       is repeatedly stated by the higher courts in the cases referred to
       by the Respondent at [7] of the grounds, the factors relied upon are
       ones which will arise in any case of deportation (or indeed removal)
       and were those to be the determinative factors, as the Respondent
       also there observes, this would amount to best interests being the
       primary consideration rather than a primary consideration which is
       not the correct legal position.


   24. Similarly, whilst the Judge was entitled to have regard to the
       relationship between the Appellant and his partner and give some
       weight to it, the analysis at [63] of the Decision does not show
       whether the Judge views the impact on the Appellant's partner of
       staying in the UK without him to be "unduly harsh" and if so for
       what reason.


   25. As we have already observed, the Appellant falls in to the higher
       category of offender.  As such, the issue for the Judge was not
       simply whether the Appellant could meet the exceptions if he was
       entitled to rely on them but whether there are very compelling
       circumstances over and above those exceptions.  We accept that this
       does not necessarily mean that the Appellant has to meet either or
       both of those exceptions; there may be other factors strengthening
       the balance in his favour or factors which diminish the public
       interest.  Equally, it may be sufficient for the Appellant to have
       developed a particularly strong family and private life in order to
       show that there are very compelling circumstances when his position
       is judged overall.


   26. It is convenient though to set out in full why it is that this Judge
       concluded that the Appellant is entitled to succeed applying what is
       a rigorous test:


           "[62]  ...I find that it would be unduly harsh for the children
           to remain in the UK without their father and it is in the bests
           interests of the Appellant's children that he remains living in
           the UK, to maintain the level of co-parenting that he currently
           has.  That is a factor of significant weight in the balancing
           exercise.
           [63]  Also weighing in the Appellant's favour is that he has a
           relationship with his partner, which started prior to the
           commission of the offence, and which is continuing, albeit that
           they do not live together. The relationship was started when the
           Appellant was lawfully in the UK, and his immigration status was
           not precarious, as he was a refugee who was granted indefinite
           leave to remain.  As the relationship started when the Appellant
           was lawfully settled in the UK, I give weight to it.
           [64]  The Appellant has been living in the UK, lawfully, since
           the age of 10, the majority of his life, over 20 years.  That
           also is a factor to which I give weight.
           [65]  The Appellant is socially and culturally integrated in the
           UK given the length of time that he has spent living here.
           [66]  The Appellant committed a serious offence, but his
           involvement in that offence was described by the sentencing
           judge, as being at the lower end of involvement, and for a
           limited time.  Whilst the Appellant remains on licence, his
           behaviour in prison and since his release in November 2017, has
           been described by those professionals working with him, as being
           exemplary, and it has been decided that he is at low risk of re-
           offending or causing harm to others.
           [67]  Weighing against the Appellant in favour of deportation,
           to which must be given considerable weight, is the fact that the
           Appellant was convicted of a serious offence to which he was
           sentenced to 9 years imprisonment, significantly in excess of
           the 4-year period.  Further weighing in favour of deportation
           are the following factors: The Appellant committed the offence
           aged 25, whilst an adult.  The Appellant was brought up by his
           mother, a Columbian national, and they retain ties with family
           members living in Columbia.  The Appellant speaks Spanish.  The
           Appellant has gained qualifications and work experience, which
           he could use to secure employment, upon return to Columbia now.
           [68]  The public interest in deportation will only be outweighed
           where there are very compelling circumstances, surrounding an
           appellant's family and private life.  The Appellant committed a
           serious offence, but he was involved to a very low level, the
           offence was a one off, his behaviour since has been exemplary
           and there is a low risk of re-offending or further harm. I find
           that the Appellant's family and private life outweighs the
           public interest in deportation.  The Appellant's relationship
           started when he was lawfully settled in the UK having lived here
           since the age of 10.  His four children were born prior to the
           commission of the offence.  They are British citizens, all aged
           7 and above, who are at critical stages in their education, and
           in growing up, and need the level of parental support that can
           only be provided by a parent who lives in the same country and
           is able to co-parent on a daily basis.  Given their length of
           time in the UK, it would not be reasonable for them to relocate
           to Columbia, a country with which they have limited family and
           cultural ties, and it would be unduly harsh for them to lose the
           close, personal, relationship that they need with their father."




   27. We keep firmly in mind that it is not for us to interfere with a
       Judge's assessment and conclusion simply because it is not the
       conclusion we would have reached on the evidence.  However, we
       consider that the foregoing reasoning discloses the following errors
       of law.


   28. First, we have already noted that the Judge does not make a finding
       that the Appellant's private life would entitle him to succeed under
       exception one.  That is supported by what is said at [67] of the
       Decision.  As such, the interference with the Appellant's private
       life, even if he were an "under 4 years" case and entitled to rely
       on that exception, would not be sufficient to outweigh the public
       interest at least taken alone.



   29. Second, as we have already noted, the Judge has not reached an
       express finding that it would be unduly harsh for the Appellant's
       partner and children to go to Columbia with him.  Both that issue
       and the question whether it is unduly harsh for them to stay in the
       UK without him are addressed mainly if not entirely based on what
       the children's best interests require.  That is a relevant factor
       but not ordinarily a determinative one, particularly in deportation
       cases.


   30. Third, and linked to that conclusion, we agree with the Respondent
       that the Judge has minimised the Appellant's offending and has
       failed to give due weight to the public interest.  That the
       Appellant was involved at a low level in the chain of offending in
       which he and others were convicted does not mean that his
       involvement in the importation and distribution of a substantial
       amount of class A controlled drugs was not a very serious offence.
       We recognise that the Judge accepts that it is, but her comments do
       not adequately take into account the level of the sentence which was
       not only over four years but significantly so and the level of
       interference which is required by the Rules and Section 117C in
       order to outweigh the public interest in such cases.  We consider
       that, following the Supreme Court's judgment in KO and others it is
       arguable in the appellant's favour that the test is only whether the
       offending falls into the higher category and not whether it is a
       higher sentence than others in the same category.  Equally, though,
       the Supreme Court's comments in those cases may also undermine the
       Judge's reliance on the nature of the Appellant's role in the
       offending for which he was convicted.


   31. We accept that the Judge was entitled to refer to the low risk of
       the Appellant reoffending.  The Judge had earlier concluded based on
       the evidence that the Appellant was not a danger to the community in
       the context of section 72 of the 2002 Act ([25]).  However, what the
       Judge did not take into account was the other facets of the public
       interest in deportation (deterrence, maintaining public confidence
       and perhaps denunciation).  There is mention of a submission on this
       point (albeit also in the context of section 72), but the only
       mention of it is when summarising the submission in relation to
       Maslov at [57(v)] and it is not a point considered in the Judge's
       assessment of the level of weight which needs to be given to the
       public interest.

   32. For those reasons, we are satisfied that the Decision does contain
       material errors of law.  We set aside the Decision so far as it
       relates to the Article 8 case.  We preserve paragraphs [3] to [40]
       of the Decision which relate to the protection aspect of the appeal.

   33. Although Mr Ahmed confirmed that there was no application to adduce
       further evidence in the event of us setting aside the Decision and
       invited us to re-make the decision based on the written evidence, we
       would be assisted in our task by hearing oral evidence.
       Accordingly, we have given directions below for the Appellant to
       file and serve further evidence if he wishes to do so and for an
       oral hearing at which he may give evidence and call other witness
       evidence if he wishes to do so.


    DECISION


    We are satisfied that the Decision contains a material error of law. We
    set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  S  J  Steer
    promulgated on 7 November 2018 so far as it relates to  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds.  We preserve paragraphs [3] to [40] of the Decision.
     We give the following directions for the re-making of the decision:


    DIRECTIONS


    1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is promulgated,  the
       Appellant shall file with the Tribunal and serve on  the  Respondent
       any further evidence on which he relies.
    2. The appeal will be re-listed before UTJ Smith on the first available
       date after six weeks from the date when this decision is promulgated
       with a time estimate of three hours.
      Signed           [pic] Dated: 14 February 2019
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

