
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05502/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 1 September 2017                   |On 4 September 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    M F A
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Singh Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge James  ('the  Judge')  promulgated  on  2
        March 2017 who allowed the appeal on all grounds.






Background


     2. The above respondent is a citizen of Nigeria born on 17  July  1975
        who on 23 November 2015 claimed asylum. The application was refused
        against which the above respondent appealed.
     3. The Judge  noted  the  Secretary  of  State  refers  to  the  above
        respondent using several aliases. The Judge records that  the  core
        of the claim is that a daughter born to the above respondent on  27
        January 2010, referred to as 'Blessing', will be subject to FGM  if
        returned with the appellant to Nigeria.
     4. It is noted the Secretary State accepted the appellant is a  member
        of a particular social group by reason of  being  the  accompanying
        parent of a child subject to FGM and also  by  reason  of  being  a
        woman and  that  the  appellant's  identity  and  nationality  were
        accepted in the Reasons for Refusal Letter.
     5. It was also accepted by the Secretary of State that  the  appellant
        is a member of the Yoruba tribe.
     6. The Judge sets out the nature of evidence received and  submissions
        made before setting out findings of fact at [31-42] of the decision
        under challenge. Those findings may be summarised in the  following
        terms:


                i) the Judge was in no doubt that the appellant has, in  the
                   past, been less than forthright  with  the  Tribunal  and
                   with the Secretary of State and has a  conviction  for  a
                   criminal offence in relation to immigration matters,  but
                   was mindful that the person alleged to be at risk in  the
                   appeal is a child and that it would be  wrong  to  punish
                   the child for the misdeeds of her parent [31].
               ii) The Judge found the recent change in law relating to  FGM
                   in Nigeria would not remove the risk of FGM  to  Blessing
                   as FGM is considered to be a cultural matter by those who
                   practice  it  and  the  new  law  would  not  deter  most
                   practitioners. The Judge found there is no  evidence  the
                   Nigerian authorities have been able to  enforce  the  new
                   law and the objective evidence provided by the  appellant
                   is said to make it clear that the change in law will make
                   little difference until  there  has  been  a  significant
                   cultural shift. The Judge accordingly was satisfied  that
                   within certain tribes and communities in  Nigeria  women,
                   and particularly young women and girls, remain at risk of
                   FGM [32].
              iii) The Judge noted the Yoruba tribe practice FGM [33].
               iv) The Judge  found  the  information  in  the  Home  Office
                   Country Information and Guidance relating to  Nigeria  to
                   suggest that a female child has a one in four  chance  of
                   suffering FGM and that in certain tribal areas it will be
                   higher. The Judge noted the above respondent has suffered
                   FGM and considered whether there are any factors relating
                   to Blessing that would  make  it  more  likely  she  will
                   suffer  MGM,  in  considering  this  position  the  Judge
                   accepted that the above  respondent's  husband  has  died
                   [34].
                v) The Judge accepted the  appellant  had  told  a  credible
                   narrative in relation to Blessing including claiming  she
                   had received requests to take Blessing to  Nigeria  since
                   husband died in 2015. The Judge found the  delay  between
                   the above respondent and her husband separating  in  2010
                   and the requests in 2015 were explained by the fact  that
                   whilst the respondent's husband was alive he  would  have
                   been the person who would have determined where  Blessing
                   would live and it was  only  since  his  death  that  the
                   remaining members of the family would have been  able  to
                   claim authority in relation to Blessing. The Judge  noted
                   and accepted the above respondent's siblings are involved
                   in family discussions  regarding  where  Blessing  should
                   live  and  accepted  that  in  accordance  with  Nigerian
                   culture she should be  with  her  father's  family  which
                   placed the above respondent in the position of not  being
                   able to rely upon her family for support in the event  of
                   her return to Nigeria [35].
               vi) The Judge was satisfied to the lower  standard  that  "if
                   Blessing were taken to Nigeria and was taken to her  late
                   father's  family  she  would   have   a   risk   of   FGM
                   significantly higher than the already serious one in four
                   risk across the country" [36].
              vii) The Judge therefore concluded the above respondent  is  a
                   member of a particular social group as a single parent of
                   a female child, that that child faces a real risk of  FGM
                   against the wishes of her mother and  for  the  child  to
                   face that risk will be subjected to FGM would  amount  to
                   persecution of the above respondent. [37].
             viii) The Judge considered the  issue  of  internal  relocation
                   having noted quoted passages from the Country Information
                   and Guidance and was not satisfied the  above  respondent
                   and her daughter would be able to avail themselves of the
                   protection of the State authorities on return to Nigeria,
                   was not satisfied that they will be able to relocate  and
                   avoid the risk of FGM bearing in mind the  prevalence  of
                   the practice in some form or another throughout  Nigeria,
                   and that if the above respondent had to  relocate  within
                   the Yoruba areas of Nigeria the Judge believed she  would
                   be at risk from her late husband's  family  and  have  no
                   support from her own family, and that  if  she  relocated
                   outside those  areas  the  above  respondent  would  face
                   difficulties by reason of not being part  of  the  tribal
                   culture of those areas and would have nobody  protect  to
                   protect her or Blessing [40].
               ix) The Judge considered the best  interest  of  Blessing  in
                   accordance with section 55 whilst accepting that at  this
                   age her life will be more concerned with being  with  her
                   mother, it was found on return to Nigeria there is a risk
                   the child will be taken by her late father's  family  who
                   would exercise control over her leading  to  the  concern
                   about the child being subjected to FGM which is  said  to
                   be  relevant  in  assessing  the   best   interests   and
                   accordingly the Judge found the  child's  best  interests
                   would be to remain in the UK with her mother [41].


     7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal on a  number  of
        grounds which was  granted  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal in the following terms:


             1.  the  Respondent  seeks  permission  to  appeal  against  a
                decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge James)  who,  by
                decision and reasons promulgated on 2 March  2017,  allowed
                the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision   of   the
                respondent made on 23 May 2016 refusing to grant asylum and
                humanitarian protection under paragraph 336 and 339F of  HC
                395 (as amended).
             2. The grounds asserts  that  the  FTT  Judge  had  failed  to
                consider whether there  was  a  sufficiency  of  protection
                available to the appellant; failed to apply the  principles
                in Devaseelan; failed to correctly apply section 8  of  the
                Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  claimants,etc)  Act
                2004; failed to adequately carry  out  the  proportionality
                test in dealing with  the  best  interests  of  the  child;
                failed to provide adequate reasons for  her  findings;  and
                failed to  consider  the  resolve  issues  surrounding  the
                appellant's corroborative documents which  amounted  to  an
                error of law.
             3. The appellant stated that she had been subject  to  FGM  in
                fear that on return to Nigeria her infant daughter will  be
                subjected too.
             4. It is clear from the decision and reasons  that  the  judge
                had not considered the first determination relating to  the
                appellant which was applicable especially  as  both  claims
                had involved family members.  The  appellant  had  produced
                documents which the respondent had not accepted  but  there
                had been no consideration of these within the terms of  the
                judgment, nor had the issues under section 8  of  the  2004
                Act. There was arguably a failure to give adequate  reasons
                for her findings overall with particular to  the  issue  of
                sufficiency of protection in  the  best  interests  of  the
                child.
             5. Permission is granted.



Error of law


     8. There was no appearance by or on behalf of the above respondent  at
        the Upper Tribunal. Notice of the date, venue, and time of  hearing
        has  been  posted  to   both   the   above   respondent   and   her
        representatives by first class post on 17 July 2017.  No  documents
        have been returned as not having been posted. No correspondence has
        been received requesting an adjournment or any explanation for  the
        failure to attend.
     9. Checks were made by the clerk assisting the Tribunal prior  to  the
        commencement of the day's business at 10 AM and again at 10:15  and
        10:50 AM. Checks on the latter occasion being when the  appellant's
        case was called on for hearing.
    10. In light of the fact valid service of the  notice  of  hearing  has
        occurred and the lack of an explanation for the failure  to  attend
        or any application to adjourn, this tribunal considers it fair  and
        reasonable in all the circumstances to proceed to hear  the  appeal
        in the absence of the appellant.
    11. The Secretary  of  State  has  filed  detailed  grounds  of  appeal
        challenging the determination identifying a  number  of  key  legal
        errors, the most important of which can be summed up as being:
     a. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in making a misdirection in law
        when finding there was not a sufficiency of protection available to
        the appellant in Nigeria as the appellant failed to prove that  the
        Nigerian authorities were unwilling or unable to assist if  a  real
        risk of FGM arose in relation to Blessing.
     b. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  when  finding  at  [24]  that
        although FGM has been a  punishable  offence  since  May  2015  the
        respondent was unable to provide  any  information  as  to  whether
        there had been any prosecutions, which arguably reverses the burden
        of proof which is upon the appellant to prove there is a lack of  a
        sufficiency of protection.
     c. The First-tier Judge  erred  in  failing  to  correctly  apply  the
        Devaseelan principles  when  considering  the  credibility  of  the
        appellant's account. The previous determination in relation  to  an
        early asylum appeal should have formed the starting  point  of  the
        Judges determination which is not arguably the  case  when  reading
        the decision under challenge.
     d. The First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to correctly apply  section  8
        of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  claimants,  etc)  Act
        2004 when determining the credibility of the  appellant's  account.
        This is raised as a specific matter  in  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
        letter yet there appears to be no consideration of the  factors  in
        the decision under challenge.
     e. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  erred  in  appearing  to  allow  the
        appeal on the basis the child's best interests are served in the UK
        inferring the appeal is allowed on article 8 grounds on this  basis
        without considering mandatory factors outlined in section  117B  of
        the 2002 Act. Treating the child's best interests as the  paramount
        consideration  instead  of  a  primary  consideration  amounts   to
        arguable legal error.
     f. The Secretary of State disputed  the  appellant's  claim  that  her
        partner had died and several issues were raised with regard to  the
        reliability of documentation provided in support of this claim  yet
        the Judge fails to provide  adequate  reasons  in  support  of  the
        finding that it was considered the appellant's husband had died and
        again where the Judge notes and accepts that the appellant siblings
        were involved in family discussions regarding where Blessing should
        live.
     g. The First-tier Tribunal Judge provides no reasons why the appellant
        has provided a credible account at [35]  said  to  be  particularly
        material in light of the failure to  consider  issues  referred  to
        above.
     h. The First-tier Tribunal Judge erred  in  failing  to  identify  and
        resolve the conflicts in the evidence and to explain in a clear and
        brief terms the reasons for preferring one case  to  the  other  so
        that the parties can understand why they have won or lost.
     i.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  the   appellant's
        documentation anywhere in the  determination.  Issues  were  raised
        regarding the reliability of the documentation at paragraphs 27 and
        28 of the Reasons for Refusal  Letter.  It  is  arguable  that  the
        failure to consider the documents and ascertain the  weight  to  be
        applied to them by application of  Tanveer  Ahmed  has  led  to  an
        unsafe finding in relation to husband's death  and  ultimately  the
        risk on return from his death.


    12. There is no counter argument presented on  the  above  respondent's
        behalf as a result of the failure to  attend  the  hearing.  Having
        considered the decision in light of the submissions  made,  I  find
        the Secretary of State has  made  out  that  the  determination  is
        infected by arguable legal error material to the decision to  allow
        the appeal.
    13. In light of the failure of the Judge to consider material  elements
        or to make adequate findings, the determination is set aside in its
        entirety with no preserved findings and remitted to the  First-tier
        Tribunal sitting at Sheldon Court in Birmingham to be reheard by  a
        judge nominated by the Resident Judge of  that  hearing  centre  in
        accordance with operational requirements.
    14. Remittal is appropriate in this case  in  light  of  the  fact  the
        appeal has  not  been  properly  determined  by  reference  to  all
        relevant aspects of the evidence and the positions adopted  by  the
        appellant and respondent and in light of  the  need  for  extensive
        fact-finding to be undertaken once all aspects of the  appeal  have
        been properly considered.


Decision

    15. The Immigration Judge materially erred in  law.  I  set  aside  the
        decision of the original Immigration Judge. I remit the appeal to a
        First-tier Tribunal sitting at Sheldon Court in  Birmingham  to  be
        heard by a judge other than Judge James.


Anonymity

    16. I make  an  order  the  identity  of  the  appellant  (above  named
        respondent) shall be anonymized. An order in similar  terms  having
        been made by the First-tier Tribunal.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 1 September 2017












