
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/05065/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke on Trent               |     Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 August 2017                      |     On 2 August 2017                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                                   Between

                                     SM
                         [Anonymity direction made]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr A Barnfield, instructed by Braitch RB Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Cox promulgated 21.4.17, dismissing on all  grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated  12.5.16,
    to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The Judge heard the appeal on 12.4.17.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    17.5.17.

 4. Thus the matter came before me on 1.8.17 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision of Judge Cox to be set aside.

 6. In granting permission to  appeal,  Judge  Gillespie  found  "potential
    arguable merit" in the ground of  appeal  that  the  judge  "failed  to
    consider, or has failed to give adequate reasons  for  rejecting,  oral
    and written evidence that the  appellant  has  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity; alternatively, that she has failed to give  reasons  why,
    accepting  the  genuineness  of  the  evidence  given,  this  does  not
    constitute proof to the lower standard of conversion."

 7. In a well-reasoned decision the judge gave adequate reasons for finding
    that the appellant was not a Christian convert. I find that the grounds
    amount to nothing more than a disagreement with  the  findings  of  the
    judge on the evidence before the tribunal.

 8. The judge very carefully addressed the evidence of the two witnesses in
    relation to conversion  and  whilst  finding  them  genuine  and  well-
    intentioned,  concluded  that  they  were  overly  "enthusiastic"   and
    generous  about  the  appellant's  conversion  and  that  the  fact  of
    conversion was not made out on the evidence. The evidence  demonstrated
    that the appellant had first attended church out of loneliness and  had
    integrated  himself  into  the  life  of  the  church,  but  failed  to
    demonstrate evidence of conversion. The judge pointed out that  in  his
    asylum interview the  appellant  declined  to  describe  himself  as  a
    Christian, merely that he was interested and might become one.

 9.  Both  witnesses  failed  to  satisfactorily  address  the   issue   of
    conversion. The Reverend Lowe had not  had  any  extensive  discussions
    with the appellant,  hampered  by  the  appellant's  poor  English.  He
    instead relied on work with him by what was described as a  "hard-nosed
    deaconess," Shelia Podmore. It was she who suggested that the appellant
    was ready for baptism. As Mr Harrison pointed out in  his  submissions,
    this was at a stage before the asylum interview, when the appellant was
    still ambivalent as to whether he was a Christian convert, as  seen  in
    his answers to Q232, 237 and 238. This undermined  the  reliability  of
    the church member evidence. At Q217 the appellant said, "Right  now,  I
    do not consider myself a Christian. I haven't  got  much  information."
    The evidence of the witnesses did not adequate  address  the  issue  of
    conversion so as to discharge the lower standard of proof.

10. Complaint is made in the grounds that the judge made  no  reference  to
    the written evidence of  Deaconess  Podmore,  contained  in  two  short
    letters of 5.9.16 and 25.3.17. She did not attend the hearing  to  give
    oral evidence. I have looked carefully at both letters  and  find  that
    they do not in fact address the issue of the appellant's conversion  at
    all. Mr Barnfield suggested that reference to having seen  "change"  in
    the appellant related to the conversion process, but that is  far  from
    clear on reading the letter, where  that  comment  is  preceded  by  an
    observation that he had been depressed. I can find no material error in
    failing to address the written evidence of the  deaconess,  which  does
    not appear to have advanced the appellant's claim at all.

11. I find that the judge gave clear and cogent reasons  for  finding  that
    the two church members who gave oral evidence,  Reverend  Lowe  and  Mr
    Routledge,  were  wrong   about   the   appellant's   conversion.   The
    disagreements raised in the grounds and in Mr  Barnfield's  submissions
    are just that, disagreements with the findings and conclusions  of  the
    judge. That they  were  genuine  and  sincere  is  supportive  but  not
    determinative of the issue  the  judge  had  to  resolve,  whether  the
    appellant is a genuine Christian convert. I find it is clear  that  the
    evidence, well-intentioned and enthusiastic, was  properly  taken  into
    account and put into context with the evidence as a whole. The issue of
    weight is a matter for the judge to determine. Just because a different
    judge may have reached a different  conclusion  does  not  render  this
    judge's assessment flawed.

12. The remaining grounds, as  argued  by  Mr  Barnfield,  in  relation  to
    inconsistencies in the evidence, were also no more  than  disagreements
    with the findings of the judge, which I find were  fully  open  on  the
    evidence and for which cogent reasons have been provided.

Conclusions:

13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014.  However,  given  the  circumstances,  I  consider  it
appropriate to make an anonymity order.

I make no fee award, no fee being payable.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup





