
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05508/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under rule 34 (P)                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 September 2020                           |On 21 September 2020           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     KR
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation (by way of written submissions)

For the appellant:     Katani & Co Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

                      Background

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal to the appellant by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor on 6
          November 2019 against the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge Rea, promulgated on 15 August 2019 following  a  hearing  at
          Glasgow on 23 July 2019.


       2. The appellant is a Moroccan national born on 18 November 1975.  He
          entered the UK with a visit visa in December 2013 having stated he
          would be staying for two weeks. He overstayed and was  encountered
          in January 2019. He claimed asylum on 4 February 2019 on the basis
          of his political opinion. He  claimed  that  he  was  one  of  the
          leaders of demonstrations calling for improvements in his village.
          He claimed that after his departure a summons had been sent to his
          home and that a friend of his had been arrested. He  then  decided
          not to return and worked illegally as a gardener.


       3. The appeal was heard by Judge Rea who found that there was a  lack
          of detail in the account. He found that there was no  evidence  of
          any document, article,  correspondence,  poster  or  social  media
          content written by the appellant in the  course  of  the  protest,
          that he had given no details of  how  the  infrastructure  in  the
          village could be improved and no information on  how  his  village
          compared to others had been provided.  He  found  that  since  his
          arrival, the appellant had shown no interest in the conditions  of
          his village and that the description of his  political  activities
          was vague and lacking in detail. He noted that the  appellant  had
          made no mention  of  the  summons  until  his  substantive  asylum
          interview. The judge also considered the  appellant's  account  of
          travelling to the UK to  buy  clothing  for  his  children  to  be
          implausible, finding that it would be cheaper to remain in Morocco
          and buy clothes and he considered that  the  appellant's  trip  to
          Dublin to replace his allegedly lost ID card suggested a fear that
          the Moroccan authorities  in  the  UK  might  report  him  to  the
          immigration authorities. Regard was also had to the  circumstances
          and timing of the asylum claim.      Accordingly  the  appeal  was
          dismissed.


       4. The appellant sought permission to appeal. It was argued that  the
          judge had erred by failing to resolve the interaction of  positive
          and negative findings  made  and  also  by  failing  to  give  the
          appellant an opportunity to provide further information when  such
          was seemingly  required.  Permission  was  granted  because  Judge
          Norton-Taylor considered that it was arguable that the  judge  had
          held an apparent lack of  detail  against  the  appellant  without
          relevant concerns having been raised  in  advance  of  or  at  the
          hearing.


                 Covid-19 crisis : preliminary matters


       5. The appeal would then have normally been listed  for  hearing  but
          due to the pandemic this could not be done and instead  directions
          were  issued  on  10  June  2020  inviting  the  parties  to  make
          submissions on the manner of disposal and  on  the  error  of  law
          issue.


       6. The appellant replied on 23 June 2020 and the  respondent  replied
          on 30 June 2020. Neither party raised any objection to the  matter
          being determined without an oral hearing. I now  consider  whether
          that is appropriate.


       7. In doing so  I  have  regard  to  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
          Tribunal) Rules 2008 (the UT Rules), the judgment of Osborn v  The
          Parole Board [2013] UKSC 61, the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1
          2020: Arrangements during the  Covid-19  pandemic  (PGN)  and  the
          Senior President's Pilot Practice Direction (PPD). I  have  regard
          to the overriding objective which is defined  in  rule  2  of  the
          Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 as being "to enable
          the Upper Tribunal to deal with cases fairly and justly". To  this
          end I have considered that dealing with a case fairly  and  justly
          includes: dealing with it in ways that are  proportionate  to  the
          importance of  the  case,  the  complexity  of  the  issues,  etc;
          avoiding unnecessary formality  and  seeking  flexibility  in  the
          proceedings; ensuring, so far as practicable, that the parties are
          able to participate fully in the proceedings;  using  any  special
          expertise of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and  avoiding  delay,
          so far as compatible with proper consideration of the issues (Rule
          2(2) UT rules and PGN:5).


       8. I have had careful regard to the submissions made and to  all  the
          evidence before me before deciding how to proceed. I take the view
          that a full account of the facts are set out in those papers, that
          the arguments for and against the appellant have been clearly  set
          out and that the issues to be decided are  straightforward.  There
          are no  matters  arising  from  the  papers  which  would  require
          clarification and so an oral hearing would not be needed for  that
          purpose. Neither party has objected to a paper determination and I
          am satisfied that I am able to fairly and justly  deal  with  this
          matter in that way.


                Submissions


       9. The appellant submits that the judge failed to  properly  consider
          the evidence as a whole after  having  considered  the  individual
          factors. The judge considered whether there was a  sufficiency  of
          detail in the appellant's account but acted  unfairly  by  raising
          the apparent lack of detail without giving him an  opportunity  to
          respond directly. The  respondent  did  not  raise  the  issue  of
          vagueness or apparent lack of detail in the decision letter or  in
          cross examination. Although it is accepted  that  it  is  for  the
          appellant to make out his case, it is pointed out that at no point
          throughout the asylum interview was the appellant asked to give  a
          more detailed description of his political activities or  to  give
          details of the kind the  judge  was  looking  for.  The  appellant
          points to section 5.6 of the Home Office Instructions which states
          that an absence of detail cannot be held  against  a  claimant  if
          little or no opportunity was given at interview to provide  it  or
          to clarify information which goes to the core of the claim. It  is
          submitted that the judge held the absence of  detail  against  the
          appellant where no opportunity was given to him to provide it.  It
          is submitted that the judge could have put those concerns directly
          to the appellant at the time but did not do  so  and  to  hold  it
          against him after the hearing had ended was a  material  error  of
          law. It is pointed out that the judge did not find  the  appellant
          credible because it was considered that there was a lack of detail
          in his account. The first time the appellant  was  aware  of  such
          concerns was when he read the  determination.  Due  to  this,  the
          error was material. The  submissions  point  out  that  favourable
          findings were also made by the  judge  but  that  these  were  not
          balanced against those that  were  considered  to  be  potentially
          damaging. The judge also failed to consider  the  plausibility  of
          the account insofar of what happened in Morocco. It  is  submitted
          that if an error of law were to be  established  then  a  de  novo
          hearing is required.


      10. The respondent, very fairly, in submissions of 30 June accepts the
          criticisms regarding the lack of detail not being specifically put
          to  the appellant so as to give him  the  opportunity  to  provide
          more detail. Notwithstanding that he had ample opportunity to make
          his case by providing  any  detail  considered  relevant,  it  was
          accepted  that  the  appellant  could  not  have  anticipated  the
          specific criticisms made in the determination and  that  therefore
          he had not  been  afforded  a  fair  opportunity  to  comment.  As
          credibility was at the core of his claim, it is accepted that  the
          error is material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  The  respondent
          therefore accepts that the decision should be set aside.


                  Discussion and conclusions

      11. I have considered all the evidence, the grounds for permission and
          the  submissions made by both parties.


      12. I am grateful to  the  parties  for  their  succinct  and  helpful
          submissions  and  to  the  respondent  for  fairly  and   properly
          conceding  what  is  a  plain  error  of  law   in   the   judge's
          determination. Whilst it is the case that it is for  an  appellant
          to make out his claim, if matters which had never been raised  and
          which could not be foreseen are to used to dismiss an appeal, then
          fairness demands that these be put to an appellant so that he  has
          an opportunity to respond. This did not happen here.


      13. Further, it is clear from the determination  that  the  judge  did
          make positive findings and that he did not  hold  several  matters
          raised by the respondent against the  appellant.  The  potentially
          damaging factors should,  therefore,  have  been  better  balanced
          against the positive aspects of the claim.


      14. For these reasons, I  find  that  the  judge's  decision  contains
          errors of law and cannot stand. It is set aside in  its  entirety.
          Neither party has sought to preserve any findings and  indeed  the
          appellant seeks a de novo hearing.


          Decision

      15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and
          it is set aside. A fresh decision shall be made by  another  judge
          of the First-tier Tribunal.


                 Anonymity


      16. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
          Rules 2008, and unless and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
          otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. This is because  of
          his claim to be in need of international protection. No report  of
          these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any
          member of his family. This direction applies both to the appellant
          and the respondent. Failure to comply with  this  direction  could
          lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                Directions


      17. Further directions for the hearing shall be issued by the relevant
          Tribunal in due course.




        Signed


              R. Keki?

              Upper Tribunal Judge

              Date: 17 September 2020






