
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 October 2018                           |On 20 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                    [O a]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Smyth, Solicitor, Kesar & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the remaking of a decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Burns dated 5 July 2017. That decision was aside by  me,  with  the
         concurrence of the Secretary of State, on the basis of an error  of
         law concerning the application of Country Guidance. See  the  brief
         Decision and Reasons dated 11 July 2018.

      2. I directed that the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  be
         preserved, save in relation to one minor matter  which,  as  events
         have transpired, became  of  marginal  relevance.  The  matter  was
         originally set down for hearing on 31 August 2018, but for  reasons
         particularised in a separate decision could  not  proceed.  It  was
         therefore re-listed for 17 October 2018. An  accompanying  decision
         deals with the wasted costs of the ineffective hearing.

      3. I am grateful to both representatives for narrowing the issues  and
         preparing  full  skeleton  arguments  on  the   matters   requiring
         determination. A substantial  volume  of  additional  material  was
         lodged, and I have read all those parts to which my  attention  has
         been directed. However, it is only necessary to refer  to  a  small
         portion of this material in order fairly to dispose of the matter.

         Background

      4. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd, born on  [~]  1998,  to  a  farming
         family in a village near Daquq in the Kirkuk governorate. He is the
         youngest of four siblings. The appellant claims that his father was
         a senior member of the Ba'athist military regime, an assertion  not
         accepted by the Secretary of State. I am not required to  make  any
         finding in that matter.

      5. It is  accepted  by  the  Secretary  of  State  that  in  2014  the
         appellant's village was attacked by ISIS forces and  the  appellant
         fled with his family to Kirkuk where they stayed initially with one
         of the appellant's sisters, and thereafter in rented accommodation.
         They learned that the appellant's  brother  had  been  captured  by
         ISIS. They returned to live with the appellant's  sister  but  were
         not able to leave Kirkuk.

      6. It was found by the  First-tier  Tribunal  that  a  friend  of  the
         appellant's brother (named as [K]) assisted the appellant  to  flee
         Iraq, handing him to an agent  in  Erbil.  He  reached  the  United
         Kingdom on 19  November  2015  whereupon  he  claimed  asylum.  The
         appellant submitted an identity card, which he claimed was sent  to
         him by [K], brought to the United Kingdom by  a  third  party.  The
         Secretary of State does not accept that the card is genuine.

      7. The appellant has produce medical evidence attesting to a diagnosis
         of PTSD with features of anxiety and depression, including symptoms
         of nocturnal enuresis  (bed-wetting).  An  updating  report  of  Dr
         Onwuchekwa, consultant psychiatrist, dated 31 August 2018,  records
         that the appellant 'is struggling to  function  and  interact  with
         people due to his illness'. The Secretary of State does not dispute
         the medical evidence.

         Issues

      8.  At  my  direction,  the  parties  have  narrowed  the  issues  for
         determination. They are contained in an agreed document,  dated  13
         September 2018, the salient part of which reads:

           1) Is there an Article 15(c) risk in the appellant's  home  area
              of Kirkuk?


           2) Is so,  is  it  reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  relocate
              internally?


           3) Is the appellant is possession of a CSID?


           4) If not, could he obtain one within  a  reasonable  period  of
              time?


           5) Is there a stand-alone Article 3 risk in Baghdad arising from
              any lack of CSID.


      9. I propose addressing each of these issues in turn.

         1) Article 15(c) risk in Kirkuk

     10. The appellant relies upon AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
         544 (IAC). The Secretary of State submits that  the  conditions  on
         the ground have changed significantly since this decision and  that
         it is appropriate to depart from this Country Guidance.

     11. AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG is a decision of Upper  Tribunal  Judges
         Lane, O'Connor and Finch. For present purposes, it is sufficient to
         reproduce paragraph 1 of section A of the Country Guidance:

            A.  INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE
            QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


             1. There is at present a state of internal armed  conflict  in
                certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government   security
                forces, militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group
                known as ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict in  the
                so-called "contested areas", comprising the governorates of
                Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah  Al-
                din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general  matter,  there   are
                substantial  grounds  for  believing  that   any   civilian
                returned there, solely on account of his  or  her  presence
                there,  faces  a  real   risk   of   being   subjected   to
                indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within
                the scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.
                (emphasis added)


     12. The above  passage  was  expressly  approved  and  adopted  without
         revision when the case reached the Court of Appeal, reported as  AA
         (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ
         944. On the basis of this passage, there would be an Article  15(c)
         risk on return the appellant's home area of Kirkuk, irrespective of
         any  particular  characteristics  or  features  pertaining  to  the
         appellant. The onus, therefore, falls on the Secretary of State  to
         demonstrate that there are good reasons to depart from this Country
         Guidance.

     13. I remind myself of the Immigration and Asylum  Practice  Direction,
         paragraph 12.2 of which states that unless it  has  been  expressly
         superseded or is inconsistent with other authority binding  on  the
         tribunal, Country Guidance (duly marked as such by the  designation
         CG) should be followed unless that tribunal is  persuaded  that  it
         does not apply to the case in  question.  To  borrow  from  Stanley
         Burnton LJ  in  SG  (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940,  at  47:  "tribunal  judges  are
         required to take Country Guidance determinations into account,  and
         to follow them unless  very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
         evidence, are adduced justifying their not doing so".

     14. Mr Tufan, for the Secretary of State, submits that there  are  good
         reasons to depart from the Country Guidance in AA  (Article  15(c))
         Iraq CG. He says that in June 2014, the Iraqi army fled Kirkuk  and
         Kurdish forces took control, preventing  ISIS  from  so  doing.  He
         asserts that Iraqi government forces retook control of Kirkuk on 17
         October 2017, following a referendum for independence in the  Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (variously abbreviated to IKR or KRI).

     15. Reliance is placed by Mr Tufan on two authorities in support of his
         proposition  that  fundamental  changes  in  Iraq  have  arisen  in
         consequence of the demise of ISIS. The first is The Queen  (On  the
         Application of QA) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home  Department
         [2017] EWHC 2417, a decision of Sir Ross  Cranston,  sitting  as  a
         Judge of the High Court.

             [63] As far as the position in Kirkuk is  concerned,  and  the
             requirement for the claimant to return there to obtain a CSID,
             the Secretary of State was entitled to take the  realities  on
             the ground there into account. Kirkuk is no longer a contested
             area. In my view, country guidance cases must give way to  the
             realities, a point recognised by the Court of  Appeal  in  SG
             (Iraq) v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2012]
             EWCA Civ 940 at para 47. There are  apparently  still  dangers
             there, but nothing like the position as when AA  was  decided.
             That being the case, I cannot  regard  the  passages  in  the
             Secretary of State's letter as regards the claimant's  ability
             to obtain a CSID as being flawed.


     16. However, in an order sealed on 3 August 2018, Longmore  LJ  granted
         permission to appeal to the Court of Appeal, albeit  on  a  limited
         basis. I was informed that a consent order is  in  the  process  of
         being drawn up by the parties for approval by the Court of  Appeal,
         in consequence of which the matter  was  likely  to  be  considered
         afresh. In the circumstances, Mr Tufan, wisely in my view, withdrew
         his reliance on this judgment.

     17. The  second  authority  to  which  Mr  Tufan  referred  me  was  an
         unreported decision  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  in  JAA  v
         Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department   (PA/02593/2016),
         promulgated on 7 December 2017. In that case, it was noted at  [24]
         that the Secretary of State had made no concession that Kirkuk  was
         contested territory (as had been the case  in  AA  (Article  15(c))
         Iraq CG) and the judge concluded on the evidence presented  by  the
         parties that there was no present  risk  of  serious  harm  due  to
         indiscriminate violence. Mr Tufan, again in my  view  wisely,  does
         not overstate the value  of  this  decision  in  terms  of  binding
         precedent. On the contrary, he recognises that each case  turns  on
         its own particular facts; and as the evidence will be different, so
         might the outcome.

     18. The country material placed before me on this issue  on  behalf  of
         the Secretary of State is limited. Mr Tufan relies on a  report  of
         the  International  Organisation  for  Migration  (IOM)   dated   4
         September 2018. It  records  that  in  December  2017  Iraqi  Prime
         Minister Haider al-Abadi declared the  end  of  the  country's  war
         against ISIL,  and  that  since  then  nearly  4  million  formerly
         displaced persons have returned to their homes. It is  stated  that
         the displacement figures fell below 2 million for  the  first  time
         since 2014. These broad statistics are also reflected in the United
         Nations Report on Human Rights in Iraq  (July  to  September  2017)
         which notes the Prime Ministerial declaration of final victory over
         ISIL, and the sharp reduction in civilian casualties  (section  3).
         It also records federal forces launching  repositioning  operations
         from October 2017 onwards, stating that commencing in Kirkuk,  they
         proceeded rapidly  through  other  disputed  territories.  In  most
         cases, the withdrawal of Peshmerga forces  from  these  areas  took
         place in coordination with the  Iraqi  Security  Forces.  There  is
         little of assistance to be  found  in  the  Home  Office's  Country
         Policy and Information Note: Iraq (version 7.0, September 2018) and
         it did not feature significantly in Mr Tufan's submissions.

     19. Mr Tufan, in  his  skeleton  argument  and  as  developed  in  oral
         submissions, concedes that the threat from ISIS has not disappeared
         entirely, but is confined to small pockets and it has  changed  its
         nature from open conflict to periodic asymmetric attacks by ISIS in
         areas which include the Kirkuk region. He asserts that  the  nature
         of these attacks  goes  nowhere  near  reaching  an  Article  15(c)
         threshold. He points to the appellant's own evidence in the form of
         an answer the appellant gave in interview (AIR Q 38) on 11 May 2017
         in the following terms, 'for now there is  no  danger  of  ISIS  in
         Kirkuk'.

     20. Mr Tufan submits that the burden of proof lies on the appellant  to
         show that the prevailing circumstances are such  that  there  would
         still be a breach  of  Article  15(c)  were  the  appellant  to  be
         returned to Kirkuk. He asserts  that  the  Secretary  of  State  no
         longer makes the concession that  had  been  made  in  AA  (Article
         15(c)) Iraq CG. However, in my opinion,  the  burden  of  proof  in
         disapplying the Country Guidance still lies with the  Secretary  of
         State. The Guidance was not parasitic on the concession. It remains
         binding on this tribunal unless, again to 15r2 borrow from  Stanley
         Burnton LJ  (above),  'very  strong  grounds  supported  by  cogent
         evidence, are adduced justifying [it] not doing so'.

     21. Whilst it would appear that the situation on the ground  in  Kirkuk
         has improved significantly, I am not satisfied that a demonstrable,
         unambiguous and enduring new reality has dawned. In my  assessment,
         the grounds relied upon in this case by the Secretary of State  are
         insubstantial, and the limited evidence placed before me is lacking
         in cogency. The County Guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG  has
         not  been  displaced  and  there  remain  substantial  grounds  for
         believing that any civilian returned to Kirkuk, solely  on  account
         of his or her presence there, faces a real risk of being  subjected
         to indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious  harm  within  the
         scope of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

     22. In the  alternative,  were  the  burden  of  proof  to  be  on  the
         appellant, as Mr Tufan contends, to demonstrate a breach of Article
         15(c) on return to Kirkuk, I am of the  opinion  that  such  burden
         would be comfortably discharged by the material placed before me by
         Mr Smyth on behalf of the appellant, material that  was  singularly
         lacking in JAA (above). For present purposes, it is unnecessary for
         me to  rehearse  its  detail  within  what  is  already  a  lengthy
         decision. I have considered the matters referenced by Mr  Smyth  at
         the rear of bundles AB3 and AB4, in  the  Key  Passage  Indices  at
         pages 651-1775 and 1013-1072 respectively. Mr Tufan takes no  issue
         with the content of any of the material,  and  adduces  nothing  in
         rebuttal beyond the documentation rehearsed  above.  In  substance,
         his submission is that notwithstanding the volume of this material,
         its repetitive nature simply magnifies sporadic instances, and that
         taken at its highest the material  attests  to  nothing  more  that
         isolated  pockets  of  conflict.  In  my  assessment,  this  is  to
         misrepresent the totality of the evidence which remains  sufficient
         to substantiate a breach of Article 15(c) in the event of a  return
         to Kirkuk.

     23. These conclusions are sufficient, without more, to  be  dispositive
         of this appeal, but having heard full argument on the other issues,
         it is appropriate to determine them, albeit more briskly.

         2) Internal relocation

     24. The issue of internal relocation  is  inextricably  linked  to  the
         obtainability of a CSID so I address this issue in conjunction with
         issue (4) below.

         3) Possession of CSID

     25. Mr Tufan conceded that as the only identity document  presented  by
         the appellant is fake, he is not  in  possession  of  a  CSID.  The
         question therefore becomes whether he can be expected to obtain one
         within a reasonable time of arriving in Baghdad.

         4) Obtainability of CSID

     26. On this issue, there  is  disagreement  between  the  parties.  The
         starting point in resolving the  dispute  is  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -
         internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC). Mr  Tufan  does
         not pursue a positive case that the appellant could obtain  a  CSID
         from the Iraqi embassy in the United Kingdom. He submits,  however,
         that he would be able to do so once in Baghdad. He makes  reference
         to a high level Iraqi delegation of its Migration and Human  Rights
         Committee which had been in London recently  to  address  this  and
         related issues with officials from the Home Office.

     27. He placed before me correspondence emanating from Dr  Salih  Husain
         Ali, the Ambassador of the Republic of Iraq to the United  Kingdom.
         The first letter is dated 5 September 2018 and  the  relevant  part
         reads:

            'The arriving returnees [to Baghdad] can continue  their  onward
            journey to their final destination in Iraq by  domestic  flights
            or road using their laissez passer or letter (if provided) which
            help them to [pass through other designated check points. Please
            note than most of them may be in possession of copies  of  their
            national  IDs  which  may  have  not  been  not  [sic]  disclose
            previously.


              The returnees can re-document themselves and  apply  in  their
            local Civil Status Departments for a national ID Card on arrival
            using copies from his/her old documents or family  records  with
            reference to the page and register number holding the returnees'
            information or that of their family.


              We can confirm that all the Civil Status Records are preserved
            and held digitally by  each  Governorate  Directorate  of  Civil
            Status Affairs and are accessible to  assist  in  determining  a
            returnee's identity with reference to the register and page.'


     28. The second letter, dated 2 October 2018, has not  copied  well  but
         its text is reproduced in the body of Mr Tufan's skeleton argument,
         and Mr  Smyth  accepts  the  accuracy  of  the  transcription.  The
         material part reads:

            'In addition to our clarifications in our letter of 5 September,
            please note that the same procedures  are  applied  to  all  the
            returnees onward travel from Baghdad to KRG or any city in Iraq.
            The certification letter is issued on a case-by-case  [sic]  and
            depending  on  the  availability/unavailability   documentations
            (sometimes requested by the returnee), the letter is  issued  by
            Baghdad International Airport Police, and  contains  information
            about  the  returnee  including  name,   date   of   birth   and
            clarification that the returnee landed with a laissez passer and
            his repatriation procedure is completed  at  the  Airport,  this
            letter is sufficient to pass  through  checkpoints  in  case  of
            inquiry,  please  note  that  in  rare  occasions  they  may  be
            questioned at checkpoints. This letter usually not always issued
            for all cases, but individually case-by-case. All  Civil  Status
            Records have been preserved nationally and there  is  a  central
            register back up in Baghdad that includes all the civil  records
            of all the provenances in the event of any form  of  damages  of
            destruction.


              Representatives  from  the  repatriation  committee  would  be
            available at Baghdad International Airport and ready to  receive
            a returnee even at the weekends if we are  informed  in  advance
            that a returnee is on board of a flight. The officers are  fully
            qualified dealing with the repatriation  process  and  they  can
            deal with it with the last minute notes.'


     29. Mr Tufan submits that these statements from the  Ambassador  should
         be accepted in preference to the opinion of the expert Dr Fatah, on
         whose evidence the Upper Tribunal had relied in framing the Country
         Guidance in AAH. Mr  Tufan  submits  that  a  departure  from  pre-
         existing Country  Guidance  was  again  justified  because  of  the
         additional  new  information  provided  by  the   Ambassador.   The
         particular aspect of the Country Guidance  in  AAH  from  which  Mr
         Tufan needs to justify a departure is summarised in paragraph 5  of
         the headnote:

             5. P [a returnee] will face considerable difficulty in  making
             the journey between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID
             or valid passport. There are numerous  checkpoints  en  route,
             including two checkpoints in the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
             airport. If P has neither a CSID nor a valid  passport,  there
             is a real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such
             time  as  the  security  personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's
             identity. It is not reasonable to require P to travel  between
             Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of P to verify  his
             identity  at  a  checkpoint.  This   normally   requires   the
             attendance of a male  family  member  and  production  of  P's
             identity documents but may also be achieved  by  calling  upon
             "connections" higher up in the chain of command.


     30.  Mr  Smyth  offers  various   criticisms   of   the   Ambassadorial
         correspondence, some legitimate and others less so. Most compelling
         is his submission that the letters are couched in generalities, not
         addressing the particular  facts  of  this  appellant.  The  letter
         expressly indicates that a 'case-by-case' approach, so there is  no
         way of knowing what the  position  would  be  for  this  particular
         appellant. The Ambassador states that returnees  'may  be  provided
         with a certification letter' (emphasis added) but  this  is  by  no
         means guaranteed, and the letter is not expressed as constituting a
         firm and binding governmental undertaking.

     31. In my judgment, whilst not in any way questioning the bona fides of
         the Ambassador, his letter does not  provide  a  robust  foundation
         sufficient to sustain a departure from the recent Country  Guidance
         in AAH, promulgated in January 2018. I have  particular  regard  to
         the considerable weight afforded to Dr Fatah's evidence  which  the
         Upper Tribunal categorised as 'measured, detailed and well-sourced'
         [91]. In particular, the  aspirational  tone  of  the  Ambassador's
         letter repeats an assertion expressly considered  and  rejected  in
         AAH at [111]:

            'Whilst we note the evidence of Country  Research  manager  Bill
            Lacy that the Iraqi authorities have  assured  the  Home  Office
            they will "assist with any onward travel documentation" we  have
            been shown no evidence that this has actually happened, or  what
            such documentation might be. Dr Fatah's uncontested evidence was
            that a failure to produce a CSID - or in  the  environs  of  the
            airport a passport - would likely result in detention until such
            time  as  the  authorities  could  be  satisfied   as   to   the
            individual's identity.'


     32. Whilst the Ambassadorial correspondence evidences  a  direction  of
         travel which is to be welcomed, I do not consider that as currently
         constituted it  amounts  to  cogent  evidence  constituting  strong
         grounds for departing from the Country Guidance of AAH.

     33. I am drawn inevitably to the conclusion that the appellant would be
         unable to obtain a CSID within  a  reasonable  period  of  time  of
         arriving in Baghdad.  He  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  an
         undocumented, separated child and is not in possession of  a  CSID,
         passport or birth certificate. The appellant's brother is  probably
         deceased and his father in poor health, living in a  care  home  in
         Kirkuk: neither is in a position to  assist  with  the  patrilineal
         registration system. The circular argument that he return to Kirkuk
         to obtain the documentation is self-evidently flawed, as he  cannot
         travel there without a CSID. His unchallenged mental health  issues
         is a further consideration rendering less likely  any  prospect  of
         securing a CSID within a reasonable time.

     34. Mr Tufan's submissions on this subject are mere speculation:  I  do
         not consider it appropriate to assume that the fact the appellant's
         parents are residing in a care home amounts to proof that either or
         both is in possession of a CSID. Nor do I consider  it  appropriate
         to assume that family members residing in Kirkuk would be  able  to
         travel to Baghdad bringing all  necessary  documentation  within  a
         reasonable time to obtain a CSID,  especially  when  the  appellant
         would have debilitating mental health needs.

     35. My clear conclusion on this key issue is that the  appellant  could
         not obtain a CSID within a reasonable period of time of arriving in
         Baghdad.

         5) Article 3 risk in Baghdad arising from lack of CSID

     36. Mr Tufan accepted that in the event that I were to  find  that  the
         appellant could not obtain a CSID within  a  reasonable  period  of
         time of his return to Baghdad, then he would face a  real  risk  of
         destitution and, accordingly, his Article 3 claim would succeed.  I
         have so found and it therefore follows that  this  appeal  is  also
         allowed under Article 3.

         Conclusion

     37. For the reasons set out above,  I  conclude  that  the  appellant's
         protection claim succeeds as there is  demonstrable  risk  for  the
         purposes of Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  Applying
         the Country Guidance which is still current, there remains  such  a
         high level of  indiscriminate  violence  that  substantial  grounds
         exist for believing that the appellant would face a real risk which
         threatens his life and person. Further the appellant's human rights
         claim also succeeds  as  his  return  to  Baghdad  would  entail  a
         violation of Article 3 of the Convention.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside,  it  is
      remade as follows:

     a) the appellant's appeal  is  allowed  under  Article  15(c)  of  the
        Qualification Directive;

     b) the appellant's appeal is also  allowed  under  Article  3  of  the
        European Convention on Human Rights

   2) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed     Mark   Hill                                      Date           8
November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC
