
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-KRL-V2

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05670/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |                               |
|2008                                        |                               |
|On 15 May 2020                              |On 21 May 2020                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                    A R G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Pakistan.   His  date  of  birth  is  2
    December 1992.  I make a direction pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  to  anonymise  the  Appellant
    because this is a protection  claim  (see  Guidance  note  2013  No  1:
    Anonymity Orders).

 2. The Appellant's claim for protection was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 4 June 2019.  The Appellant appealed  against  that  decision.
    His appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Moffatt in
    a decision of 30 November 2019 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross  on
    17 October 2019.

 3. Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson granted permission to the Appellant on  21
    February 2020 on all grounds.  The matter was listed for 14 April  2020
    for an oral hearing.   The matter was adjourned in  the  light  of  the
    COVID-19 pandemic. Mr  Justice  Lane,  President  of  the  UTIAC,  made
    directions.  These were issued by the Upper Tribunal on 8  April  2020.
    In response to those directions the Appellant's solicitors,  Pasha  Law
    Chambers Solicitors sent an e-mail to the Upper Tribunal on  20 April.
    They also made an application under Rule 15(2A) of the  2008  Procedure
    Rules.  The Secretary of State responded in an e-mail of 27 April 2020.
     There is a reply to the Secretary of State's response from Mr  Sowerby
    of Counsel representing the Appellant, which  was  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on 1 May.  The application under Rule 15 (2A) was  not  served
    in accordance with the directions issued by the Upper  Tribunal  on  24
    February 2020 that any such application should be made at the latest 10
    days before the hearing which was listed on 14 April. However,  in  the
    light of the unusual circumstances, I have considered all the documents
    submitted by the parties and I do not take issue with the timing of the
    application.

Decision under Rule 34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008

 4. Having had full regard to the  Pilot  Practice  Direction:  Contingency
    arrangements in the  First  -Tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020 and all documents submitted by the
    parties, I conclude that this appeal decision should be made without  a
    hearing.  The Appellant contends that an oral hearing is necessary,  in
    light of complex issues in the case; however, these are not identified.
     It is also said by the Appellant that a hearing is necessary in  order
    to allow the Upper Tribunal to raise issues or  concerns  that  it  may
    have with either party and to allow either party to properly respond to
    such issues or concerns.  There is no complexity which necessitates  an
    oral hearing to ensure fairness.  The  parties  have  been  given  full
    opportunity to  advance  their  respective  submissions  and  to  fully
    participate in the decision-making process.  There  are  no  issues  or
    concerns to which fairness demands  the  parties  be  given  a  further
    opportunity to respond or a hearing. The Appellant  has  been  given  a
    full opportunity to engage in the proceedings and to advance his  case.
    Any lack of detail in the grounds or Rule 15  application  or  lack  of
    clarity in the Appellant's evidence is not a reason to list the  matter
    for an oral hearing.   The matter can be fairly and  justly  determined
    without a hearing.

The Appellant's case

 5. The Appellant's claim is summarised by the judge at  paragraphs  13  to
    16.   His case is that he would be at risk should he return to Pakistan
    on the grounds of his involvement with Muttahida Quami Movement  (MQM).
    His uncle is a chairman in the council of the MQM.  Pressure was put on
    the Appellant by his uncle on behalf of the MQM to carry  out  criminal
    activities.  He refused and as a result of this he was  tortured  on  a
    number of occasions.  He had engaged in  sur  place  activities  whilst
    here in the UK.  He has been  politically  active  supporting  the  PAK
    Sarzameen Party (PSP).





The Appellant's immigration history

 6. The Appellant's immigration history can be summarised.  He arrived here
    in the UK on a Tier 4 Student visa on 27 January  2013.   On  21  April
    2014  he  was  served  with  an  IS.151A  and  released  on   reporting
    conditions.  On 3 September 2014 he made an application  under  Article
    8.  This application was refused on  8  January  2015.   The  Appellant
    became an absconder on 14 May  2015.   He  was  encountered  during  an
    enforcement visit on 10 January 2019.  On 14 January 2019  he  made  an
    application for asylum.

The findings of the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")

 7. Before the FtT there was the Appellant's bundle, a supplementary bundle
    and Mr Sowerby's skeleton argument.  Judge Moffatt heard oral  evidence
    from the Appellant and a witness Mr Mohammed Norman.  She recorded,  at
    paragraph 57, that the case turned on the Appellant's  credibility  and
    observed that "there is very little documentary evidence which has been
    filed to corroborate the Appellant's evidence".  The  judge  found,  at
    paragraph 58, that the Appellant had been  "consistent  throughout  his
    account that he worked for MQM, a political organisation with which his
    paternal uncle was involved, from 2010 until he left the UK  in  2013".
    The judge said that she  accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence  on  this
    point.  The judge found that "his role was non-political, working as  a
    data operator earning 5,000 rupees per month.  I find that he was  also
    working as a CCTV installer as  his  primary  employment".   The  judge
    found, at paragraph 59, that there were inconsistencies in the evidence
    relating to the dates on which the Appellant says that he was tortured.
     The judge had before her a Rule 35 report prepared by  Dr  Ahmad.  She
    commented that there was nothing to suggest that Mr Ahmad has  training
    in the assessment of torture and there was no  evidence  provided  that
    the Appellant is receiving medication or  treatment  to  alleviate  any
    psychological symptoms.  The judge found that the  Appellant's  account
    that he was assaulted and tortured on many occasions and  yet  remained
    working  for  the  MQM  until  he  left  for  the  UK  in  2013  lacked
    credibility.  The judge found, at paragraph 64, that the Appellant  had
    no need to remain with the MQM and found that there are answers in  the
    Appellant's interview which suggest that his uncle  was  a  "protective
    factor" in his treatment. The judge said, "I cannot see that  he  would
    have had any difficulty in ceasing to work for the MQM if he really was
    subjected to such requests and such treatment".

 8. The judge considered the delay in the  Appellant  making  a  claim  for
    asylum, at paragraph  65,  of  the  decision  and  concluded  that  his
    credibility was damaged having rejected the Appellant's explanation.

 9. The judge, at paragraph 67,  stated "having considered all the evidence
    in the round, I find that the Appellant was not subjected to  repeated
    requests to carry out criminal activities whilst a member  of  MQM  and
    was not beaten as a result of his involvement with the MQM".

10. In relation to the Appellant's sur place activities the judge  observed
    that he had provided documentation in  order  to  demonstrate  that  he
    belongs to the PSP.  The judge found that the Appellant became a member
    of the party whilst in  the  UK.   The  judge  took  into  account  the
    evidence of his activities with the party at paragraph 69.   The  judge
    considered the Appellant's evidence that an indirect  threat  had  been
    made to the Appellant via his family as a result of  his  uncle  having
    seen him on television engaging in sur place activity in support of the
    PSP.  The judge, at paragraph 71, concluded that the  Appellant  was  a
    member of the PSP,  but that he had not taken  part  in  any  political
    activities for six to eight months and that his activities  (which  are
    set out at paragraph 69 of the decision) were not at a level that would
    cause concern to political opponents.

11. The judge at paragraph 72 found the Appellant's evidence as to what  he
    fears to be ambiguous.

12. The judge went on to consider humanitarian protection and he  concluded
    that the Appellant is not at risk on return  to  Pakistan.   The  judge
    dismissed the appeal under Article 8.

The Grounds of Appeal

Grounds 1 and 2

13. Ground 1 is a reasons challenge concerning paragraph 72 of the  judge's
    decision in  which  she  recorded  her  finding  that  the  Appellant's
    evidence as to what he fears is "ambiguous".   I  shall  consider  this
    along with ground 2 which asserts  that  the  judge  did  not  properly
    consider the Appellant's evidence in relation to his activities for the
    MQM.  Reference is made to paragraphs  14  to  19  of  the  Appellant's
    witness statement and specifically paragraph 58 of the decision of  the
    judge where she found that his role  was  non-political,  although  she
    accepted that the Appellant had been consistent throughout his evidence
    that he worked for MQM from 2010 until 2013.  It is asserted  that  the
    judge failed to  consider  or  place  any  weight  on  the  Appellant's
    evidence and that she failed to reason her finding that  his  role  was
    non-political.  A challenge under ground 2 is also made to the  judge's
    finding, at paragraph 64, that it was not  credible  that  having  been
    assaulted and tortured on many occasions the Appellant worked  for  the
    MQM until he left for the UK in  2013.   It  is  asserted  that  in  so
    finding the judge failed to consider or place weight on the Appellant's
    evidence of membership of the MQM and that he was heavily  involved  in
    its political activities.

14. In response in respect of grounds 1 and 2, in written submissions,  the
    Secretary of State submits that the decision must be read as  a  whole.
    It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled  to  conclude
    that there was a contradiction between the Appellant's case that he was
    ill-treated as a result of failure to commit crimes on  behalf  of  the
    MQM and his claim that  he  was  politically  active  on  the  parties'
    behalf.  In Mr Sowerby's reply he asserts that reading the decision  as
    a whole does not cure the error made by the judge in failing to provide
    adequate  reasons  why  she  found  the  Appellant's  evidence  to   be
    "ambiguous".  In addition, it is asserted that the Secretary  of  State
    has not engaged with ground 2.

Grounds 1 and 2 - conclusions

15. Having considered the decision was a whole,  I  identify  four  primary
    reasons why the judge did not accept the Appellant's  account  that  he
    had a political role in the MQM or that he was ill-treated.  The  first
    reason is that the judge found material inconsistencies in the evidence
    (see paragraphs 59 to 62). Secondly, the judge found that  the  medical
    evidence was limited (see paragraph 63).  These findings are subject to
    challenge in grounds 4 and 5, but for the reasons given later  in  this
    decision, the judge's findings relating to these issues are lawful.

16. The third reason that can be identified is at paragraph  64  where  the
    judge says that she takes account of the  actions  that  the  Appellant
    took after the incidents he  complains  about.   The  judge  took  into
    account the Appellant's evidence that he was  subject  to  requests  to
    undertake criminal activities every two or three days  until  2012  and
    that he was assaulted and  tortured  on  many  occasions  and  yet  his
    evidence was that he stayed working for the MQM until he left  Pakistan
    in 2013.  The judge did not find this part of the  Appellant's  account
    to be credible in light of the fact that he had a full-time  job  as  a
    CCTV installer and there was in the judge's view no  need  for  him  to
    remain with the MQM.  To put the findings in context the final sentence
    of paragraph 64 indicates that the judge interpreted answers  given  by
    the Appellant during the interview to suggest  that  his  uncle  was  a
    "protective factor" in  his  treatment  and  therefore  she  reasonably
    inferred that he would not have difficulty ceasing to work for the MQM.
      Whilst  the  judge  does  not  identify  the  relevant  part  of  the
    Appellant's interview, there is no challenge to this finding.   In  the
    light of the evidence before the judge, I conclude that at paragraph 64
    the judge drew a reasonable inference.

17. The Appellant sets out in his witness statement (which is a response to
    the reasons for refusal decision) at some length his  role  within  the
    organisation. Specifically, at paragraph 16, he  states  that  when  he
    formally became a member of the MQM he was given an incentive  to  earn
    money under the title  of  data  operator  so  that  he  would  have  a
    financial incentive and would not have to do any  part-time  work.   No
    error arises  from  the  judge  not  having  set  out  the  Appellant's
    evidence.  Furthermore, there is nothing  to  support  the  Appellant's
    contention that the judge  did  not  take  into  account  the  evidence
    contained in his witness statement.  The finding at paragraph  58  must
    be considered in the context of the decision as a whole. It is clear to
    the parties why the Appellant's evidence was not accepted.

18. The fourth reason for rejecting the Appellant's account about his  role
    within the MQM is that his credibility was damaged by virtue of Section
    8(4) and (6) of the 2004 Act (see paragraph 65).  There is no challenge
    to this finding in the grounds.

19. The choice of the word "ambiguous"  by  the  judge,  at  paragraph  72,
    relating to what it is the Appellant fears, is not  properly  explained
    by the judge. However, what is clear is that the Appellant's appeal was
    dismissed primarily for the four reasons identified above and not as  a
    result of ambiguity as found by the judge. Nothing turns on the judge's
    findings of ambiguity.

Ground 3

20. Ground  3  asserts  that  the  judge  did  not  properly  consider  the
    Appellant's sur place activities for the PSP.  It is asserted that  the
    judge did not place any weight on the  Appellant's  evidence  that  his
    uncle saw him on television and as  a  result  threatened  him  or  the
    photographic evidence showing the Appellant with the  UK  and  European
    president and joint secretary  of  the  PSP  which  were  taken  on  29
    September 2019.  In addition, Mr Norman, who gave oral evidence, wished
    to rely on a letter which was dated 10 September 2019 (page 34  of  the
    Appellant's bundle).  In this  letter  Mr  Norman  confirmed  that  the
    Appellant is an active member of the PSP.  There  was  no  issue  taken
    with Mr Norman's evidence at the hearing.   In  addition  there  was  a
    letter from the president of the PSP UK and  Europe  of  26  June  2019
    which indicates that the Appellant has been an  active  member  of  the
    organisation since 22 October 2017.  It is asserted that the judge  did
    not take into account this evidence.

21. In relation to ground 3 the Secretary of State's case is that the judge
    accepted that the Appellant was a member of the PSP and  there  was  no
    "objective evidence" that membership of the PSP in Pakistan is unlawful
    or that it would lead to a risk of persecution.  It is asserted that it
    is clear that the judge did not accept  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    threatened by his uncle.  In reply the Appellant repeats that the judge
    does not make a finding about whether the Appellant had been threatened
    by his uncle.  It is also asserted that there was "objective  evidence"
    that established that the Appellant would be at risk of persecution  on
    return to Pakistan and that the judge  referred  to  this  evidence  at
    paragraph 75 of the decision.

Ground 3 - conclusions

22. The judge considered the sur place activities at paragraphs  68  -  71.
    She took into account the documentary evidence  relied  on  to  support
    that that he was a member of the  PSP;  however,  the  Appellant's  own
    evidence was that he had not done anything for the last  six  to  eight
    months.   The  judge  accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence  about   his
    activities for the organisation and that he was a member.  In  relation
    to the evidence of a threat having been made to the Appellant  via  his
    family as a result of his uncle having seen him on television attending
    a political event, a proper reading of paragraphs 70 and  71  makes  it
    clear that the judge did not  accept  the  Appellant's  evidence.   The
    judge found that if there had been a threat to his family the Appellant
    would not be speaking regularly  to  his  mother.   To  understand  the
    conclusions reached by the judge the decision must read as a whole.

23. At paragraph 75 of the decision the judge refers to background evidence
    of MQM action against the PSP.  There was no background  evidence  that
    would suggest that the Appellant's sur  place  activities  alone  would
    place him at risk on return.  His case was not presented on this  basis
    in the alternative.

The application  under  Rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

24.  The  Appellant  gave  evidence  relating  to  PSP.  It  is   therefore
    appropriate  to  engage  with  this  when  considering  ground  3.  The
    application is to adduce evidence that was not before the FtT. There is
    a letter from Mr Masroor of 12 March 2020.  He is the president of  the
    PSP. He says that the Appellant is actively involved  with  the  party.
    He comments on the Appellant's previous political background.  There is
    a letter from Mr Raza who is the joint secretary of the PSP.

25. In addition there is a newspaper article published in "the  Daily  Urdu
    Bulletin" on 4 February 2020 which relates to the opening ceremony of a
    branch office of the PSP and in which it is asserted the Appellant  can
    be seen.  There is a translation of the newspaper article.   There  are
    further photographs submitted in support of the Appellant's case.   The
    photographs are said to  show  the  Appellant's  participation  in  the
    opening ceremony of a branch office and there  is  evidence  supporting
    the identification of the witnesses.  It is asserted by the Appellant's
    representatives that the evidence was not available at the time of  the
    First-tier Tribunal because the branch office of the PSP was not opened
    until after the hearing.

26. Whilst it is obvious why evidence relating to the opening of the branch
    office could not be before the FtT, it is not explained why  there  was
    no evidence from the witnesses.   In any event, the evidence  makes  no
    difference to the findings of the judge in relation to the  Appellant's
    activity with the party in the UK.  Whilst there is an  assertion  made
    by the witnesses that the Appellant was an active member of  MQM,  they
    did not attend the hearing  before  the  FtT.  The  evidence  does  not
    explain how the witnesses became  aware  of  the  Appellant's  previous
    political activity or how long they have  known  him.   Their  evidence
    does not support the Appellant having received a threat from his uncle.
     There is no good reason for admitting the evidence in the  context  of
    consideration of whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law;
    however, it would make no difference in any case to the decision.    If
    the Appellant has increased his activity with the PSP and  is  claiming
    that this will put him at risk,  it  is  open  to  him  to  make  fresh
    submissions under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules.

Grounds 4 and 5

27. Ground 4 asserts that the judge did not make clear findings whether the
    Appellant was tortured in Pakistan and that she  failed  to  take  into
    account the Appellant's evidence at paragraphs 52 to 54 of his  witness
    statement.  Ground 5 asserts that the judge erred in failing  to  place
    weight on the Rule 35 report  prepared  by  Dr  Ahmad.   The  Appellant
    asserts that the judge erred in failing to place weight on the Rule  35
    report in circumstances  where  the  Respondent  did  not  question  Dr
    Ahmad's  qualifications  and  that  the  Appellant  was  released  from
    detention following consideration of the report.

Grounds 4 and 5 - conclusions

28. It is necessary to consider the evidence that was before the First-tier
    Tribunal relating to the Appellant having been  tortured.   During  the
    Appellant's interview he was asked a  number  of  questions  about  the
    treatment he received

         Question 127: how many times were you asked to  commit  crimes  for
         the MQM?

         Answer: all the time, every second or third day they would ask me.

         Question 128: did you carry out any of the  crimes  that  you  were
         asked to do?

         Answer: I never did so they  tortured  me  and  assaulted  me  many
         times.

         Question 129: how many times were you tortured and assaulted?

         Answer: six to seven times.

         Question 130: who tortured you?

         Answer: there were two men who were political  workers  along  with
         one policeman and I do not know their names  but  I  can  recognise
         them.  Each incident they were unknown to me.  I knew some of  them
         but not all of them.

         Question 131: how many times were you tortured?

         Answer: I was tortured and assaulted at the same time.

         Question 132: when did these tortures happen?

         Answer: in 2010 and December 2010 and couple of times in 2012.

         Question 131: how were you tortured?

         Answer: they struck my legs with iron rods and I was unable to walk
         for three months and they burn the back of my hands and  they  with
         pliers they pressed my fingers and I was bleeding.   They  used  to
         punch and slap my face.

         Question 134: where did these tortures take place?

         Answer: it was in a unit  office  in  Gulshan  Iqbal,  unit  office
         number was 67A.

         Question 147: what happened after you were tortured?

         Answer: after the torture I was in pain and crying, they offered me
         some water to drink and asked me to leave after some time.  After I
         was bleeding I went to the hospital.

         Question 148: did they let you go after  all  the  times  you  were
         tortured?

         Answer: yes and my parents would always get upset because they knew
         what I had been through.

         Question 149: did you sustain any injuries from these tortures?

         Answer: yes.

         Question 150: did you have to go to hospital for these?

         Answer: yes once I went when they striked my legs, they  warned  me
         not to say anything to the hospital that would  lead  to  a  police
         report.

         Question 151: how long were you in hospital for?

         Answer: two hours.

         Question 152: what injuries did you sustain?

         Answer: my legs were injured when they were  hitting  me  with  the
         rods.

         Question 154: how did you get to the medical centre?

         Answer: I went on my motorbike but my leg was in pain.

         Question 155: so you rode your motorbike to the medical centre?

         Answer: yes.

         Question 156: how were you able to ride your bike if you could  not
         walk for three months?

         Answer: I went with great difficulty, I was limping and it was only
         parked two to three minutes away on my left leg  and  was  able  to
         start my leg with the right leg and somehow I got there.

         Question 157: how many times did you have to go to the hospital?

         Answer: twice I got serious injuries so I have to go.

29. In response to the  Appellant's  interview  the  Secretary  of  State's
    position is set out at paragraphs 50 to 52 of the Reasons  for  Refusal
    Letter and it states as follows

         "    In your asylum interview you claim  that  you  were  asked  to
             commit crimes every two to three days but  you  never  carried
             out the tasks and so was tortured a  total  of  six  or  seven
             times in 2010, December 2010 and in 2012 (AIR  127-129,  132).
             You claim that there were two MQM supporters and  a  policeman
             who tortured you and the torture took place 'in a unit  office
             in Gulshan Iqbal, unit office number was 76A' (AIR 130,  134).
             You claim that

                  'they struck my legs with iron rods and I  was  unable  to
                  walk for three months and they burn the back of  my  hands
                  and they with pliers they pressed my  fingers  and  I  was
                  bleeding.  They used to punch and slap my face' (AIR 133).



         51.  Alternatively, you state that you rode on your motorbike after
             the attack and went to the Almustafa Medical  Centre  for  two
             hours where you were treated.  You state 'I  went  with  great
             difficulty, I was limping and it was only parked two to  three
             minutes away on my left leg and was able to start my leg  with
             the right leg and somehow I got there' (AIR 149-156).

         52.  It is noted that you have provided various accounts of how you
             were beaten and what happened  during  this  incident  between
             your Rule 35 report and asylum interview.  Your  inability  to
             provide consistent details regarding a  core  aspect  of  your
             claim has damaged your credibility.  In addition,  it  is  not
             plausible that you were beaten with iron rods  which  resulted
             in you being unable to walk for three months, that  you  would
             then be able to escape the incident  on  a  motorbike.   As  a
             result, your credibility has been damaged."

30. The Rule 35 report of 13 February 2019 reads as follows

         "This person says  he  is  a  victim  of  torture  in  his  country
         Pakistan.

         He says he was a MQM (a political party) member and  was  given  an
         illegal task in 2010 and he was advised that he should not disclose
         to anyone.  He did not like the idea and discussed with his dad who
         told his uncle who was also  a  very  active  leader  of  MQM.   In
         December 2010 he was called to party headquarter and was beaten  up
         with a metal bar and sustained injuries  to  his  L  leg.   He  was
         treated at Almustafa Hospital in Gulshan Iqbal, Karachi,  Pakistan.
         He was tortured by various means on numerous  occasions.   In  July
         2011 he was again tortured when a hot metal plate  was  applied  to
         his L hand and also L index finger was injured.  He was treated  at
         the same hospital.

         Now he is complaining of anxiety symptoms, insomnia, panic  attacks
         and flashbacks which are affecting him...".

    In Section 6 under  the  heading  "assessment"  the  doctor  states  as
    follows

         "In my opinion the symptoms he is describing can be consistent with
         the clinical findings today and I am raising my  concerns  that  he
         may be victim of torture and his case needs  further  investigated.
         I am also concerned that this ongoing detention  can  have  adverse
         effect on his physical and psychological wellbeing".

31. The Appellant's evidence relating to the issues raised by the Secretary
    of State in the Reasons for Refusal Letter at paragraphs 52  to  54  of
    his witness statement read as follows:-

         "52.     In relation to paragraphs 51 and 52 it is  stated  that  I
             provided various accounts of how I  was  beaten  up  and  what
             happened during the incident between your Rule 35  report  and
             my asylum interview.  However, it is correct to advise that  I
             gave various accounts of the incident.   The  Rule  35  report
             notes that I 'was beaten up with a  metal  bar  and  sustained
             injury to his left leg'.  Answer to question 133 of the asylum
             interview notes that 'they struck my  legs  with  iron  rods'.
             The difference is that of the words used by the interpreter in
             the Asylum Interview Record.  Metal bar and iron rods are  the
             same thing.  Further my understanding of the question  133  on
             the basis of the way it was asked was to describe how  torture
             took place on different occasions rather than how torture took
             place on one particular occasion so I did explain  how  I  was
             tortured accordingly.   The  questions  asked  just  prior  to
             question 133 show the context in which the  question  133  was
             asked.

         53.  Further the Rule 35 report notes that I sustained injury on my
             left leg as a  result  of  the  torture  that  took  place  in
             December 2010.  This  is  what  I explained  in  response  to
             question 156 when I explained that I started my motorbike with
             my righto leg and went to the hospital.

         54.  Further the Rule 35 report notes that I was  tortured  when  a
             hot metal plate was applied to my  left  hand  and  also  left
             index finger was injured.  This incident of  torture  occurred
             when I was given the task to go and burn a bus, my cousin  was
             the leader of that task.  That happened in July 2011.  I  went
             along the group but was just there and did not physically take
             part in the actual activity and refused to my cousin  to  burn
             the bus.  Question 198 of the Asylum  Interview  Record  notes
             that I told that the bus was burned in June or July 2011.   It
             was after that  refusal  to  actively  engage  in  the  actual
             criminality that my cousin once again  reported  me  back  and
             further torture took place in which is what I described in the
             rest of my answer to question 133 where the answer is noted as
             'they burn the back of my hands  and  they  with  pliers  they
             pressed  my  fingers  and  I  was  bleeding'.   I  was  giving
             information to the interpreter who would translate for me  and
             this may have caused some misunderstanding in the mind of  the
             interviewer.  However, if specific  questions  were  asked  to
             seek clarity I would have obviously been able to  provide  the
             same at the interview.

         55.  The rest of my answer in response to question 133  notes  that
             'they used to punch and slap my face'".

32. None of the Appellant's accounts are particularly coherent. He had  the
    opportunity to give some clarity  in  his  witness  statement.  In  his
    interview he says he was attacked in 2010 and  2012.  He  described  an
    attack to his legs  and  hands.   The  Rule  35  report  describes  the
    Appellant saying that he was attacked in 2011  causing  injury  to  his
    hand and in 2012 causing injury to his legs.  He  attempts  to  explain
    the inconsistency in dates, in response to the  RFRL,  in  his  witness
    statement with reference to an incident involving a bus about which  he
    referred  to  in  his  interview.   However,  in  the  interview,  when
    discussing this incident, he did not say that he was tortured  at  this
    time.  There is nothing to indicate that the judge  was  not  aware  of
    and/ or did not take  into  account  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  an
    attempt to explain the  clear  discrepancies.  The  judge  specifically
    mentions  paragraph  53  of  the  Appellant's  witness  statement  (see
    paragraph 63). The Appellant seeks to explain  the  inconsistencies  in
    his evidence at paragraphs 52-55.   I am satisfied that the judge  took
    the evidence into account and made findings  that  were  open  to  her.
    The judge was entitled, at paragraph 59, to conclude that  the  account
    given by the Appellant relating to the dates on which he  said  he  was
    tortured was inconsistent.  The judge explains the  inconsistencies  at
    paragraphs 60, 61 and 62.  The judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that
    there was an inconsistency relating to the extent  of  the  Appellant's
    injuries after the torture in 2010 rendering him  unable  to  walk  for
    three months but being able to  travel  by  motorbike  to  the  medical
    centre.  These were findings  that  were  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her.

33. What weight to attach to the Rule 35 report was a matter for the judge.
     There is no error arising from paragraph 63 of the  judge's  decision.
    The judge did not take issue with evidence of  scarring;  however,  she
    did not accept that the Appellant was tortured in accordance  with  his
    account.  The judge did not have to explain the scarring. The burden of
    proof rests on the Appellant.   The judge does  not  accept  that  this
    Appellant was the victim of torture and therefore paragraph 339K is not
    material to the judge's decision.

Ground 6

34. The Appellant submits that  the  judge  did  not  have  regard  to  the
    objective evidence about MQM with regard to internal  flight;  however,
    there is no need for me to engage with this because the judge  did  not
    err when concluding that the Appellant was not at risk on return.

35. There is no error of law arising from the  decision  of  the  FtT.  The
    decision dismissing the Appellant's appeal  on  protection  grounds  is
    maintained.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam                             Date 15 May 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam

