
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05905/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2018                          |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     Q J
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hussain promulgated on  12  December  2017  dismissing  the  protection
    appeal of the Appellant.


2.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Afghanistan  who  further  to  an  age
    assessment has been accorded the date  of  birth  1  August  2001.   He
    claims to have left Afghanistan in April 2015 - which, on the basis  of
    the age assessment, would have been at  the  age  of  13  years  and  8
    months.   He  travelled  from  Afghanistan  transiting  Europe   before
    arriving in the UK concealed in a lorry on 21 August 2015.  He  claimed
    asylum.


3.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL')  dated  20  May  2016.   The
    Appellant  was  nonetheless  granted  discretionary  leave  to   remain
    pursuant to the Respondent's policy in respect of  unaccompanied  minor
    asylum seekers.  Be that as it  may,  he  challenged  the  decision  to
    refuse his claim on protection grounds.


4.   The Appellant's appeal to the IAC was heard in the  first  instance  on
    24 November 2016 and dismissed for reasons set out  in  a  decision  of
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Butler  promulgated  on  4  January  2017.
    However, following challenge the Upper Tribunal  -  in  a  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce promulgated on 3 July 2017 - set  aside  the
    decision of Judge Butler and directed that the decision in  the  appeal
    be re-made before the First-tier Tribunal.  Accordingly the Appellant's
    appeal was heard again before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Hussain  on  4
    December 2017.  Judge Hussain  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  for
    reasons set out in his decision promulgated on 12 December 2017.


5.   The Appellant claims that his uncle is a member of the Taliban and  was
    planning forcibly to recruit him.  It is the Appellant's case that  his
    father had died when  he  was  an  infant,  and  that  his  mother  had
    thereafter resided with her brother and her brother's wife, that is  to
    say the Appellant's maternal uncle and aunt.  The Appellant  claims  he
    was not initially aware his uncle was involved  in  the  Taliban;  this
    became apparent to him after his mother had overhead some discussion as
    to the intention  to  recruit  the  Appellant.  This  precipitated  the
    Appellant's mother and his aunt to make arrangements for him  to  leave
    Afghanistan.  Jewellery and other valuable  items  were  sold  and  the
    services of an agent engaged.  It was in such  circumstances  that  the
    Appellant departed Afghanistan to make his way in  due  course  to  the
    United Kingdom.  The Appellant claims to have  had  no  direct  contact
    with his mother since coming to the  United  Kingdom,  but  nonetheless
    fears that if returned he will be at risk from his maternal  uncle  who
    will either force him to join the Taliban or kill him if he would  seek
    to defy him.


6.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not accept  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account in respect  of  the  core  element  of  his  claim.
    Moreover, the Judge considered that the Appellant had family to  return
    to in Afghanistan and so should not be considered as a returning  minor
    with no support.


7.   The Appellant again challenged the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
    by way of  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer on
    9 January 2018.  The grant of permission to appeal in material part  is
    in these terms:

         "It is arguable that in finding that the Appellant had deliberately
         not given the Respondent sufficient information to find his  family
         the Judge materially erred as he was only 13 years and 8 months old
         when he left Afghanistan.  It took him four months to get here  and
         it was not until sometime later (over a year it  appears)  that  he
         provided the information he knew.  This  arguable  error  may  have
         impacted on the rest of the adverse findings.  All grounds  may  be
         argued although to me this seems the strongest".


8.    For  completeness  I  note  that  there  are  three  separate  grounds
    identified in the application for  permission  to  appeal.   The  first
    relates to the so-called 'tracing' issue which Judge Saffer  considered
    particularly attractive.  The second ground of  appeal  is  not  relied
    upon before me by Mr Howard; in my judgment, Mr Howard is sensible  not
    to rely upon that ground  as  it  seems  to  me  that  it  is  entirely
    misconceived.  In the circumstances I say no more about it.  The  third
    ground of appeal relates to the circumstances that the Appellant  might
    face  as  a  minor  returning  to  Afghanistan,  but   as   Mr   Howard
    acknowledges, that ground is  essentially  contingent  upon  the  first
    ground of appeal.  Accordingly, the principal focus of the challenge is
    in relation to the Judge's comments and observations and findings  with
    regard to the issue of tracing.


9.   In the premises I share the reservation and concern expressed by  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Bruce when considering the  challenge  to  the  previous
    decision in these proceedings.  Judge Bruce makes this  observation  at
    paragraph 16 of her decision: "Confusingly the Tribunal also appears to
    weigh against him the fact that he has not sought to  maintain  contact
    with the very uncle whom he claims to fear".  The question  of  tracing
    the Appellant's family necessarily means seeking to  trace  either  his
    mother or the uncle with whom he and his mother had resided  since  the
    time of the Appellant's father's death.  That is, in effect, to  invite
    the Appellant to make contact with the very person from whom he  claims
    to fear persecution.  In such circumstances it is difficult to see  why
    any failure to make any such contact, or to pursue contact  or  tracing
    with any vigour, should result in any adverse inference being drawn  as
    to overall credibility.  Be that as it may, that  does  not  appear  to
    have been a point expressly argued before the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    - notwithstanding it having found its  way  into  the  observations  of
    Judge Bruce. Nor is it expressly a point that has been  articulated  in
    the grounds of challenge before me.  Nonetheless, it  is  difficult  to
    see that it does not give rise to at least some reservation in  respect
    of the overall approach to this case. Further,  given  that  it  was  a
    matter of express comment by the Upper Tribunal it is difficult to  see
    how this could have been a point to which the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    was not alert - (cf. 'Robinson obvious').


10.  The First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  made  observations  on  the  issue  of
    tracing at paragraphs 12, 27 and 30 of his decision.


11.  Paragraph 12 appears under the heading 'Background Facts'  -  before  a
    direction on the standard of proof, before the section of the  Decision
    headed 'Assessment of Credibility', and before the specific findings in
    respect of whether or not the Appellant's uncle was involved  with  the
    Taliban.  It is in these terms:

         "It is relevant to mention at this stage that at the  date  of  the
         previous hearing, the Appellant had made no attempt to contact  his
         family through the  tracing  service  provided  by  the  Red  Cross
         although he had rectified this by the time of  the  hearing  before
         me.  The Red Cross have not traced his family.  I am satisfied that
         this was because the information that he provided  did  not  enable
         either the Red Cross or the Secretary of State to trace his  family
         and that the reason for this was because he did not want his family
         to be found.  I base this on the fact that his family is from Kabul
         district and there is no credible evidence that families from Kabul
         are being displaced or have been displaced.  This means that if the
         Appellant had provided sufficiently accurate details of his  family
         it would have been possible to trace them.  Subject to the findings
         I make on his asylum claim this gives rise to an adverse  inference
         against him in terms of whether he would be  returning  as  a  lone
         child".


12.  At paragraph 27 under the heading 'Does the appellant have a family  to
    return to?', the Judge says this in part:

         "Given  my  findings,  I  draw  an  adverse  inference   from   the
         Appellant's failure to contact his  family  or  provide  sufficient
         information for the Red Cross or the Secretary  of  State  to  find
         them to facilitate family reunion."


13.  At paragraph 30 the Judge makes  reference  to  the  Appellant's  uncle
    having a telephone.

         "There is evidence that his uncle has a telephone.   For  the  same
         reasons I have mentioned about his friend's telephone number, I  do
         not find it credible that he will not know of his  uncle's  number.
         If he provides this and full details  of  where  the  family  lived
         contact can be made with them either through family tracing by  the
         Secretary of State or the Red Cross.  They should  still  be  where
         the Appellant left them as there is no reason for them to have left
         or been displaced and there is little or no evidence that any  harm
         has befallen them.  I do not consider therefore that the  Appellant
         would be returning as an orphan or as a lone child to  Afghanistan.
         He has family who would be there to assist and take care of him".


14.  It seems to me necessarily  paragraph  30  is  written  in  prospective
    terms, that is to say it suggests that the Appellant could now seek  to
    make contact with his family via his uncle given that the Judge has  in
    fact found that there is no risk from the uncle.  It  is  difficult  to
    see how what is set  out  at  paragraph  30  could  provide  supporting
    reasoning for the Judge's conclusions in  respect  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to be at risk from his uncle.  Accordingly, I do not identify any
    substantive reasoning in paragraph 30 that supports the Judge's overall
    conclusions that are the subject of challenge.  In  such  circumstances
    it is paragraphs 12 and 27  that  require  to  be  considered  in  more
    detail.


15.   However,  it  is  appropriate  to  observe  at  this  stage  that  the
    positioning of the analysis at paragraphs 12  and  30  of  the  Judge's
    decision indicate that the Judge approached the Appellant's conduct  in
    respect of 'tracing' as a discreet issue from his narrative account  of
    the claimed events in Afghanistan that led  to  his  departure.  In  my
    judgement it was inappropriate to separate these matters out and not to
    treat them as part of an 'in the round' evaluation of credibility. (See
    further below in particular in respect of paragraph 12.)


16.  By way of contextual background it is to be noted  that  the  Appellant
    provided significant personal details at his screening  interview.   It
    may be seen from Annex A of the Respondent's bundle before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal that the Appellant provided his full name,  his  father's
    full name, his mother's full name, the name of the school that  he  had
    attended and its address, and the address of the family home  where  he
    had lived with his mother, uncle and aunt.   Similarly,  the  Appellant
    provided such information  in  the  Statement  of  Evidence  Form  that
    appears at Annex C of the Respondent's bundle, where again he  provides
    his address, the address of his school and the name of his  mother  and
    what he believed were  her  whereabouts.   Also  see  yet  further  the
    witness statement at Annex B.


17.  Further, at the substantive asylum  interview  the  Appellant  answered
    questions with regard to  his  address  and  family,  and  in  response
    specifically to question 13 "If possible would you  be  happy  for  the
    Home  Office  to  try  to  make  contact  with  your  mum  or  aunt  in
    Afghanistan" the Appellant answered "Yes".


18.  Accordingly it appears that the  Appellant  provided  information  that
    might assist in the process of tracing during his formal contacts  with
    the Respondent and indicated a willingness for the  Respondent  to  use
    whatever resources were available to seek to contact his mother.


19.  The Respondent considered these matters in the RFRL under  the  heading
    'Family Tracing' at paragraphs 63 et seq.  At paragraph 63 the decision
    maker sets out a table with regard to tracing setting with 'Action' and
    'Results' columns.  What is clear from the table  is  that  it  is  not
    currently, and has not been since a statement  issued  on  27  November
    2012, the policy of the British Embassy in Kabul to  undertake  tracing
    of families of unaccompanied asylum seeking children.   Otherwise,  the
    Secretary of State's methods of assisting in tracing appear to  be:  to
    search the UK immigration databases - this was  done  with  no  matches
    being found; to search overseas databases  -  similarly  done  with  no
    matches; to attempt to trace through  relatives  that  might  exist  in
    other European countries - it is noted there that  no  information  was
    submitted that the Appellant had any relatives in  any  other  European
    countries; and to attempt to make direct contact with family members in
    the country of return.  No contact details have  been  provided  beyond
    those I have indicated on the face of the screening interview  and  the
    Statement of Evidence Form.  There were no UK based  relatives  through
    whom to make any such enquiries and  again,  so  far  as  searching  or
    tracing in the field by local facilitators, it was again noted that the
    Home Office does not currently have any arrangements  or  contracts  in
    Afghanistan to allow such measures or checks to be taken.


20.  At paragraph 64 of the RFRL the  steps  taken  by  the  Respondent  are
    summarised in these terms:

    "The following steps have been taken  in  order  to  obtain  sufficient
    information from you to enable the Secretary of State to  endeavour  to
    trace your family: you been asked questions regarding  your  family  in
    your screening interview, your SEF and your substantive interview."




21.  At paragraph 66 the Respondent notes "The particular  circumstances  of
    the case meant that only cursory steps were available to the  Secretary
    of State  to  endeavour  to  trace  your  family...".  Nonetheless  the
    Respondent considered such steps were adequate  to  meet  the  duty  in
    respect of tracing: see paragraph 67.


22.  There is  no  suggestion  in  the  RFRL  that  the  Appellant  did  not
    cooperate or  provide  adequate  information  to  permit  tracing.  The
    ineffectiveness of the steps taken seem for  the  main  part  to  be  a
    consequence of the Respondent's policy and resources.


23.  Nonetheless, at paragraph 68 of  the  RFRL  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision-maker commented that it was not accepted as credible that  the
    Appellant and his family were content to allow him to leave Afghanistan
    without being able to maintain communication with them. Inevitably  the
    credibility or otherwise of such a circumstance is intertwined with the
    overall credibility of the Appellant's asylum claim. (As  much  appears
    to be implicitly recognised at paragraph 66 of the RFRL wherein  it  is
    stated that "The results of the family tracing have been considered  in
    the round with all other evidence available".)


24.  The Secretary of State has  not  taken  issue  in  the  RFRL  with  the
    specific information provided by the Appellant but has not followed  up
    that information because of the Home Office's and the British Embassy's
    limited facilities so to do.  Bearing in mind the age of the  Appellant
    at the time of  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  it  is  perhaps
    difficult to see what further information  it  was  expected  that  the
    Appellant might have provided to the Secretary of State in  respect  of
    the whereabouts of is mother,  given  the  Secretary  of  State's  very
    limited facilities for chasing matters up.


25.  Although not articulated by  the  Respondent,  perhaps  the  most  that
    could be said was that the Appellant did not provide a telephone number
    for his mother. However, the Appellant stated  at  interview  that  his
    mother and aunt did not have telephones (question 70).  The  Respondent
    did not  expressly  dispute  this  in  the  RFRL:  the  observation  at
    paragraph 68 is not expressly to  the  effect  that  telephone  contact
    would have been ensured. I note that the lack of a telephone number for
    his mother would not have inevitably prevented tracing by other methods
    had the policy and/or resource considerations been different.


26.  As I say, the Respondent does not raise  the  absence  of  a  telephone
    number for the Appellant's mother as an adverse  issue  in  respect  of
    tracing. And neither does the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.  Rather  the
    Judge  identifies  that  there  "is  evidence  that  his  uncle  has  a
    telephone". For the reasons already given, it was inappropriate to rely
    upon the failure  to  provide  a  telephone  number  for  his  would-be
    persecutor as an adverse feature in respect  of  tracing,  and  thereby
    also  in  respect  of  any  'in  the  round'  assessment   of   overall
    credibility.


27.  As regards the Appellant's  contact  with  the  Red  Cross,  there  was
    nothing in the supporting evidence on this point  and  nothing  in  the
    Appellant's witness statement.  As such, it  appears  to  have  been  a
    matter that emerged during the course of the oral evidence, (albeit  it
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not make that  adequately  clear  in
    the decision).


28.  Whilst at paragraph 12 the Judge records that the Red  Cross  had  been
    contacted and had failed to trace the Appellant's family, he  makes  no
    reference to what  information  the  Appellant  may  or  may  not  have
    provided to the Red Cross. The Judge does not expressly  identify  what
    might be considered inadequate in the information  provided,  and  does
    not otherwise identify what information the Appellant should reasonably
    have been expected to provide.


29.  It seems to me that  in  such  circumstances  it  is  unclear  on  what
    premise the Judge has seen fit to draw an adverse inference. The  Judge
    characterises the information provided to the Red Cross as  necessarily
    having not been "sufficiently  accurate".   It  does  not  seem  to  be
    suggested  thereby  that  the  Appellant  provided  deliberately  false
    information upon his arrival in the UK  or  subsequently,  but  perhaps
    that he provided insufficient information.  If the Judge  had  intended
    to say that the Appellant had provided false information, he  does  not
    make that clear.  If the Judge did intend to say that  the  information
    was  insufficient,  he  has  not   specified   the   nature   of   that
    insufficiency.


30.  More particularly, in context it seems that the Judge's  conclusion  in
    respect of the adequacy of the information provided to the Red Cross is
    founded on the fact that the Red Cross was unsuccessful in its attempts
    to trace.  In my judgement that is inadequate reasoning: the failure of
    the Red Cross to trace the family cannot be determinatively  indicative
    of a failure to provide adequate information.


31.  Moreover, I am greatly troubled by the positioning in the  decision  of
    the Judge's observation in respect of tracing through the Red Cross.


32.  Of course in  an  'in  the  round'  assessment  of  credibility  it  is
    inevitable that a decision-maker will set  out  matters  in  a  written
    decision in a linear fashion. However, I  do  not  think  that  in  the
    particular circumstances of this case that that provides an explanation
    for the manner in which the Judge has approached this issue.  It  seems
    to me clear enough that the Judge has looked at the tracing point as  a
    discreet and distinct matter, and indeed has done so even before he has
    come onto the overall credibility assessment of the  core  elements  of
    the Appellant's claim.  In my judgement this is manifest from the final
    sentence at paragraph 12 - "subject to  the  findings  I  make  on  his
    asylum claim ..."  The Judge is thereby indicating that he has taken  a
    view as to the support that might be available to the Appellant through
    his family in Afghanistan, and subject to anything he might now find in
    respect of the asylum claim it means he will be able to return  to  the
    bosom of his family. I remind myself again that this is the very family
    that includes the person from whom he claims to fear persecution.  I am
    driven to the conclusion that the Judge did not  consider  the  tracing
    issue 'in the round' but determined it adversely as  a  discreet  point
    even  before  he  has  got  onto  the  main  body  of   the   decision.
    Accordingly, the Judge  commenced  considering  the  substance  of  the
    Appellant's claim having  already  made  an  adverse  assessment  on  a
    peripheral matter.  That was inappropriate and is sufficient for me  to
    be satisfied that this amounts to a material error of law.


33.   So  far  as  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the  core  element  of  the
    Appellant's account is concerned, the key paragraph is paragraph 22  of
    the decision.  The Judge's reasoning therein is  essentially  that  the
    Appellant is not to be believed in his account because his  mother  and
    aunt were able to act and operate in their attempts to raise funds  and
    secure the escape of the Appellant in a manner  that  was  inconsistent
    with the Judge's expectations of how a Taliban member would  allow  the
    womenfolk around him to behave.  In substance this was to apply a  test
    of plausibility.  The Judge has in effect evaluated that if  the  uncle
    was a Taliban member it was implausible that the Appellant's mother and
    aunt would have been able to have the confidence to act as they did, or
    the freedom to act as they did, and indeed,  that  it  was  implausible
    that they would have been left alone at  home  whilst  the  Appellant's
    uncle disappeared for two or three days at a time; accordingly the fact
    that they had  acted  as  claimed  rendered  it  implausible  that  the
    Appellant's uncle was a Taliban member.


34.  Considerable caution is necessary  in  evaluating  credibility  on  the
    basis of plausibility, and on the basis  of  expected  behaviours:  the
    unlikely  happens;  people  do  not  always  behave  rationally  or  in
    accordance with expectations or societal norms.   I  am  not  satisfied
    that the Judge has demonstrated that he exercised due caution  in  this
    regard.  Indeed, it seems that a similar approach in  the  decision  of
    Judge Butler in the first appeal attracted  the  adverse  comments  and
    observations of Judge Bruce:

         "The Tribunal appeared to regard the Appellant's mother's  decision
         to send him away to be at odds with the evidence about the position
         of women in Afghanistan generally.  All I say about  that  is  that
         the Tribunal has arguably here failed to  take  into  account  that
         families and individuals are rarely a monolithic representation  of
         the society from which they come.  Just as conservative fathers may
         wish their daughters to be educated so might a Taliban brother have
         the decency to respect his sister's wishes.  The case put  is  that
         the Appellant's mother feared that her brother would cease to do so
         after she had died.  I find nothing incredible in that"  (paragraph
         17).


35.  In all the circumstances it seems to me that  the  reasoning  of  Judge
    Hussain in respect of the tracing  element  -  and  in  particular  the
    conclusion  that  the  Appellant  must  have  provided  inaccurate   or
    insufficiently accurate details to the Red Cross is established by  the
    fact that the Red Cross were unsuccessful in tracing the family - to be
    flawed.  Moreover, the decision is flawed in its structure  in  that  a
    credibility conclusion in this regard is made, and put,  ahead  of  the
    evaluation of the overall credibility  of  the  claim.   Further,  when
    focusing upon the core element of the claim the Judge has  not  applied
    the  appropriate  Karanakaran  standard,  but  has  unduly  relied   on
    plausibility  and  expectation  without  giving  any  weight   to   the
    possibility that something different may have  been  the  case  in  the
    circumstances of this particular family.  For all these reasons I  find
    the decision is flawed for material error of law and must be set aside.


36.  It was  common  ground  between  the  representatives  before  me  that
    because the flawed nature of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    went to the heart of the credibility of  the  claim,  the  case  should
    again be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  I  do  not  seek  to  go
    behind that joint position of the parties: as the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge indicated ultimately this case turns on the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's own account (there being no supporting evidence by  way  of
    personal documents relied upon) and this  requires  to  be  re-assessed
    with a fresh hearing.


37.  Accordingly, the matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  the
    decision in the appeal to be re-made with all issues  at  large  before
    any  Judge  other  than  Judge  Hussain  or  Judge  Butler.    Standard
    directions will suffice.


Notice of Decision

38.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
law and is set aside.


39.  The decision in the appeal is  to  be  re-made  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than Judge Hussain or Judge Butler with all
    issues at large.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                                 Date: 3 January 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis

