
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05656/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21st January 2020                   |On 31st January 2020              |
|                                       |                                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     KS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Markus, instructed by Turpin Miller LLP
(Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  KS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

         1. On 8th April 2019, for the reasons given below, I set aside the
            decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge:


                  1.   By a decision promulgated on 18th July  2018,  First-
                  tier Tribunal Judge Alty dismissed KS' appeal against  the
                  respondent's decision to refuse his human rights claim and
                  his protection claim.


                  2.   KS, a citizen of  the  DRC,  arrived  in  the  UK  in
                  December 2003 as a minor. Asylum  claims  made  after  his
                  arrival in the UK listing him as a dependant first on  his
                  mother and then on his father were refused and appeals  in
                  each case were dismissed. Neither the appellant,  nor  his
                  parents or siblings left  the  UK.  They  were  eventually
                  granted indefinite leave to remain in August 2008.


                  3.   In July 2016, KS was  sentenced  to  a  total  of  15
                  months' imprisonment for a number of offences  on  various
                  dates: taking a motor vehicle without consent, failing  to
                  surrender to custody, possession of  cannabis,  possession
                  of an offensive weapon,  racially  aggravated  harassment,
                  breach of a criminal order and exposure.  He  fell  within
                  the automatic deportation  provisions  and  a  deportation
                  order was made on 2nd March 2017. He claimed  asylum.  His
                  claim was refused for reasons set out in a decision by the
                  respondent dated 17th April 2018.


                  Error of law


                  4.   The First-tier Tribunal judge found, inter alia,
                  (i)  the appellant is bi-sexual;
                  (ii) on 7th July 2016 he was recorded on  CCTV  as  having
                  sex with a man in a public place;
                  (iii)    although same sex relations are  not  illegal  in
                  the DRC, there are cases of arrest for public displays  of
                  same-sex sexual relations;
                  (iv) it was unlikely that an on-line search  would  reveal
                  the  appellant's  bi-sexuality,  not  least   because   of
                  periodic restrictions in internet access;
                  (v)  the level of arrests under public  decency  laws  are
                  not such as to give rise to a real risk of persecution;
                  (vi) although clear that there is societal  discrimination
                  it has not been demonstrated that it is at  a  level  that
                  amounts to persecution;
                  (vii)    irrespective of the risk of persecution, he would
                  not live openly as a bisexual man; he would choose to live
                  discretely;
                  (viii)   he is not at risk of persecution because  of  his
                  sexuality if returned to the DRC;
                  (ix) he does not fall  within  paragraph  399  Immigration
                  Rules/s117C(5) NIAA 2002;
                  (x)  he has been lawfully resident in the UK for  most  of
                  his life;
                  (xi) he is socially and culturally integrated into the UK;
                  (xii)    there would not be very significant obstacles  to
                  his re-integration into DRC.
                  (xiii)   There are not very compelling reasons such as  to
                  outweigh the public interest in deportation.


                  5.   The appellant sought and was  granted  permission  to
                  appeal on the following grounds:
                  (i)  The judge failed to give adequate reasons for finding
                  that there were periodic restrictions on  internet  access
                  which would result in a  search  of  the  appellant's  bi-
                  sexuality not being disclosed and  in  any  event  such  a
                  conclusion was perverse;
                  (ii) The judge failed to apply the correct test and failed
                  to give adequate reasons in considering why the  appellant
                  would live discretely in the DRC;
                  (iii)    The judge failed to  address  not  only  societal
                  taboos  but  the  extent  of  the  arrests  and  potential
                  extortion that flowed from the stopping  (not  necessarily
                  the arrest and charge) of a bisexual man whose identity as
                  a bisexual man would be known; failed to  have  regard  to
                  relevant evidence that was before  the  judge;  failed  to
                  have regard to the violent  actions  of  non-state  agents
                  against a known bi-sexual man;
                  (iv) In reaching his conclusions as  to  very  significant
                  obstacles,   the   judge   failed    to    consider    the
                  discrimination,  societal  taboo,  lack  of  support   and
                  overall  lack  of  ability  to  find   accommodation   and
                  employment.


                  6.   Mr Bates said that he was inclined to accept that the
                  judge had failed to give adequate reasons for his  finding
                  that there would not be  very  significant  obstacles.  Mr
                  Bates  acknowledged  that  periodic  restrictions  on  the
                  internet would not necessarily prevent a  search  bringing
                  up the appellant's name; the judge had failed  to  provide
                  adequate reasons for reaching the finding  he  did,  given
                  the paucity of the evidence before him to support  such  a
                  finding.


                  7.   Nevertheless, Mr Bates submitted that even though the
                  possibility of it becoming known that  the  appellant  was
                  bisexual did not result, without more, in a  finding  that
                  he would be  at  risk  of  being  persecuted.  Ms  Wilkins
                  stressed that grounds 1  and  2  specifically  highlighted
                  that an individual assessment had to be made; the risk  to
                  the appellant flowed not only from the risk of arrest  and
                  extortion because he was identified as bisexual  but  from
                  his personal circumstances and  the  evidence  before  the
                  judge which had not been considered and  assessed  in  the
                  context of the  appellant's  personal  circumstances.  She
                  noted in passing that there was an apparent  contradiction
                  in the judge's findings  whether  he  was  now  free  from
                  alcoholism.


                  8.   Ground 3, she submitted, refers to evidence that  was
                  before the judge that he did not consider in  the  context
                  of the appeal as a whole.


                  9.   Mr Bates submitted that the respondent did not accept
                  that anyone who was bisexual would  be  at  risk,  but  he
                  acknowledged that the findings in relation to  persecution
                  flowed from the finding by the judge that he would not  be
                  identified or identifiable as bisexual.


                  Discussion


                  10.  The findings by the First-tier Tribunal judge have as
                  a baseline an unreasoned finding that the appellant  would
                  not be identifiable from an internet search. To reach such
                  a fundamental finding, the judge ought to have set out his
                  reasoning on the basis of the evidence before him. It  was
                  not possible to identify evidence in the file  that  could
                  have led to that conclusion. The findings as  to  risk  of
                  being persecuted flow from that baseline  -  the  evidence
                  material  to  arrests,  violence  from  non-state  actors,
                  detention are all matters that, if  held  adverse  to  the
                  appellant, need to be reasoned and in the context  of  the
                  evidence that was before the judge. That was not done.


                  11.   I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge  failed
                  to provide adequate reasons for his findings  with  regard
                  to very  significant  obstacles  and  the  risk  of  being
                  persecuted. The judge erred in law such that I  set  aside
                  the decision to be remade.


                  12.  The finding that the appellant is bi-sexual  has  not
                  been challenged and stands. It is the applicability of the
                  appellant's personal circumstances in the context  of  the
                  DRC both in terms of risk of being persecuted and  whether
                  there are very significant obstacles to reintegration that
                  have to be examined.


                            Conclusions:


                  The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did
                  involve the making of an error on a point of law.


                       I set aside the decision to be re-made.


                       Consequential Directions


                  1.   Both parties  have  leave  to  file  and  serve  such
                  further evidence as they seek to rely  upon  by  7th  June
                  2019 (such evidence to be sent direct to Mr Bates)


                  2.   Thereafter written submissions by both parties to  be
                  filed and served by 22nd July 2019.


                  3.     If  either  party  wishes  an  oral   hearing   for
                  submission only, no oral evidence, they are to notify  the
                  Tribunal by 22nd July and in that case the hearing will be
                  listed for 27th  August.  Failing  such  notification  the
                  appeal will be determined on the papers.


         2. Both parties indicated they wished a further hearing  and  thus
            the resumed hearing eventually came before me on  21st  January
            2020. There had been earlier dates of hearing  set,  but  these
            had been adjourned because the respondent was in the process of
            preparing an updated Country Policy and Information Note (CPIN)
            which was eventually produced dated January 2020.


         3. In addition to the  CPIN  I  also  had  before  me  a  skeleton
            argument on behalf of the respondent dated  17th  October  2019
            and a skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant  dated  16th
            January 2020 (one correction to which was the appellant's  date
            of grant of indefinite leave to  remain  being  12th  September
            2007 and not 2008).

         4. Mr Singh had not been able  to  update  the  skeleton  argument
            because he had only had an opportunity to consider the CPIN the
            previous day; nevertheless, he was content to proceed.

         5. Mr Singh did not seek to expand upon the skeleton submitted  on
            behalf of the respondent. He  did  not  seek  to  challenge  or
            disagree with the submissions in the skeleton argument filed on
            behalf  of  the  appellant.  He  acknowledged  the  applicant's
            criminal conviction could be ascertained from a simple internet
            search. This could, the evidence supported, in turn lead to the
            appellant's arrest/detention or so as to exhort money from him.




         6. The evidence supports a finding, which was not disputed  by  Mr
            Singh, that the appellant's conviction together with his mental
            health difficulties would more than likely lead to an inability
            on the part of the appellant to live  discretely,  even  if  he
            wanted to which the evidence indicated he would not.


         7. There is little doubt but that the appellant would, as a result
            of this, be at real risk of being  persecuted  because  of  his
            sexual orientation. Although not conceding the issue, Mr  Singh
            did not dispute  this.  I  am  satisfied  that  to  remove  the
            appellant  to  the  DRC  would  be  a  breach  of  the  Refugee
            Convention.


         8. In so far as Article 8  is  concerned  and  the  exceptions  to
            deportation, Mr Singh did not  challenge  the  summary  of  the
            evidence provided on behalf of the appellant.


         9. The appellant has not been lawfully resident in the UK for half
            his life although he has been resident in the UK for more  than
            half his life. When he did not have leave to remain, he  was  a
            child and dependent upon his parents for applications  made  to
            regularise his stay. Given his length of residence and spending
            his formative years in the UK,  it  can  safely  be  concluded,
            particularly in the absence of any  significant  countervailing
            features that he is culturally and socially integrated  in  the
            UK despite his criminal conviction.  The circumstances  of  the
            appellant's offence arose in part from his mental ill-health  -
            he suffers from Bipolar Affective Disorder and the presence  of
            his family in the UK constitute a  powerful  protective  factor
            against relapse. The appellant has no family in DRC.


        10. The appellant is  at  real  risk  of  being  persecuted  for  a
            Convention reason.


        11. I am satisfied, in all the circumstances,  that  the  appellant
            presents  very   compelling   circumstances   such   that   his
            deportation from the UK  in  accordance  with  the  deportation
            regime would be a breach of Article 8.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing  it  on  international
    protection and human rights grounds.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to  rule  13  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.


    I make that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008).





                                    Date 29th January 2020
[pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
