
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05748/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2019                             |On 8 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    discretion could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born on  [~]  1994.   She
    arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 24 January 2017.   On  2
    May 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.  The appellant's claim is  that
    she is gay and that, following a marriage which she  was  pressured  to
    enter into by her family, and  which  has  since  been  dissolved,  her
    family consider that she has dishonoured them  and  has  threatened  to
    kill her.

 3. On 30 May 2017, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum and humanitarian protection and  on  human  rights  grounds.
    Whilst the Secretary of State accepted that the appellant  had  married
    and that the marriage had subsequently been dissolved, the Secretary of
    State did not  accept  that  the  appellant  was  gay  or  that,  as  a
    consequence, she would be at risk from her family on return to Albania.



The First-tier Tribunal Decision

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    promulgated on 21 February 2018, Judge Cohen dismissed the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  The judge made an adverse  credibility  finding
    and rejected the appellant's account that she is gay and so would be at
    risk on return to Albania.  The judge  also  found  that,  even  if  he
    accepted the appellant's account, her claim failed as she would be able
    to obtain a 'sufficiency of protection' from the Albanian  authorities.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  26
    August 2018, the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ Chapman)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

The Issues

 6. The appellant's grounds, which were developed by Ms Solanki in her oral
    submissions, fall  under  three  headings.   Ground  1  challenges  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding on a number  of  bases.   Ground  2
    challenges  the  judge's  finding  in  relation  to   'sufficiency   of
    protection' on the basis that at para 35 the judge was wrong to  prefer
    the decision of LC (Albania) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 351 to  the  expert
    report on the erroneous assumption that  LC  (Albania)  was  a  country
    guidance decision when, in fact, it was a  decision  of  the  Court  of
    Appeal that was not concerned with country guidance at all.   Ground  3
    challenges the judge's decision to dismiss the appeal under Art  8,  in
    particular in the application of para 276ADE of the  Immigration  Rules
    (HC 395 as amended) in concluding that there were not "very significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's integration in Albania.

 7. During  the  course  of  the  parties'  submissions,  Mr  Howells,  who
    represented the Secretary of State, accepted that  Ground  2  was  made
    out, in that LC (Albania) was not a country guidance case and the judge
    was wrong in para 35 to so regard it.  However, he submitted that error
    would not be material unless the appellant  could  establish  that  the
    adverse credibility finding was flawed under Ground 1.

 8. It was common ground between the parties that Ground  3  was  parasitic
    upon Ground 1 as the only arguable basis upon which the appellant could
    succeed under para 276ADE(1)(vi) in establishing that there were  "very
    significant obstacles" to her integration in Albania was if  she  could
    establish the adverse consequences to her on return as a result of  her
    sexual orientation.

 9. As a consequence, both representatives' submissions focused upon Ground
    1.

10. Ms Solanki made a number of detailed points, relying upon paras 7-23 of
    her grounds.  It became apparent  during  the  course  of  Mr  Howells'
    submissions that he accepted that a number of these  points  were  well
    taken.

11. I turn now to consider the judge's reasons for his adverse  credibility
    finding at paras 26-34 and the detailed submissions made by Ms  Solanki
    and Mr Howells.

The Judge's Reasoning

12. The appellant's claim is that she is gay.  She claims that she began to
    experience feelings for members of her own gender when she  was  around
    18 years of age and she had her first relationship at  university  when
    she was 18 years old.  She claims that  she  was  not  open  about  her
    sexuality because she  feared  being  ostracised  or  worse.   She  was
    pressurised by her family to marry a man ("D") who lived in the UK.  In
    November 2016, she went  through  a  religious  marriage  with  him  in
    Albania.  However, as a result of her sexuality, the marriage  was  not
    successful and ended on 18 April 2017.  When she  informed  her  family
    about this, she was told that she had damaged  the  family  honour  and
    that, having told them that she is gay, they threatened to kill her  if
    she returned to Albania.

13. At paras 26-34 of his determination, the judge  gave  his  reasons  for
    disbelieving the appellant's account as follows:

         "26. The appellant  claims  to  fear  persecution  upon  return  to
             Albania as a result of her sexuality.   She  claims  to  be  a
             lesbian.

         27.  The appellant was  apprehended  by  immigration  officers  and
             interviewed.  She indicated that she had come  to  the  UK  to
             form  a  family  unit  with  her  husband   and   his   child.
             Furthermore, she underwent an asylum interview and  still  did
             not raise a claim in respect of her  sexuality  claiming  that
             she was scared due to religious and family reasons because she
             had left her husband and damaged the family  honour.   I  find
             that if the appellant genuinely feared persecution due to  her
             sexuality that  she  would  have  raised  this  claim  at  the
             earliest available opportunity and find her failure to  do  so
             to be damaging to her credibility.

         28.  The appellant claimed that she came  to  the  UK  because  she
             hoped that she could live openly and like the freedom that she
             experienced in the UK.  I find this to be discrepant with  the
             appellant's actions in failing to disclose her sexuality  when
             given the opportunity in the interviews referred to above.

         29.  The appellant claimed that she  could  not  tell  her  parents
             about her sexuality because she feared them and their reaction
             and she could not disclose her sexuality in interview  because
             she was afraid that information concerning the same would find
             its way back to the Albanian community and to her family.   In
             these circumstances, I find the appellants evidence  that  she
             disclosed her claimed sexuality  to  her  family  of  her  own
             accord to be discrepant with her earlier evidence and  further
             damaging to her credibility.

         30.  The appellant claimed to enjoy the freedom that  she  felt  in
             the UK but despite this, when in London where there  are  many
             LGBT groups and clubs did not attend any of the same  which  I
             find to be further indicative of the fact that  the  appellant
             is not a lesbian as claimed by her.  The appellant has not had
             any relationships since she has been in the UK.

         31.  I acknowledge that the appellant has produced an expert report
             in support of her claim, but this accepts her  credibility  at
             face value and the writer did not interview the appellant  and
             I find that it is of limited value.

         32.  The appellant has produced a letter from Hoops  and  Loops  in
             support of her claim.  It indicates  that  the  appellant  has
             participated in  groups  and  discussed  her  sexuality.   The
             appellant  however  is  an  intelligent  woman  who   attended
             university in Albania and spoke English before me.  I find the
             fact that the appellant participated in such groups and  spoke
             about her claimed sexuality  to  an  individual  within  those
             groups does not significantly advance the  appellant's  asylum
             claim.

         33.  The appellant came to the UK illegally despite  being  married
             to a British citizen.  She has  not  satisfactorily  explained
             why  she  took  such  action.   She  did  not   approach   the
             authorities until she was apprehended by immigration officers.
              I find the appellants actions to be extremely damaging to her
             credibility and indicative of the fact  that  the  appellant's
             motivation was to come to the UK by any means and  has  little
             regard for the immigration laws of this country.  I find  this
             to be indicative of the fact that the  appellant  after  being
             arrested and detained and following her  screening  interview,
             received advice and raised a late fabricated claim for  asylum
             based on sexuality.   I  find  the  appellant  to  be  totally
             lacking in credibility.

         34.  As indicated above, the appellant came to the UK illegally and
             failed  to  claim  political  asylum  until   apprehended   by
             immigration officers and having regard to  Section  8  of  the
             Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act
             2004,  I  find  that  the  appellant's   immigration   history
             significantly damages her credibility."

14. Then at paras  36-37  the  judge  continued  and  reached  his  adverse
    conclusion as follows:

         "36. There are further discrepancies in  the  appellant's  evidence
             and evidence which I find to be implausible but which  I  will
             not set out in further detail herein.   I  conclude  that  the
             appellant has fabricated her asylum claim in its entirety  and
             find her to be lacking in credibility.

         37.  In the  light  of  the  inconsistent,  vague  and  implausible
             account provided by the appellant which is lacking in cohesive
             detail, I find that the appellant has  not  demonstrated  that
             she is part of a particular social group and/or that she would
             face persecution at the hands of her family members or society
             upon return to Albania or based upon her  sexuality  that  she
             has a well-founded fear  of  persecution.   I  find  that  the
             appellant's asylum claim is bound to fail.  I do not find that
             the appellant will be returning to Albania as  a  lone  single
             woman and  find  that  she  is  in  contact  with  her  family
             members."



Discussion

15. As I have already indicated, Ms Solanki made a number of  points  under
    Ground 1.

16. First, she submitted that the judge had failed to take into account, in
    assessing the appellant's credibility, that the Secretary of State  had
    accepted in para 26  of  the  refusal  letter  that  she  had  given  a
    consistent account regarding her marriage to "D"  and  the  effects  of
    this on her relationship with her family in Albania and so had accepted
    that aspect of her claim.

17. Whilst the judge made no reference to the  respondent's  acceptance  of
    this part of her claim, the judge  no  doubt  had  fully  in  mind  the
    position of both the appellant  and  respondent  at  the  hearing.   In
    itself, the judge's failure to refer to this, if his other reasons  for
    disbelieving the appellant are  sustainable,  would  not  amount  to  a
    material error in his reasoning.

18. However, there are a number of difficulties with the judge's reasoning.



19. Secondly, Ms Solanki submitted that the judge had been  wrong  to  take
    into account that the appellant had not disclosed her claim based  upon
    her sexuality either at her 'mitigating circumstances' interview on  22
    March 2017 nor in her screening interview on 8 May 2017.   She  pointed
    out that the appellant had set out  the  basis  of  her  claim  in  her
    substantive asylum interview on 9 May 2017 and the judge had failed  to
    take into account that at her  screening  interview  she  had  said  at
    section 4.2 that she would prefer "a  woman"  when  specifically  asked
    whether she had a preference for being interviewed by a man  or  woman.
    Ms Solanki also submitted that the appellant explained in her  evidence
    why she did not disclose her sexuality and basis of her claim  earlier.



20. Thirdly, Ms Solanki submitted that the judge was wrong in  para  30  to
    take into account that the appellant had not attended "LGBT groups  and
    clubs" despite living in London and had not had any relationships since
    she was in the UK.  Further, Ms Solanki submitted  that,  by  contrast,
    the judge criticised the appellant in para 32 for  having  subsequently
    "participated in groups and discussed her sexuality".

21. Mr Howells accepted that the judge had been wrong to take into  account
    her lack of involvement with LGBT groups and  clubs  and  not  to  have
    formed any gay relationships in the UK.

22. Fourthly, Ms Solanki  submitted  that  the  judge  had  been  wrong  to
    disregard the expert's report in para 31 on the basis that  the  expert
    had  accepted  the  appellant's  "credibility  at  face  value".    She
    submitted that the expert  had  not  done  so  but,  in  contrast,  had
    identified important  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account  as  being
    plausible in the light of his expert knowledge.

23. Dr Tahiraj's report is referred to by the judge at para 14 as follows:

         "Additionally provided to me  was  an  expert  report  from  Doctor
         Tahiraj who finds that the appellant's testimony is coherent and  a
         common story of a daughter brought up under Kanun  and  coerced  to
         marry despite being a lesbian.  The family comes from a traditional
         area where Kanun law is still practised.  The appellant would be at
         risk from  her  family  members  upon  return.   LGBT  people  face
         significant barriers in openly  practising  their  sexuality  human
         rights in Albania.  Implementation of the law is problematic.   The
         appellant would be at risk upon return."

24. Mr Howells acknowledged that perhaps the judge could have given  fuller
    consideration to the report than the brief statement in para 31 that it
    was of "limited value" because it accepted the appellant's  account  at
    face value and that the  expert  had  not  interviewed  the  appellant.
    During the course of his submissions, however, Mr Howells accepted that
    the judge had been wrong, in effect, to reject the expert report on the
    basis that the expert's reasoning was based upon an acceptance  of  the
    credibility of the appellant's account.  He accepted, in response to my
    enquiry, that the report raised relevant  matters  to  the  appellant's
    credibility arising out of the expert's opinion  that  aspects  of  her
    account were plausible.

25. Fifthly, Ms Solanki submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  properly
    consider the evidence, and in particular that of the appellant, why she
    had come to the  UK  illegally  despite  being  married  to  a  British
    citizen.  In para 53 of her witness statement,  Ms  Solanki  submitted,
    she had explained that "D" and her father made arrangements for her  to
    come to the UK illegally where she lived with "D" and his son.

26. Sixthly, Ms Solanki submitted that the judge had simply been  wrong  in
    para 34 of his determination to apply s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 to the appellant on  the  basis
    that  she  had  failed  to  make  her  asylum  claim  before  she   was
    "apprehended by immigration officers".  Ms Solanki  submitted,  and  Mr
    Howells accepted in his submissions, that s.8(6) of the 2004 Act  could
    not apply as the appellant had sought to  claim  asylum  prior  to  her
    being arrested even though she had been unsuccessful in doing so.

27. Finally, Ms Solanki submitted that the judge had erred  by  failing  to
    consider large parts of the appellant's account.  He had failed to give
    consideration to her account of the emergence of  her  sexual  identity
    and claimed gay relationship in Albania (beginning at  para  7  of  her
    witness statement); he failed to assess her evidence concerning why she
    did not disclose her sexuality  (see  pages  6  to  9  of  her  witness
    statement).  Ms Solanki also submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider the GP's report and  the  Rule  35  report  in  assessing  her
    credibility.

28. Whilst I do not accept all the points raised by Ms Solanki, I do accept
    a significant number of them such that I am satisfied that the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding is flawed.

29. First, I accept, as indeed Mr Howells  conceded,  that  the  judge  was
    wrong to doubt the appellant's claimed sexuality on the  basis  of  her
    failure to take part in "LGBT groups and clubs" in London  and  not  to
    have formed any gay relationships since being in the UK.  The danger of
    relying upon reasoning based upon "stereotyped notions" was  recognised
    by the CJEU in the case of A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid
    en Justitie (Case C-148/13 to C-150/13) [2015] Imm AR 403 especially at
    [59]-[63]).  The fact that an individual does  not  overtly  engage  in
    social activities focused upon persons of their own sexual  orientation
    or, indeed, form a sexual relationship with a person of the same sex is
    not a safe indication, one way or another, of their sexuality.

30. In addition, when  the  appellant  had  subsequently  "participated  in
    groups and discussed her sexuality", the judge counted this against her
    in para 32 of his determination; in the sense that having  done  so  he
    concluded that it did "not significantly advance the appellant's asylum
    claim".  There is a very real sense in which the judge  approached  the
    appellant's behaviour on the basis that she was 'damned if she did  and
    damned if she didn't'.

31. Secondly, the judge was wrong to disregard the expert  report  -  which
    is, in effect, what he did by giving it "little weight" - on the  basis
    that the expert had not interviewed the appellant and  his  conclusions
    were based upon accepting her credibility.  As a reading of the  expert
    report makes plain, and the judge's brief summation of it  at  para  14
    sets out, the expert identified a number of aspects of the  appellant's
    claim which were plausible  given  his  expert  knowledge  of  Albania.
    Those opinions were relevant and, although not determinative, could not
    simply be disregarded in assessing the credibility of  the  appellant's
    account.  The fact that the appellant had not been interviewed did  not
    affect the expert's opinion on these issues.  It was not justifiable to
    conclude that he had, in effect, reached  the  view  on  the  basis  of
    accepting the appellant's credibility.

32. Thirdly, as Mr Howells accepted, the judge was in error in para  34  in
    applying s.8  (in  all  probability  s.8(6))  of  the  2004  Act.   The
    appellant had not claimed asylum only after she had been  "apprehended"
    by Immigration Officers.  It was  accepted  before  the  judge  by  the
    Presenting Officer that she had sought to claim asylum prior  to  being
    arrested and subject to her 'mitigating circumstances' interview.   The
    judge was, therefore, wrong to take into account  that  aspect  of  the
    appellant's "behaviour" as "damaging" of her credibility under  s.8  of
    the 2004 Act.

33. In addition, I have considerable misgivings about the judge's treatment
    of the appellant's failure to disclose her sexuality (and the basis  of
    her asylum claim) prior to her asylum interview.  There are  very  real
    dangers in treating the failure to disclose  a  claim  in  a  screening
    interview  as  a  reliable  basis  for  doubting  the  veracity  of   a
    subsequently made  claim,  especially  when  that  claim  is  disclosed
    shortly afterwards (here it was one day later) in a substantive  asylum
    interview.  Particular caution needs to be exercised in a case, such as
    the present, where an individual may be required to disclose  sensitive
    matters about their private or sexual life (see A, B, C at [64]-[65])).
     Here, at least, the judge should have had regard to the fact that even
    in her screening interview the appellant said she would  prefer  to  be
    interviewed by a "woman" interviewer.  That should, at least, raise the
    potential exculpatory argument  that  she  did  not  disclose  personal
    aspects of her life for understandable (and good) reasons.   The  judge
    did not engage with the  evidence  that  was  relied  upon  before  him
    relevant to that latter issue.

34. Finally, in relation to the final points raised by Ms  Solanki  in  her
    submissions, the judge's reasoning at paras 26-34 and 36-37,  makes  no
    reference to  those  aspects  of  her  account  concerning  her  sexual
    relationship in Albania and her evidence concerning  the  emergence  of
    her understanding of her own sexuality.  These were, in effect,  "core"
    parts of her claim.  The judge was clearly aware of this  evidence  but
    made no reference to it, nor did he make any assessment of it,  in  his
    reasons and in reaching his adverse credibility finding.  That was,  in
    addition to the points I have identified above, a further error in  his
    determination.

35. It is unnecessary for me to deal, in any detail, with the remainder  of
    Ms Solanki's submissions.  Suffice it for me to say that  I  would  not
    accept that the judge failed in any material way to take  into  account
    the GP's letter or the Rule 35 report.  However, for the reasons I have
    given above, the judge's  assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility
    entailed a number of errors which cumulatively materially affected  his
    conclusion.  That conclusion is, therefore, legally flawed and must  be
    set aside.

36. As Ground 1 is made out, it was  accepted  that  the  judge's  decision
    could not stand as Ground 2 was conceded by Mr  Howells.   Finally,  it
    was common ground that the Art 8 decision could not stand if Grounds  1
    and 2 were established.

Decision

37.  Thus,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss   the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

38. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo re-hearing before a judge other than Judge Cohen.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             18 January 2019
