
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/05415/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                     |Promulgated                             |
|On 29 November 2019                  |           On 23 December 2019          |
|                                     |                                        |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                    D k i
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr G Dolan, instructed by Sriharans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is appealing against a decision of Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Randall ("the judge") promulgated on 15 August 2019 to
    dismiss his protection and human rights claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, from Helmand Province. He
    was born on 18 June 2000 and arrived in the UK in June 2012.

 3. In summary, the appellant states that:

      a) When he was 11 years old armed Taliban fighters came to his family
         home, took their food, and said that if the family informed they
         would come and destroy them. This had not happened previously.

      b) The following day American soldiers came to the house, and shot his
         father (who looked like a Taliban because of how he dressed).

      c) Later that day the appellant's uncle took the appellant, along with
         his mother and brothers, by tractor to his house in the same
         village.

      d) The next day, the appellant's uncle told him that his life was in
         danger because the Taliban were told by neighbours that he was the
         one who informed the authorities.

      e) He stayed in hiding, at his uncle's home, for about a week, and
         then began his journey to Europe.

 4. The judge did not accept that events occurred as the appellant claimed.
    The judge went on to find that even if they did, the appellant would
    not now be of interest to the Taliban given how much time had elapsed.



 5. The judge found that as there was no risk of persecution in the
    appellant's home area it was not necessary to consider whether it would
    be reasonable to expect him to relocate to Kabul.

 6. The judge then considered Article 8 ECHR.  The judge stated at
    paragraphs 39 - 40:

         As far as Article 8 is concerned the relevant standard is the
         balance of probabilities.  It is not argued that the appellant has
         family life here so that issue does not arise.  As to his private
         life the appellant is over 18 so paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) does not
         assist even though he has been here for over seven years.  He had
         not been here for seven years when he turned 18 on 18 June 2018
         having arrived on 17 June 2012.  He is still under 25 but will not
         have been here for half of his life until 2022, so paragraph
         276ADE(1)(iii) does not presently assist him either.  Finally,
         given my findings above, both on risk on return and on the
         appellant's cultural beliefs, despite the decision in Kamara and
         the argument that the appellant may still be regarded as a child in
         Afghanistan until he marries, I find that he has not established
         that there are very serious obstacles to his integration into
         Afghanistan, so paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) does not assist him.

         As far as Article 8 outside the Rules is concerned, under Section
         117B I am to give limited weight to private life established whilst
         the appellant has been in the United Kingdom precariously.  That
         covers all of the time the appellant has been here and that the
         appellant's commendable engagement with the education system here
         and the supporting letters from his former foster parent and social
         worker, I take account of the fact that he has now been here for
         over seven years.  I also take account of the skills he has learned
         here, including mechanics and English.  These will assist him in
         Afghanistan as well.  Overall, the appellant has not established on
         the balance of probabilities that it would be unduly harsh to
         return him to Afghanistan such as to breach Article 8.

Grounds of Appeal

 7. The grounds of appeal raise four distinct grounds. In granting
    permission, the Upper Tribunal stated in the "reasons" section that the
    first two grounds were not arguable. However, the grant was not limited
    in the "decision" section. Therefore, having regard to Safi and others
    (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 00388 (IAC), I invited Mr
    Dolan to pursue the first two grounds if he so wished. He declined to
    do so and limited his submissions to the third and fourth grounds of
    appeal.

 8. The first of the grounds advanced by Mr Dolan (ground 3) concerns
    paragraph 22 of the decision, where the judge stated:

         "Thirdly, why, after his father was targeted by the Americans, was
         the appellant [sic] was fearful of the Taliban?  The explanation
         given was that the Taliban thought that (overnight) the appellant
         had betrayed his own father to the Americans after their very first
         visit to his house; but, on any view, this appears unlikely
         behaviour to attribute to an 11 year old."

 9. Mr Dolan submits that the judge in this paragraph allowed his own
    perspective and influences to affect his assessment of what would be
    plausible and was effectively seeking to decide for himself what the
    Taliban might have thought an eleven year old would do. The grounds
    state that this is the type of error identified by the Court of Appeal
    in Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223
    where it is highlighted that a judge needs to be:

         "cautious before finding an account to be inherently incredible,
         because there is a considerable risk that he will be over
         influenced by his own views on what is or is not plausible, and
         those views will have inevitably been influenced by his own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of our own
         society".

10. The second submission made (the fourth ground of appeal) is that the
    assessment of proportionality under Article 8 was inadequate.  In
    particular it was argued that the judge failed to adequately consider
    how young the appellant was when you left Afghanistan, how young he
    still is (and that he would be treated as a child in Afghanistan), and
    that he lacks contact with family or friends in against. Mr Dolan
    argued that there was a real risk of destitution on return that had not
    been adequately considered.

11. Ms Jones submitted that when the decision is read as a whole it becomes
    clear that there is no material error. With respect to ground 4, she
    highlighted paragraph 7.6 of the decision where the judge noted the
    evidence of the appellant that he lives independently, shopping and
    cooking for himself. She drew attention to the finding of the judge at
    paragraph 27 that the appellant may have exaggerated his lack of
    contact with family in order to strengthen his claim.

Analysis

12. The grounds of appeal quote, and Mr Dolan relied on, paragraph 25 of Y
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223,
    where the Court of Appeal stressed the importance of viewing an account
    of events in the context of the conditions in the country from which
    the appellant comes and of being cautious before finding an account
    inherently incredible. These are indeed important principles. However,
    this does not mean a judge cannot, applying common sense to a
    particular situation, reach the conclusion that an account (or an
    aspect of an account) is implausible. It is important, when considering
    plausibility, to keep in mind what the Court of Appeal in Y stated at
    paragraphs 26 - 27, not just paragraph 25. I therefore set out below
    paragraphs 25-27 of Y:

         25. There seems to me to be very little dispute between the parties
         as to the legal principles applicable to the approach which an
         adjudicator, now known as an immigration judge, should adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The fundamental one is that he
         should be cautious before finding an account to be inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that he will be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or is not plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been influenced by his own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of our own
         society.  It is therefore important that he should seek to view an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues, in the
         context of conditions in the country from which the appellant
         comes.  The dangers were well described in an article by Sir Thomas
         Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by the IAT in
         Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken from an article in
         Current Legal Problems.  Sir Thomas Bingham said this:

             "'An English judge may have, or think that he has, a shrewd
             idea of how a Lloyds Broker or a Bristol wholesaler, or a
             Norfolk farmer, might react in some situation which is
             canvassed in the course of a case but he may, and I think
             should, feel very much more uncertain about the reactions of a
             Nigerian merchant, or an Indian ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav
             banker.  Or even, to take a more homely example, a Sikh
             shopkeeper trading in Bradford. No judge worth his salt could
             possibl[y] assume that men of different nationalities,
             educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments would
             act as he might think he would have done or even - which may
             be quite different - in accordance with his concept of what a
             reasonable man would have done."

         26 None of this, however, means that an adjudicator is required to
         take at face value an account of facts proffered by an appellant,
         no matter how contrary to common sense and experience of human
         behaviour the account may be.  The decision maker is not expected
         to suspend his own judgment, nor does Mr Singh contend that he
         should.  In appropriate cases, he is entitled to find that an
         account of events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to be
         incapable of belief.  The point was well put in the Awala case by
         Lord Brodie at paragraph 24 when he said this:

             "... the tribunal of fact need not necessarily accept an
             applicant's account simply because it is not contradicted at
             the relevant hearing.  The tribunal of fact is entitled to
             make reasonable findings based on implausibilities, common
             sense and rationality, and may reject evidence if it is not
             consistent with the probabilities affecting the case as a
             whole".

         He then added a little later:

             "... while a decision on credibility must be reached
             rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled to draw
             on his common sense and his ability, as a practical and
             informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".

          27. I agree.  A decision maker is entitled to regard an account as
         incredible by such standards, but he must take care not to do so
         merely because it would not seem reasonable if it had happened in
         this country.  In essence, he must look through the spectacles
         provided by the information he has about conditions in the country
         in question.  That is, in effect, what Neuberger LJ was saying in
         the case of HK and I do not regard Chadwick LJ in the passage
         referred to as seeking to disagree.

13. At paragraph 19 of the decision the judge stated that despite not
    accepting some of the points raised by the respondent, there were
    "other issues of concern about the merits of the claim". One of these,
    which is set out at paragraph 22 of the decision (quoted above in
    paragraph 8) is that the judge found it was unlikely the Taliban would
    have believed that the appellant had "betrayed his own father to the
    Americans after their very first visit to his house".

14. This finding is problematic - and undermines the judge's assessment of
    the appellant's credibility - for two reasons. Firstly, the judge
    appears at paragraph 22 to have misconstrued the appellant's evidence
    which was not that the Taliban believed he betrayed his father to the
    Americans, but that they believed he had betrayed them to the
    Americans. It is notable that when summarising the respondent's
    position (at paragraph 2.6.2 of the decision) and the appellant's
    evidence (at paragraphs 5.1.3 and 5.3.4) the judge did not make any
    reference to the appellant claiming the Taliban believed he betrayed
    his father, and there is no explanation why this is raised for the
    first time at paragraph 22.

15. Secondly, there is no adequate explanation in the decision as to why it
    would be "unlikely" for the Taliban to accuse the appellant of
    betraying them (or, indeed, his father). It was accepted by the judge
    (at paragraph 24) that the appellant's village was contested and that
    it was plausible the Taliban and Americans both went to it. In this
    context, it does not, on its face, seem implausible or inherently
    unlikely that if American soldiers went to the appellant's family home
    the day after armed Taliban fighters had been there the Taliban might
    have been suspicious that someone from the household had informed the
    Americans; and given the appellant, following his father's death, would
    have been the eldest male member of the household, it would not seem
    implausible that the Taliban would be interested in him. I accept Mr
    Dolan's submission that in finding this aspect of the appellant's
    account implausible the judge fell into the error identified in Y.

16. However, although I accept that the judge made the error identified in
    ground 3 of the grounds of appeal, I am not satisfied that the error
    was material. This is because there has been no challenge in the
    grounds of appeal to the judge's finding at paragraph 35 that even if
    the events occurred as claimed the appellant would not be of interest
    to the Taliban after so long.

17. The appellant's account, taken at its highest, does not plausibly
    explain why, after over 7 years have elapsed and huge changes have
    happened in the region (including the displacement of the entire
    village - see paragraph 5.3.7 of the decision) the Taliban would remain
    interested in him, given that the only reason given they had any
    interest in him was that he had told the Americans they had come to his
    house and taken food. Whilst it is plausible that the Taliban would
    have sought out the appellant after the Americans came to his family
    home and killed his father (in order to find out what happened and
    punish/kill the appellant if they thought he had informed the Americans
    that the Taliban had been at the home) there does not seem to be any
    basis for believing that they would maintain an interest in the
    appellant for over 7 years. In this regard it is relevant that the
    appellant, by his own account, was able to reside with his uncle in the
    same village for a week following the incident without the Taliban
    managing to locate him, despite the presence of informers in the
    village. The appellant's ability to do this indicates that he was not a
    priority for the Taliban even in the week following the death of his
    father. This supports the conclusion of the judge at paragraph 35 that
    the appellant would not, 7 years later, be of interest to the Taliban.

18. I am not persuaded that there are any errors in the judge's approach to
    article 8 ECHR. Although the assessment at paragraphs 39 - 40 is brief,
    reading the decision as a whole it is apparent that when considering
    both obstacles to integration under paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the
    Immigration Rules and proportionality of removal under article 8(2),
    the judge has had regard to the following factors:

      a) the appellant's age when he left Afghanistan,

      b) the length of time he has lived in the UK,

      c) his concern that he would be treated as a child in Afghanistan
         until he marries, and

      d) his education and achievements in the UK, and his ability to deploy
         skills learnt in the UK in Afghanistan.

19. The grounds of appeal submit that there was inadequate consideration of
    the appellant's youth when he left Afghanistan. However, the judge
    clearly had regard to this. Although not emphasised in paragraphs 39 -
    40, these paragraphs need to be considered in the context of the
    decision as a whole, where it is clear that the judge has had the
    appellant's age at the forefront of his mind. The judge began his
    asylum credibility assessment by reminding himself that the appellant
    was only 13 when the asylum interview took place, that the events at
    issue occurred when he was only a child, and that he was only 19 at the
    time the hearing. The judge referred to the respondent's guidance on
    children and noted its significance "especially as the most important
    evidence still relied on was elicited when the appellant was only 13."
    Moreover, at paragraphs 17-19 of the decision the judge criticised the
    respondent for failing to follow his own guidance and make appropriate
    allowances for the appellant's age. Although these references to the
    appellant's age are in the section of the decision concerned with
    asylum, there is no reason to believe that the judge did not keep them
    in mind when assessing article 8.

20. The grounds of appeal submit, also, that the judge had inadequate
    regard to the argument advanced by the appellant that he would be
    treated as a child in Afghanistan. However, this is explicitly referred
    to in paragraph 39. The judge did not dispute that the appellant may be
    treated as a child, but found that despite this there would not be very
    significant obstacle to integration. The criticism in the grounds,
    therefore, amounts to no more than a challenge to the weight given to
    this factor. However, that was a matter for the judge.

21. The grounds submit that the judge failed to take into account that the
    appellant would not be able to support himself. However, although dealt
    with only briefly, at paragraph 40 the judge considered the appellant's
    capacity for earning a living in Afghanistan where he found that the
    appellant would be able to utilise the education in mechanics he had
    received in the UK, as well as his English-language ability. Based on
    the evidence before the judge, I am satisfied that it was open to him
    to conclude that a healthy male Afghan educated in the UK and able to
    speak English would not become destitute or be unable to earn a
    livelihood on return.

22. A further point made in the grounds is that there was a failure to
    consider the appellant's lack of contact with family or friends. There
    is no reference in paragraphs 39 - 40 to whether the appellant would
    have the assistance of family in Afghanistan. At paragraph 27 the judge
    found that the appellant gave "curious" answers to questions about his
    family and that one explanation for this would be that he had
    exaggerated lack of contact in order to strengthen his claim. However,
    there is no clear finding as to whether the appellant would have family
    support on return. That said, the absence of such a finding does not
    affect the outcome because the conclusion of the judge is that even
    without support of family removal would not be disproportionate.

23. The article 8 assessment, although brief, includes consideration of all
    material factors and reaches a conclusion that is not inconsistent with
    the evidence that was before the judge.  I therefore reject the fourth
    grounds of appeal.

24. The appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain an error on a
point of law that is material to the outcome. I therefore do not set aside
the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


|Signed                              |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|                                    |                                    |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan       |                                    |
|                                    |Dated: 19 December 2019             |

