
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-sc-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05309/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 January 2017                            |On 23 January 2017            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                    M F H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is an Iranian national born  on  13  October
    1999.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the respondent  dated  9  May  2016  to  refuse  to  grant  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection under  paragraphs  336  and  339M/339F  of  the
    Immigration Rules HC  395  as  amended.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 10 November 2016 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Bart-
    Stewart dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

      1) inconsistent findings;

      2) plausibility findings;

      3) error of fact;

      4) approach to expert report;

      5) failure to have regard  to  material  matters  -  the  age  of  the
         appellant.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on  the  basis,  primarily,  that  the
    judge appeared to have paid little attention to  the  appellant's  age.
    The appellant was 16 when he was interviewed by the respondent but  the
    potential impact of the appellant's age on the appellant's evidence was
    not considered.

 4. Mr Bradshaw accepted that at paragraph [23] of her decision Judge Bart-
    Stewart noted the appellant's age and the fact that he was just over 16
    at the time of his screening interview.  Mr  Bradshaw  pointed  to  the
    fact that the judge resolved part  of  his  claim  in  the  appellant's
    favour, at [24].  However the judge went on to make  negative  findings
    including implausibility findings against the  appellant  at  [28]  and
    [29].  The judge also criticised the appellant's vagueness without  any
    regard to  the  appellant's  age  providing  an  explanation  for  that
    vagueness.  Mr Bradshaw submitted that the judge had no regard  to  the
    fact that the asylum interview disclosed that this was the  appellant's
    standard response at interview and that he was not just vague  on  this
    issue and therefore one possible  explanation  could  have  potentially
    have been his age and lack of maturity and  it  was  incumbent  on  the
    judge  to  consider  this  and  give  reasons  for  not  accepting  the
    appellant's account on this ground.  Mr  Bradshaw  submitted  that  his
    skeleton argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  also  addressed  the
    issue of the appellant's age and this was not considered by the  judge.



 5. In  relation  to  ground  1  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  made
    inconsistent findings; at paragraph [24] of the determination the judge
    gave the appellant "the benefit of the doubt",  "for  similar  reasons"
    with regards to his claim that there was a raid on his  house  observed
    by his uncle (as stated in his interview) together with his explanation
    that it was his assumption (when he had said his  screening  interview)
    that Ahmed had been arrested, tortured and given his name.   The  judge
    had also found that nothing turned on  the  issue  as  to  whether  the
    appellant said "his friend" or his father's friend.  However,  at  [28]
    the judge considered it implausible that a raid happened to have  taken
    place on the very same day when his uncle  happened  to  be  around  to
    witness it.  Again  at  [29]  the  judge  stated  that  there  was  "no
    explanation for him saying that Ahmed was arrested, tortured  and  gave
    his name even if his uncle had witnessed his house being raided."

 6. It was Mr Bradshaw's  submission  that  if  the  judge  had  given  the
    appellant the benefit of the doubt on this issue at one  point  in  the
    determination it was  an  error  of  law  to  elsewhere  regard  it  as
    implausible or lacking explanation.  Had the  judge  not  believed  the
    account of the uncle witnessing the raid or  of  the  appellant  having
    assumed Ahmed gave his name, he would not be expected to be  given  the
    benefit of the doubt as he was at paragraph  [24].   It  was  submitted
    that the findings were inconsistent and impossible to reconcile.

 7. It was further submitted that this  error  goes  to  the  core  of  the
    appellant's  account  and  credibility  assessment  and  is   therefore
    material as it cannot be said that it would have made no difference  to
    the outcome.

 8. In relation to ground 2 Mr Bradshaw relied on HK [2006] EWCA  Civ  1037
    and what was said there in relation to  caution  being  exercised  when
    considering an account to be implausible.  It was  submitted  that  the
    judge gave no reasons why she considered it  implausible  that  a  raid
    would have taken place the very same day  when  the  appellant's  uncle
    happened to be around to witness that raid and that it was  implausible
    that his uncle could have located an agent  and  arranged  for  him  to
    leave the country the next day.  It was submitted that coincidence does
    not render a matter inherently implausible  and  the  judge  failed  to
    assess the matter in context; the arrest of Ahmed being something which
    appeared to have happened near in  time  to  the  raid.   It  might  be
    thought, the closer in time the arrest, the more likely a raid  on  the
    appellant's house taking place.  None of  this  is  considered  by  the
    judge in reaching an implausibility finding.

 9. Mr Bradshaw submitted, on ground 3, that there had been no challenge by
    the respondent in relation to the father's death by hanging  ten  years
    before  or  his  brother's  disappearance  and  there  was  no   cross-
    examination on this issue.  There was some challenge by the  Presenting
    Officer in submissions at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  Mr  Bradshaw
    pointed out at that point that there had been no  cross-examination  on
    this issue.  However the judge went on to refer to the  father's  death
    as allegedly occurring which suggests disbelief.

10. Mr Bradshaw submitted in respect of ground 4 that the judge  failed  to
    adequately address the expert report before her; other than setting out
    the details of the report she failed to consider it  further.   It  was
    submitted that at the very least the judge should have  had  regard  to
    the expert's  view  on  plausibility  when  making  her  assessment  on
    credibility as the judge had noted that it was Dr Fatah's view that the
    appellant's account of his dealings with some PDKI members  is  similar
    to what happens in reality, referring to the distribution  of  leaflets
    and considering it plausible a supporter would hold some party material
    for the purposes of distribution.  However there were  no  findings  on
    this report.  At the conclusion of paragraph [26] the judge  quoted  Dr
    Fatah's conclusion (at paragraph [128] of his report) that "however  it
    is unclear whether the authorities are aware of whether  Master  Hakeem
    is the son of an  executed  PDKI  member.   It  is  difficult  to  make
    definitive conclusions".  The judge then went on at [27] to state  that
    in relation to the substantive claim "that is really the heart  of  the
    matter".  However Mr Bradshaw submitted that that had not been disputed
    by the respondent.  It was also incumbent on the judge to  have  regard
    and make findings in relation to the expert's view.

11.  Mr  Walker  conceded  that  the  judge  had  made   inconsistent   and
    contradictory findings at paragraph [24] and then  paragraphs  [28]  of
    her decision, in appearing to give the appellant  the  benefit  of  the
    doubt in relation to the raid on his  house  and  his  assumption  that
    Ahmed had been arrested, and then reaching the opposite conclusion.  Mr
    Walker conceded that there  was  clear  conflict  in  the  findings  at
    paragraphs [24] and [28] and that, given that this was central  to  the
    appellant's credibility, such an error was material.  Mr Walker further
    conceded that the judge had made inadequate findings in relation to the
    expert report.

12. I was grateful for Mr  Walker's  indication.   Taken  cumulatively  the
    issues relied on by Mr Bradshaw and summarised above are sufficient  to
    render the decision and reasons  unsafe.   In  particular  the  judge's
    contradictory findings in relation to credibility  at  paragraphs  [24]
    and [28] are difficult to reconcile, as conceded by Mr Walker.   Whilst
    the judge's reliance on implausibility in itself is not an  error  this
    must be considered in the context of her findings in  relation  to  the
    appellant's vague evidence.   The  judge's  failure  to  make  adequate
    findings on either the relevance of the appellant's age or the comments
    of the expert in relation to that vagueness and claimed  implausibility
    materially undermines her credibility assessment.

13. I am satisfied therefore that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    falls to be set aside.   No  findings  are  preserved.   Under  Section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  courts  and  enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice  Statement  7.2,   the   nature   and   extent   of   judicial
         fact finding necessary for the decision to be remade is such  that
    it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    heard, de novo, by any judge other than other than Judge  Bart-Stewart.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside  and  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

The appellant is a minor.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies to  both  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is payable and therefore I make no fee award.

Signed                                  Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


