
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05435/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 12 October 2017                    |On 01 November 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    [V D]
                       (anonymity direction not MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Sabic, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Kainth (FtJ), promulgated on 14 July 2017, dismissing  the
        Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated  25  May
        2017 refusing his asylum claim.


   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Ukraine, date of birth [ ] 1991.  He
        claims to have entered the UK illegally on 10 August 2015.  He  was
        encountered during an enforcement visit on 16 March 2017. Following
        the issuance of removal directions for his return  to  Ukraine  the
        Appellant made an asylum claim.


     3. The Appellant fled Ukraine in August 2015 following  attacks  aimed
        at extorting money from him. In  September  2015  military  call-up
        papers were left for the Appellant at his parent's home. He did not
        answer the call-up papers and fears being  imprisoned  as  a  draft
        evader as a consequence. He additionally fears that the  conditions
        of military service in Ukraine would amount to a breach of  article
        3 ECHR, and that he would be forced to  perform  acts  contrary  to
        basic rules of conduct. The Appellant is Catholic and does not wish
        to fight a war which is against his religious beliefs.


     4. The Respondent accepted that the Appellant was beaten by  villagers
        for money. The Respondent additionally accepted that the  Appellant
        received a call-up notice instructing him to serve in the military.
        The Respondent did not however consider the Appellant would  be  of
        significant interest to the Ukrainian authorities if  returned,  or
        that he would face a risk of article 3 ill-treatment because of his
        failure  to  undergo  military  service  or  as  a  result  of  the
        conditions of military service, or that he  would  be  required  to
        engage in military acts contrary to basic rules of conduct.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The FtJ did not find  the  Appellant  a  wholly  credible  witness,
        rejecting his explanation for the delay in his  asylum  claim.  The
        FtJ did not however go behind the facts accepted by the  Respondent
        in her Reasons For Refusal Letter.  The  FtJ  noted  that,  to  the
        Appellant's knowledge, there were no current  judicial  proceedings
        against him due to his failure to sign the  call-up  papers  (there
        was no evidence before the FtJ  that  the  Appellant's  family  had
        signed the call-up papers on his behalf). The  FtJ  considered  the
        Country Guidance case of VB and Another (draft evaders  and  prison
        conditions) Ukraine CG  [2017]  UKUT  00079  (IAC)  (VB).  The  FtJ
        claimed Ms. Sabic had accepted that the appeal  could  not  succeed
        based on VB, and that she sought to distinguish VB by relying on an
        expert report from Dr Turaeva-Hoehne dated 16 June  2017.  At  [45]
        the FtJ quoted from Ms. Sabic's skeleton argument:


             It is important to note that the UT did not  consider  it  had
             sufficient country of origin information available to make any
             informed country guidance decision on  the  question  of  what
             conditions those mobilised into the Ukrainian army would  face
             [see paragraph 7 of VB]. Nonetheless, it is for this  Tribunal
             to assess the evidence available before it on this  point  and
             to make a determination.


     6. At [47] the FtJ posed for himself the question of what implications
        there  would  be  for  the  Appellant  should  he  refuse   to   be
        conscripted. The FtJ noted that there were no court proceedings  in
        Ukraine  against  the  Appellant  and  he  had   not   signed   any
        conscription papers. The FtJ  noted  that  a  failure  to  complete
        military service could constitute persecution  where  the  military
        service involved acts which were contrary to  the  basic  rules  of
        human conduct, or the conditions of military service  would  be  so
        harsh as to amount to persecution,  or  the  punishment  for  draft
        evasion was disproportionately harsh or severe. The FtJ referred to
        the September 2016 Country Information and Guidance (CIG) report on
        military service in Ukraine  and  expressed  his  concern  that  Dr
        Turaeva-Hoehne made no reference at all to VB in her report  or  to
        the documents  that  were  considered  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
        reaching their decision.


     7. At [49] the FtJ stated,


             I did not agree with the submission made on behalf of the
             Appellant that the expert report upon which reliance is made,
             provides accurate information with respect to purported
             violations of humanitarian concerns by the Ukrainian army and
             the general decline of standards in Ukraine.


     8. At [50] the FtJ noted  that  draft  evaders  do  not  automatically
        receive a custodial sentence and that one of the options  available
        to the Ukrainian authorities was  the  imposition  of  a  financial
        penalty. The FtJ comprehensively rejected the factors  advanced  by
        Ms. Sabic as being aggravating features increasing  the  likelihood
        of a custodial sentence  being  imposed  on  the  Appellant.  While
        accepting that the Appellant could potentially be  the  subject  of
        prosecution  under  the  Penal  Code  and  Administrative  Code  of
        Ukraine, the FtJ observed that this did not mean that the Appellant
        would  face  an  automatic  mandatory  custodial   sentence.   With
        reference to VB the FtJ concluded that the Appellant would not face
        any degrading treatment or punishment if returned to Ukraine.


     9. Having  found  that  the  Ukrainian  authorities  were  capable  of
        providing a sufficiency of protection to the Appellant  in  respect
        of the attacks from the criminal gang in the village, and that  the
        Appellant could,  alternatively,  avail  himself  of  the  internal
        relocation  alternative,  the  FtJ  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
        grounds.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

    10. The grounds note, as a preliminary point, that Ms.  Sabic  did  not
        concede that the Appellant could not succeed on the basis of VB and
        that she did not seek to distinguish VB.  The  grounds  essentially
        contend that the FtJ provided no reasons for his assertion at [49],
        as detailed in paragraph 7 above. Not only was the FtJ's finding at
        [49] unreasoned, he failed to  engage  at  all  with  the  evidence
        detailed in the expert report,  and  his  reference  to  'purported
        violations  of  humanitarian  concerns'  and  'general  decline  of
        standards in Ukraine' did not accurately describe the criteria  the
        First-tier Tribunal was legally bound to consider when  determining
        risk on return. This error was material as the evidence before  the
        FtJ, including the report from Dr Turaeva-Hoehne,  a  Human  Rights
        Watch report dated 21 July 2016, and an OHCHR report on  the  human
        rights situation in Ukraine dated 13 June 2017, could have led to a
        different result had it been considered. Permission was granted  on
        all the grounds.


    11. In her oral submissions Ms.  Sabic  referred  me  to  the  skeleton
        argument that had been before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  including
        the reference to the Court of Appeal decision in  Krotov  [2004]  1
        WLR 1825. Ms. Sabic did not take issue with the FtJ's assessment of
        the consequences for refusing to serve in the  army,  and  accepted
        that there were no aggravating  features  likely  to  result  in  a
        custodial sentence following  any  future  prosecution.  Ms.  Sabic
        pointed out that VB did  not  assess  the  conditions  of  military
        service and that, at footnote 58 of the  expert  report,  reference
        was in fact made to VB. It was incumbent on the FtJ to have engaged
        with the evidence detailed in the expert report and the  other  NGO
        reports. In relation to the materiality of the FtJ's error, it  was
        submitted that even if the Appellant was given  a  fine,  he  would
        still be a person who was liable to conscription,  and  that  there
        was nothing to indicate that he was somebody  who,  having  refused
        conscription, would simply be left in peace. When I asked Ms  Sabic
        to draw my attention to  the  evidence  before  the  FtJ  that  the
        Appellant would continue to face pressure to  join  the  army,  she
        suggested, in the alternative, that the matter should be  adjourned
        to enable further exploration of the evidence on this very point.


    12. Mr Bramble  submitted  that  the  FtJ  had  been  entitled  to  his
        conclusions relating to the consequences of draft evasion and that,
        had the FtJ properly considered the evidence detailed in the expert
        report, this could not have made any  material  difference  to  his
        conclusion.

Discussion

    13. In VB, a recently promulgated decision providing  country  guidance
        on Ukraine, the Upper Tribunal considered  the  likely  punishments
        for draft evasion and whether prison conditions for  draft  evaders
        were contrary to article 3 (paragraph  6).  The  Tribunal  did  not
        consider whether the conditions to which a draftee would be exposed
        during military service  would  breach  article  3,  or  whether  a
        draftee was at risk of being forced  to  commit  acts  contrary  to
        international humanitarian law (paragraph 7).  The  Tribunal  found
        there was a real risk that anyone being  returned  as  a  convicted
        criminal sentenced to a term of imprisonment would be  detained  on
        arrival, and that conditions of detention and  imprisonment  risked
        breaching article 3.


    14. The 1st headnote of VB reads:
          At the current time it is not reasonably likely that a draft-
          evader avoiding conscription or mobilisation in Ukraine would
          face criminal or administrative proceedings for that act,
          although if a draft-evader did face prosecution proceedings the
          Criminal Code of Ukraine does provide, in Articles 335, 336 and
          409, for a prison sentence for such an offence. It would be a
          matter for any Tribunal to consider, in the light of developing
          evidence, whether there were aggravating matters which might lead
          to imposition of an immediate custodial sentence, rather than a
          suspended sentence or the matter proceeding as an administrative
          offence and a fine being sought by a prosecutor.
    15. It was not in dispute  that  the  Appellant  was  not  a  convicted
        criminal, or that there was any evidence that judicial  proceedings
        had been commenced against the Appellant for his failure to sign or
        answer to the call-up papers, and Ms.  Sabic  accepted  that  there
        were no aggravating features that might lead to the  imposition  of
        an immediate custodial sentence (a finding of fact made by the  FtJ
        in any event, which was not challenged and which was  clearly  open
        to him on the evidence before him and for the reasons given).


    16. In light of the findings in  VB,  and  the  Appellant's  particular
        circumstances as determined by the FtJ, the Appellant  was  not  at
        risk of being  imprisonment  as  a  draft  evader  if  returned  to
        Ukraine.


    17. I accept Ms. Sabic's submission that the FtJ's conclusion at  [49],
        where he claimed that the expert report did  not  provide  accurate
        information in relation to purported  violations  of  'humanitarian
        concerns' by the Ukrainian army, is  insufficiently  reasoned.  The
        only possible explanation advanced by the FtJ for not attaching any
        weight to this aspect of Dr Turaeva-Hoehne's report is the  absence
        of any reference in the report to VB. I note that the expert did in
        fact make reference to VB, albeit in  extremely  brief  terms.  The
        FtJ's reasoning, to the extent that he has provided any, is  wholly
        deficient. I additionally accept that the FtJ did not  engage  with
        the  evidence  detailed  in  the  expert  report  relating  to  the
        conditions of military service.

    18. I am not however  satisfied  that  this  lack  of  reasoning  is  a
        material legal error capable  of  undermining  the  FtJ's  ultimate
        conclusions. In short, this is because there was no evidence before
        the FtJ, either in the background documentation or  in  the  expert
        report, capable of entitling him to  conclude  that  any  continued
        refusal by the Appellant to undertake military service  would  lead
        to  him  being  forcibly  conscripted  or  otherwise  compelled  to
        undertake military service, or that  any  continued  refusal  would
        expose the Appellant to a  real  risk  of  imprisonment.  In  these
        circumstances, the conditions of military service, or any  risk  of
        being made to  perform  acts  contrary  to  basic  rules  of  human
        conduct, would not arise for consideration as the  Appellant  would
        not face a real risk of being recruited.


    19. VB found that there was no real risk that a draft evader  would  be
        imprisoned for refusing to be conscripted. At paragraphs 30  to  32
        the Tribunal set out the relevant sections of the  Ukrainian  Penal
        Code and Administrative Code relating to avoidance of conscription,
        and  noted  (at  paragraph  31),  the  quantum  of  fines  imposed,
        including an increased penalty if the violation is repeated  within
        a year. This suggests  that  men  who  continue  to  refuse  to  be
        conscripted may be liable to pay larger fines. At paragraph  57  of
        VB the Tribunal stated, "The evidence in the public domain is  that
        very few draft evaders have, to date, been subject to any  criminal
        proceedings let alone convicted of any criminal offence or sent  to
        prison." The Tribunal noted that it was  possible  that  sentencing
        might be more severe for individuals who do everything possible  to
        avoid call-up, but that it was also possible for  prison  sentences
        to be suspended, and if a term is suspended there was  a  power  to
        give  probation/supervision.  If  there  was  any   evidence   that
        individuals who repeatedly refused to be conscripted and  who  were
        prosecuted, were subsequently imprisoned for continued  refusal  to
        be conscripted, I would have reasonably expected such  evidence  to
        be available and to have been brought to the Tribunal's  attention.
        Yet at paragraph 67  the  Tribunal  noted,  after  considering  the
        background and expert evidence before it, that  only  a  couple  of
        persons  appeared  to  have  actually  been  sent  to  prison   for
        conscription or mobilisation evasion, with  evidence  of  suspended
        sentences, probation or fines in only tens of  other  cases.  There
        was no cogent evidence before  the  Tribunal  to  suggest  that  an
        individual who repeatedly refused conscription would either  be  at
        increased  risk  of  being  imprisoned,  or   of   being   forcibly
        conscripted. On the basis of the information before  the  Tribunal,
        the overwhelming majority of over 100,000 draft evaders have  faced
        no consequences at all for their actions.


    20. I have considered the report from Dr Turaeva-Hoehne  in  detail.  I
        have approached the report on the basis that Dr  Turaeva-Hoehne  is
        sufficiently qualified to provide a report to the Tribunal  on  the
        conditions of military service and the consequences for refusal  to
        be conscripted, although I did not  hear  detailed  submissions  on
        this point and I note that few of her published books and  articles
        relate specifically to Ukraine, that her  Ukrainian  is  'working',
        and that she relies on NGO reports, scholarly texts, press articles
        and a 'wide network of informants both living  in  Ukraine  and  in
        Europe' as sources of her report. At paragraphs 19 to 22 the expert
        deals with military conscription in Ukraine, and at  paragraphs  23
        to 28 the expert considers draft  evasion.  The  expert  refers  to
        local news reports of deserters and  those  who  refused  to  serve
        being sentenced from 2 to 5 years, although  this  is  said  to  be
        pursuant  to  Article  336  which,  according  to  VB,  relates  to
        avoidance of mobilisation and not avoidance of conscription  (which
        falls under Article 335). At paragraph 24 the expert considers  the
        position of deserters who are already in military service, but this
        is not relevant to the issue of draft evasion and the Appellant  is
        not in military service. At paragraph 25 the  expert  refers  to  a
        local news report, only available in Ukrainian, of several cases of
        imprisonment of a school teacher  and  others  for  draft  evasion,
        which occurred in 2015. This however sits  uncomfortably  with  the
        conclusions reached by  the  Tribunal  in  VB.  The  only  explicit
        reference to forced recruitment (other than a  vague  reference  to
        soldiers getting on a bus and driving off somewhere with the  young
        men) appears at paragraph 28 where the expert cites a single source
        (Sputnik news, a Russian news agency,  citing  'local  informants')
        describing representatives  of  enlistment  offices  bursting  into
        student dormitories to 'catch' those evading military service,  and
        threatened to bring those who refused to the recruitment office  in
        handcuffs. There is no other reference to  someone  being  forcibly
        conscripted, and no further evidence as to  what  would  happen  to
        someone who repeatedly refused  to  be  conscripted.  There  is  no
        reference to forcible conscription in any of the NGO reports relied
        on by the Appellant, or in the CIG reports, or indeed in any report
        before the Tribunal in VB. Ms. Sabic  acknowledged  the  dearth  of
        evidence  to  support  an  assertion  that  individuals  are  being
        forcibly recruited, or that a person who remains liable to military
        service but who continues to refuse conscription is likely to  face
        renewed attempts of conscription or  greater  punishment  for  such
        refusal. She invited me, as an alternative, to  adjourn  to  enable
        the Tribunal to consider further evidence on this point, but it  is
        for the Appellant to demonstrate, albeit to the lower  standard  of
        proof, that he will be at risk of either forcible recruitment or at
        real risk of imprisonment for continuing  to  refuse  to  undertake
        military service, and I can only identify a material error  of  law
        based on the evidence that was before the FtJ.

    21. If there is no satisfactory evidence, and therefore no  real  risk,
        that the Appellant will be imprisoned  for  repeatedly  failing  or
        refusing  to  undertake  military  service,  and  no   satisfactory
        evidence that he will be compelled to undertake  military  service,
        he will simply not find himself in a position where he is subjected
        to any adverse conditions that may accompany military  service,  or
        be forced to participate in acts contrary to basic rules  of  human
        conduct. Put simply, there was insufficient evidence before the FtJ
        sufficient to entitled him, on any rational view, to conclude  that
        the  Appellant  would  ultimately  be   forcibly   conscripted   or
        imprisoned if  he  persisted  in  refusing  to  undertake  military
        service. In these circumstances, the FtJ's failure to  engage  with
        the evidence in the expert  report  describing  the  conditions  of
        military service and the possibility  that  the  Appellant  may  be
        required  to  engage  in  acts  that   may   breach   international
        humanitarian law can  have  no  material  impact  on  his  ultimate
        conclusion that  the  Appellant  does  not  face  a  real  risk  of
        persecution or article 3 ill-treatment if returned to Ukraine.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


[pic]                               30 October 2017

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
