
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05993/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Glasgow  Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 9th May 2019   On 7th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MRS E G W
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C McGinley of Gray and Co, Solicitors, Glasgow
For the respondent:    Mr A Govan, Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Kenya born in 1981. She came to the
      United Kingdom on 15 November 2017 with her son, [D], born in
      September 2000 and her daughter, [R], born in March 2011. They
      travelled on a family visit Visa, valid from September 2017 until
      March 2018. On 27 December 2017 she made a claim for protection. The
      basis of her claim is that her daughter [R] is at risk of genital
      mutilation (FGM) from her husband in Kenya.

   2. Her claim was rejected by the respondent on 26 April 2018. It was
      accepted that the claim engaged the Refugee Convention in that
      individuals at risk of FGM form a particular social group.

   3. The respondent did not accept her claim that her husband and his
      family had tried forcibly to have their daughter circumcised. In
      considering her credibility the respondent relied upon section 8 of
      the 2004 Act and the fact she did not claim immediately on arrival.
      Furthermore, applying for the visit Visa she did not disclose any
      underlying problem. Furthermore, her Visa application indicated that
      she worked as an insurance broker whereas at the asylum interview she
      said she sold fruit and vegetables. Other discrepancies were
      identified in any event, the respondent concluded that there was State
      protection and that it was reasonable to expect the appellant to
      relocate within Kenya to avoid family pressures.

   4. Her appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Clough at Glasgow on
      11 June 2018.In a decision promulgated on 6 November 2018 it was
      dismissed. The judge did not find the account credible. If the
      appellant's husband were determined to have their child circumcised
      the judge felt the appellant would have been unable to protect her.
      The judge referred to the timeline of events as being inconsistent
      with the claimed fear.

   5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis it
      was arguable the judge failed to give the claim anxious scrutiny in
      light of the country information. The respondent lodged a rule 24
      response opposing the appeal. Reference was made to the fact that it
      did not follow because the practice occurs in Kenya there was a real
      risk for this appellant's daughter. The respondent also referred to
      the timeframe as being a contra indicator of the account.

   6. The judge had referred to a claimed incident in March 2016 when the
      appellant said her husband came intent on taking their daughter away.
      The Visa application was not made until September 2017 and then the
      appellant did not leave with her daughter until November 2017, 2
      months after the visas had been granted. Reference was also made to
      her delay in claiming protection when she arrived here.

   7. The appellant's representative submitted that the judge failed to
      provide adequate reasons. I was referred paragraph 28 of the decision
      whereby the judge accepted that FGM takes place in Kenya, particularly
      amongst the Masai tribal group. The appellant said she was from the
      Kikuyu tribe and her husband was of mixed ethnicity, his father being
      Masai and his mother Kikuyu. He referred to the judge in the same
      paragraph stating, 'it is with a great deal of reluctance I come to
      the decision the appellant's claim is not well founded.' He said the
      judge did not explain why she had used this expression or, if that was
      the case why she had not allowed the appeal. He said the decision was
      very brief and the only real reasons are contained at paragraphs 27
      and 28 and he submitted these were inadequate.

   8. Mr Govan in reply relied upon the rule 24 response. He said the
      reasons behind the decision clear if paragraph 25 and 28 were together
      and the reference to the timeframe. I was also referred to the refusal
      letter which made the point that so far as a response was concerned
      there was sufficiency of protection and the option of relocation. Mr
      Winters pointed out that the appellant did not deal with these
      alternative matters.

Conclusion.

   9. The refusal letter refers to the country information on Kenya as
      indicating those in fear of FGM form a particular social group within
      the meaning of the Convention. The issue was whether the appellant in
      fact had a well-founded fear.

  10. The refusal letter refers to the tribal differences between the
      appellant and her husband and that when the appellant would not
      cooperate marital problems began. The appellant described how when her
      daughter was 6 years old her husband arrived home with his brother
      wanting the child circumcised. She said there was an altercation
      resulting in the child being scalded with hot water.

  11. The respondent questioned why the appellant had not discussed FGM with
      her husband before, given they were from different tribes and she was
      aware of its prevalence amongst the Masai. The appellant had indicated
      she had not undergone the procedure and the respondent question why
      her husband would be so insistent on it being performed on their
      daughter. The respondent also questions why she did not seek help from
      her own family. The refusal letter then refers to country information
      in relation to the practice and the question of sufficiency of
      protection. The refusal letter then refers to the timeframe and having
      considered all these factors did not find the claim credible.

  12. The judge's decision is brief. The bulk of the decision consists of
      setting out the details of the claim made. There is a section setting
      out the appellant's evidence. There is a part of the decision
      containing the heading `findings'. Rather than setting out findings
      further details of the claim are set out. It is really only from
      paragraph 22 that the judge expresses her view. At paragraphs 27 and
      28 the judge indicates the factors influencing her. Principally, the
      judge is not finding the appellant credible because of the time frame
      involved.

  13. The judge has not referred to the other contra indicators in the
      refusal letter. Whilst the reasoning is limited, on the claim made I
      find the judge has given adequate reasons. Essentially, the judge has
      not found the claim credible because of the appellant's delay in
      taking action at various stages. The judge had referred to the
      incident when the appellant said her husband arrived accompanied by
      his brother and matters came to a head. Despite the incident occurring
      in the 2016 the appellant did not leave her home country with her
      children until November 2017 notwithstanding the fact visas have been
      issued by 26 September 2017 yet she did not leave until 15 November
      2017. There was then delay in claiming protection in the United
      Kingdom. In the circumstance I find this was sufficient.  The judge
      was entitled to draw the inference she did from the time frame set
      out. The fact FGM may be prevalent among certain tribes does not mean
      the individual claim made was true.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in the decision of First-
tier Tribunal Judge Clough. Consequently, that decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Date 04 June 2019

