
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05087/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2020                            |On 31 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     E U
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER IN PLACE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chakmajian, instructed by Wimbledon Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms C Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State made on 17
May 2019 to refuse her asylum and humanitarian protection claim.  Her
appeal against that decision to the First-tier Tribunal was dismissed in a
decision promulgated on 3 October 2019.  For the reasons set out in my
decision of 19 February 2020, a copy of which is attached, that decision
was set aside as it involved the making of an error of law.

    The appellant's case

The appellant's case is that her father physically abused her from a very
young age.  He was also abusive towards her mother and her brother, was
often drunk and although she was able to attend university in Durres, that
was paid for by her uncle and aunt (maternal uncle).  After graduating from
university, she returned to live with her parents when her father began to
physically and sexually abuse her.  The sexual abuse persisted but
eventually on one occasion her mother walked in on the appellant and her
father, pulled him off and she ran out of the house and went to stay with a
friend.  She returned briefly to pick up her belongings and then went to
say with her uncle where she remained for three weeks.  During that time
her father came to look for her but was told that she was not there.  She
was able to raise money with the help of relatives, travelling to Italy
where she remained for a few days, then travelled to France, attempted to
travel to the United Kingdom using a forged Italian ID card.  She was
stopped by French Immigration who then released her.  She returned to Italy
where she obtained another forged Italian ID card and went to Spain and
from there travelled to the United Kingdom.

The appellant has been able to remain in contact with her mother and with
some friends by telephone.  They have also written to her.

The appellant maintains that she would be at risk of being subjected to the
same abusive behaviour or killed by her father were she to return and that
she would not be safe anywhere in Albania as he would be able to track her
down.  She also believes that the Albanian authorities would not provide
her with sufficiency of protection.

    The Respondent's case

The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter of 17 May 2019,
subject to a major concession made in submissions.  The Secretary of State
now accepts that the appellant was subject to the physical and sexual abuse
as described.  The Secretary of State does, however, rely on Section 8 of
the 2004 Act drawing inference to the appellant's failure to claim asylum
en route. The Secretary of State did not consider either that, as a lone
woman, she would be at risk having had regard to DM (Sufficiency of
Protection - PSG - Women - Domestic Violence) Albania CG [2004] UKIAT
00059, TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 0092 and AM and BM
(Trafficked women) Albania CG [2010] UKUT 80.

The Secretary of State noted that the appellant had been supported by her
uncle and aunt whilst at university, the cousins were willing to lend her
money to travel to the United Kingdom and there was no reason given as to
why they would not be able to support her on return.  The Secretary of
State considered that the appellant could return to her locality and
uncle's family and carry on with her life as before, noting that she was
well-educated who had completed university, performed voluntary social work
and had lived independently away from her family for years at university.
She considered also that there would be a sufficiency of protection for the
appellant, having had regard to Horvath [2000] UKHL 37 noting that things
in Albania were improving.  The Secretary of State noted [64] that although
the appellant thought her father would be arrested he would be released
within days and able to kill her, the background demonstrates that Albania
has a functioning police force and it was speculative that her father has
any continuing interest in her or that he would be released from police
custody.  She noted also that a police response could be escalated to the
independent ombudsman who would as shown be able to take action if
necessary.  She noted also that there had been significant improvements in
the treatment of domestic abuse there being evidence of arrests and
prosecutions.

The Secretary of State noted that there were ten shelters in Albania and
five women's centres in major cities which provided practical help and
advice for victims of gender-based abuse.  The Secretary of State noted
that the physical abuse to the appellant had ceased when she went to
university, it was therefore speculative that he would have any continued
interest in her should she relocate to another area in Albania [82] and
that it was unlikely that he would be able to do so in any event.  It was
noted that the victim's civil registration office would be the NGO's
address rather than the shelter address so that access through the civil
registration would not compromise her location.  (Note to self: this is
likely to be temporary only).

The respondent also considered that the appellant's removal would not be in
breach of Article 8 but the refusal letter was written before it became
apparent that the appellant is pregnant expecting a child early next year.

The Hearing on 5 November 2020

I heard evidence from the appellant, who gave evidence through an
interpreter as did a supporting witness, Mr L.

The appellant adopted her witness statement confirming details she had
given in her asylum interview at Q24 as regards relatives in Albania.  She
confirmed she had an aunt in Italy and other relatives in nearby villages.
She confirmed that she had been taken to her interview by solicitors but
that she had not been told that she could amend it by the Home Office.  She
accepted she had confirmed that it was all correct but she had not quite
understood what had been meant by "state officials" and that this had been
put in her statement.  She accepted that had only been prepared for the
appeal.  She said that she had no other family outside Albania apart from
the aunt in Italy and what she had meant (see witness statement of 17
September 2019) was that there would have been no family who had been able
to come to the United Kingdom to pursue her and they could not come to the
UK without an EU passport.

Asked about what she had said to the expert psychiatrist about having no
friends in the United Kingdom she said what she had said to him was that
she had distanced herself from Albanians as she did not want to get close
to somebody who might have connections with her family.  She confirmed that
the father of her child is Albanian but was not able to say whether he was
a member of the Albanian community, by which I meant whether he worked and
socialised with other Albanians.  She said that they had met in a caf� but
she could not recall exactly where but that they had not spoken since she
told him she was pregnant.  When asked, she refused to give his name and
said that he had told her in the past he did not want his name used in any
case.  Even after it was explained to her that she could write it down and
it would not be necessary and that this was an enclosed court, she declined
to provide his name.  She said that the friend who accompanied her that day
was not the father of her child.

The appellant said that she had met Mr L at a caf� near London Bridge but
again she could not recall the exact name.

The appellant confirmed that she is in contact with her mother, who goes to
visit the appellant's friend, MH and they speak by telephone.

The appellant said that she had borrowed money from different extended
family members and also from friends.  She had not told them that she was
going to leave and had asked them for small amounts of money each as they
would not have been able to give big sums.

The appellant said that her uncle who had paid for her studies was the only
businessman in the family by which she meant that he had some people who
worked for him in construction.  He was the only person who was in
"business" which was not what was meant by being in business in the United
Kingdom.  She said the rest were in simple jobs.  When asked that she had
not included her paternal cousin's husband who is a police officer, in
those to whom she referred when asked if she had family members who were in
a government job.  She said he was not a close relative although they had
seen him.  When they had married, they had, as tradition requires in
Albania, visited her family house and they had seen him on other occasions
at family gatherings.  She said he is in the police in Tirana and is a
municipal police officer.

The appellant confirmed that when studying she had stayed at university for
three years, living in shared accommodation with friends one of whom is
Migena.  She said that after university she had submitted a CV and obtained
a job in a private school in Tirana but that she had not been able to take
up the post because of what happened to her and her need to flee the
country.  She said her home area is about twenty to 25 minutes' journey
from Tirana but an hour or so from Durres where she had gone to university.
 Although her father had worked across the country she was not aware of him
ever having visited Durres while she was there although she had thought he
might have been but had not bothered to see her.  He had not attended her
graduation.

The appellant said that she had taken antidepressants while she was in
Albania and had not been referred to a psychologist as they were not
available on public health system but were private.  She cannot afford
that.  She was not sure if the drug she had been prescribed was sertraline
which she had been prescribed in the United Kingdom.  She had said that she
had taken that and had stopped taking it after the first two weeks as she
felt bad and stopped and had not taken it while she was pregnant.

In re-examination the appellant said that Mr L did not know the details of
her case.

In response to my questions the appellant said that her mother had talked
to her about her father in conversations and that he was wanting to know
where she is.

I then heard evidence from Mr L, who adopted his witness statement.  He
also gave his evidence through an interpreter.

After some confusion Mr L explained that the appellant lives in the address
she has given in Ilford.  He confirmed that he had lived elsewhere but that
the property in Ilford was in his name.  He confirmed that he paid rent for
it.  He also said he would not be able to support her if she returned to
Albania given that in the current circumstances he had not been earning
much.  Mr L also explained that he had been granted 30 months' leave to
remain and had made an application within time for further leave to remain
which was outstanding.  He said that he had not met the appellant's former
partner, the father of her baby.

Submissions

Ms Cunha relied on the refusal letter subject to a concession that it was
no longer contested that the applicant had been subjected to sexual and
physical abuse.  She submitted that the appellant could return to Albania,
either to Tirana or to Durres where she had studied.  She submitted that
she was highly educated, had shown that she had been able to get a job in
the post, that she was less likely to self-harm now given that she was
pregnant and would soon have a child and would be able to be self-
sufficient on return.

Ms Cunha submitted that the appellant's explanation for not claiming
outside asylum before she came to the United Kingdom made little sense. She
also submitted that there are state-run NGOs which would be able to assist
the appellant, who would also get the assistance of IOM (see AM) to help
her to reintegrate.  She submitted further that in reality she would not be
at risk of trafficking on return nor, even returning as a single woman
without a male figure and as an unmarried mother would she be at risk.  She
submitted further that there was insufficient evidence to show that the
trauma and PTSD that the appellant had suffered was sufficient to engage
Article 3.

She submitted that there was insufficient evidence to show that the
appellant's father would pursue her, and in any event there would be a
sufficiency of protection for her from the police.  She submitted also that
she would get the necessary assistance with her mental ill health as she
had in the past as shown by the evidence she had produced and accordingly
the appeal ought to be dismissed.

Mr Chakmajian relied on his skeleton argument submitting that on the basis
of the objective evidence there was still difficulty that the appellant
would face given that there is still a stigma attached to domestic
violence.  He submitted that on the particular facts of this case there
would not in reality be a sufficiency of protection for this appellant and
that she would as a result of the circumstances in which she found herself
be more at risk as to be trafficked in future.  He submitted that  being
the mother of an illegitimate child would not make any difference to this
risk and that there was in Albania a paucity of funding for mother and baby
units let alone for the victims of sexual violence.

Mr Chakmajian asked me to note that there was still a considerable degree
of evidence to show that there was still a risk to the appellant from her
father.  There was the evidence, not challenged, that her mother had told
her he is still looking for her and thus the appellant would not be able to
tell anyone if she went back to Albania.  There was in reality a risk that
she would be found and the police would not be in a position to protect
her.

The Law

 1. It is for the appellant to prove, on the lower standard, that she is at
    risk on return to Albania of serious  harm  such  as  would  constitute
    persecution, entitle her to humanitarian protection or engage article 3
    of the Human Rights Convention.

 2. The appellant's fear in this case is of non-state agents.  As was noted
    in  AW  (Sufficiency  of  Protection)  Pakistan  [2011]  UKUT  31,   in
    Bagdanavicius the House of Lords at [2005] UKHL 38 left undisturbed the
    proposition set out  by  Auld LJ  on  real  risk  and  sufficiency  of
    protection in  the  Court  of  Appeal  [2005]  EWCA  Civ 1605.   These
    propositions are in the following terms:
       "54. Summary  of  conclusions  on  real  risk/sufficiency  of  state
      protection.
          The common threshold of risk
          1) The threshold of risk is the same in both categories of claim;
         the main reason for introducing section 65 to the 1999 Act was  not
         to provide an alternative, lower threshold of risk and/or a  higher
         level of protection against such risk through the medium  of  human
         rights claims, but to widen the reach of protection  regardless  of
         the motive giving rise to the persecution.
      Asylum claims
         2) An asylum seeker who claims to be  in  fear  of  persecution  is
         entitled  to  asylum  if  he  can  show  a  well-founded  fear   of
         persecution for a Refugee Convention reason and that there would be
         insufficiency of state protection to meet it;  Horvath [2001] 1  AC
         489].
         3) Fear of persecution is well-founded if there  is  a  'reasonable
         degree of likelihood' that it will materialise;  R  v  SSHD  ex  p.
         Sivakumaran [1988] AC 956, per Lord Goff at 1000F-G.
         4) Sufficiency of state protection, whether from  state  agents  or
         non-state actors, means a willingness and ability on  the  part  of
         the  receiving  state  to  provide  through  its  legal  system   a
         reasonable level of protection  from  ill-treatment  of  which  the
         claimant for asylum has a well-founded fear;   Osman  v  UK  [1999]
         1 FLR  193],  Horvath,  Dhima  [2002]  EWHC  80  (Admin),  [2002]
         Immigration Judge AR 394].
         5) The effectiveness  of  the  system  provided  is  to  be  judged
         normally by its systemic ability to deter  and/or  to  prevent  the
         form of persecution of which there is a risk, not  just  punishment
         of it after the  event;  Horvath;  Banomova  [2001]  EWCA  Civ.807.
         McPherson [2001] EWCA Civ 1955 and Kinuthia [2001] EWCA Civ 2100.
         6) Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state protection in  the
         receiving state a claimant may still have a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution if he can show that its authorities know  or  ought  to
         know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise  to  his
         fear, but are unlikely to provide  the  additional  protection  his
         particular circumstances reasonably require;  Osman.
          Article 3 claims
          7) The same principles apply to claims in removal cases of risk of
         exposure to Article 3 ill-treatment in  the  receiving  state,  and
         are, in general, unaffected by the approach of the Strasbourg Court
         in Soering; which, on its facts, was, not only a state-agency  case
         at the  highest  institutional  level,  but  also  an  unusual  and
         exceptional case on its facts;  Dhima, Krepel [2002] EWCA Civ 1265
         and Ullah [2004] UKHL 26.
         8) The basis of an article 3 entitlement in a removal case is  that
         the claimant, if sent to the country in question, would be at  risk
         there of Article 3 ill-treatment.
         9) In most, if not all, Article 3 cases in this context the concept
         of risk has the same or closely similar  meaning  to  that  in  the
         Refugee Convention of a 'well-founded fear  of  persecution',  save
         that it is confined to a risk of Article 3 forms  of  ill-treatment
         and is not restricted to conduct with any particular motivation  or
         by reference to the conduct of the claimant;  Dhima, Krepel, Chahal
         v UK [1996] 23 EHRR 413.
         10) The threshold of risk required to engage Article 3  depends  on
         the circumstances of each case,  including  the  magnitude  of  the
         risk, the nature and  severity  of  the  ill-treatment  risked  and
         whether the risk emanates from a state agency or  non-state  actor;
         Horvath.
         11) In most, but not necessarily all, cases of ill-treatment which,
         but for state protection, would engage Article 3, a  risk  of  such
         ill-treatment will be  more  readily  established  in  state-agency
         cases than in non-state actor  cases  -  there  is  a  spectrum  of
         circumstances giving rise to such risk spanning the two categories,
         ranging from breach of a duty by the state of a negative  duty  not
         to inflict Article 3 ill-treatment to a breach of a  duty  to  take
         positive protective action against such ill-treatment by  non-state
         actors;  Svazas.
         12) An assessment to the  threshold  of  risk  appropriate  in  the
         circumstances  to  engage  Article  3   necessarily   involves   an
         assessment of the sufficiency  of  state  protection  to  meet  the
         threat of which there is such a risk -  one  cannot  be  considered
         without the other whether  or  not  the  exercise  is  regarded  as
         'holistic' or to be conducted in two stages; Dhima, Krepel,  Svazas
         [2002] EWCA Civ 74.
         13)  Sufficiency  of  state  protection  is  not  a  guarantee   of
         protection from Article 3 ill-treatment any  more  than  it  is  a
         guarantee of protection from  an  otherwise  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution in asylum cases - nor, if and to the extent that  there
         is any difference, is it eradication or removal of risk of exposure
         to Article 3 ill-treatment'; Dhima, McPherson; Krepel.
         14) Where the risk falls to be judged by the sufficiency  of  state
         protection, that sufficiency is judged, not according to whether it
         would eradicate the real risk of the relevant harm,  but  according
         to whether it is  a  reasonable  provision  in  the  circumstances;
         Osman.
         15) Notwithstanding such systemic sufficiency of  state  protection
         in the receiving state, a claimant may still be able  to  establish
         an Article 3 claim if he can show that the authorities there  know
         or ought to know of particular circumstances likely to  expose  him
         to risk of Article 3 ill-treatment;  Osman.
         16) The approach is the same whether the receiving country is or is
         not a party to the ECHR, but, in determining whether  it  would  be
         contrary to Article 3 to remove a  person  to  that  country,  our
         courts should decide the factual  issue  as  to  risk  as  if  ECHR
         standards apply there - and the same applies to  the  certification
         process under section 115(1) and/or (2) of the 2002 Act".

 3. While it will always be relevant to ask whether  or  not  there  is  in
    general a sufficiency of protection in a country, the critical question
    will nevertheless remain in an asylum case as  set  out  in  the  sixth
    proposition by Auld LJ and in an Article 3 case as  set  out  in  the
    fifteenth proposition.  Thus I must  look,  notwithstanding  a  general
    sufficiency of protection in a country, to the individual circumstances
    of the appellant and ask the above questions.

In assessing the appellant's credibility, I bear in mind that the core of
her claim, that she has been subject to physical and appalling sexual abuse
at the hands of her father,  I accept also the diagnosis in the psychiatric
report that she is suffering from PTSD is consistent with  that. I have
also taken into account the entirety of the background evidence and also
the reports of the expert, Dr Korovilas.

The appellant did not claim asylum en route to the United Kingdom either in
Italy or when she spent time there in Spain or France.  Her explanation
that she was concerned that Albanians would be able to trace her to those
EU countries where they would be able to travel without an EU passport as
opposed to the United Kingdom indicates that she believed that she would be
safe here because unlike those countries covered by the Schengen
arrangement, Albanians would not easily be able to come here.  Looked at
objectively, that makes little sense but I bear in mind the position that
the appellant found herself in.  She had escaped from an appalling
situation and it is entirely understandable that she would fear being
traced.  That is, I consider, sufficient such that little or no damage is
done to her credibility by operation of Section 8 of the 2004 Act.  I
accept similarly that she was reticent in disclosing in detail what
happened to her given the very sensitive nature of what had happened to
her.

There are no submissions beyond that regarding her credibility and in the
circumstances, I have no reason to doubt, given the major concession made,
the authenticity of the letters sent to her by her mother and her friend
MH.  They form part of the picture of what has happened to her. I find
nothing in the letters which is materially inconsistent with the
appellant's account as accepted.

I accept in the circumstances that her cousin's husband is a police
officer.  Detailed printouts regarding him had been provided and again
these are not challenged.  Insofar as the appellant had not mentioned him,
when asked, in interview, it is difficult to describe that somebody who is
a police officer who is the husband of a cousin is a "close relative".  I
also attach little or no weight to the observation, as raised in cross-
examination, as to whether he did or did not have a government job; any
inconsistency is adequately explained by what is meant by a government job
and by what is meant by close relative, a subjective issue. A cousin's
husband would rarely be called close.

I accept the appellant is pregnant.  That is not in dispute but I do have
some concern about the fact that she would not disclose the name of the
father.  Even when offered the opportunity to write down the name so that
it would not be disclosed in court or recorded, the appellant refused to do
so, which I find evasive and I do not accept her reasons for not doing so.

It is not clear to me either why Mr L should, at significant expense, be
supporting the appellant nor has the exact nature of what tenancy he has
over the property Ilford where the appellant lives been explained to me nor
how he is able to afford that yet lives somewhere else with his partner.  I
do not consider I have been told the truth about this but I find that this
is peripheral to the core of the asylum claim and does not damage the
overall credibility such that I do not accept the account of what happened
to the appellant in Albania or as to the subjective nature of her fear.

Taking all of these factors into account and viewing the evidence as a
whole, in the light of the background evidence and medical reports, I found
the appellant to be a credible witness.  I accept her account of what
happened in Albania and I accept also the evidence that her father still
maintains an interest in her as shown by the evidence she has heard from
her mother and also from her friend MH.  I accept also that her maternal
cousin's husband is a police officer.

Having made these findings, I turn now to the risk to the appellant on
return.  It is necessary to answer the following questions:-

From whom is the appellant at risk?

Where is the appellant at risk?

Is there a sufficiency of protection for her?

Is there anywhere she could relocate within Albania where she would not be
at risk?

The only person who poses a threat to the appellant is her father.  I
accept her evidence about how he had treated her and her mother and that he
is an alcoholic.  I discount the suggestion that he may also be abusing
drugs; this appears to be speculative on the part of the appellant which
has unfortunately been inflated by the psychiatrist.  That is not, in any
event, a relevant matter.

I accept the evidence also that the father maintains an active interest in
finding her.  Whether he would be able to do so is contingent on (a) him
knowing that she had returned to Albania and (b) being able to trace her.
That is of course if she had not returned to the local area. The continuing
threat and interest in her is confirmed by the letters from the appellant's
mother and friend, MH, which in the light of the concessions made, and the
overall positive credibility findings, I accept. Those letters are as
recent as 14 October 2020.  In the light of that evidence, I accept that
the appellant's father continues to be a threat to her and maintains an
interest in her.  Given how he has treated her in the past, I am satisfied
also that he presents a threat to her of violence, either physical or
sexual, of sufficient severity to constitute persecution, serious harm and
engage Article 3.

I am satisfied also, given the level of sustained interest, that the risk
to the appellant would not just be in the local area but would extend to
other parts of the country, were he to learn she had returned. That is
something she would find difficult to avoid happening; she would be
returning with a small baby and would have to avoid contact with family and
friends lest that information reach him, aside from any difficulties
arising from her having to register with a local authority, an issue to
which I will return.

In assessing whether there is a sufficiency of protection for this
appellant, the principal difficulty in assessing this case is that what the
appellant has been subjected to goes far beyond the paradigm of domestic
violence, an issue to which for understandable reasons, much of the
background material is directed. There is significant evidence in the CPIN
"Albania: Domestic abuse and violence against women" that there has been
increased reporting, training of police and other agencies. But the
situation is different when it comes to sexual violence.

Even though there is a functioning police service in Albania and a criminal
justice system, it is not without its problems. In the CPIN on Domestic
Abuse it is noted at 3.2.1 that:

         Rape, including spousal rape, is a crime. Penalties for rape and
         assault depend on the age of the victim. For rape of an adult, the
         prison term is three to 10 years. The law includes provisions on
         sexual assault and sexual harassment and makes the criminalization
         of spousal rape explicit. 'The government did not enforce the law
         effectively. Officials did not prosecute spousal rape. The concept
         of spousal rape was not well understood, and authorities often did
         not consider it a crime.

I note in passing, that the appellant's father has on several occasions
raped his wife. This passage indicates the difficulty she would have faced
were she to have reported the crime.

The CPIN set out at section 5.12 material on other forms of violence
against women which is the primary concern in this case. The CPIN provides:

    5.12.1The GREVIO report of November 2017 stated:

         '[...] forced marriage, sexual harassment and sexual violence, have
    received little legislative and political attention. Available data
    regarding these other forms of violence against women -however limited
    -corroborate the need to address them comprehensively. Hence, more
    efforts are needed, notably in the areas of data collection, multi-
    agency co-operation, awareness-raising, education, training of
    professionals, general and specialist support services, as well as
    restraining or protection orders, to cover effectively all forms of
    violence against women and girls.'55

    5.12.2 GREVIO further reported on sexual violence:

    'There are no rape crisis or sexual violence referral centres in
    Albania, although[...]medical and forensic examinations are offered in
    hospitals and other healthcare settings. Other types of support such as
    trauma support, counselling for victims, support during court
    proceedings by woman to woman advocacy are rare. Available
    administrative data record very few cases of sexual violence against
    women. According to the Statistical Yearbook of the Ministry of
    Justice, the number of convicted persons under the criminal offence of
    rape (Article 102 of the CCA) was only 3 in 2014 and 4 in 2015.
    However, given the taboo which very much still enshrouds the phenomenon
    of sexual violence, it is likely that the great majority of cases go
    unreported. The prevalence of sexual violence in domestic relations was
    rated at 7.9 % in the 2013 national survey on domestic violence
    conducted by INSTAT, a figure which is considered an under-
    representation of the actual occurrence of sexual violence in intimate
    partner relationships. In light of these figures, GREVIO is extremely
    concerned that the majority of victims of sexual violence are likely to
    receive little or no protection.'56

    5.12.3GREVIO further stated:

    'As a reflection of the law's main focus on domestic violence, specific
    standards for the treatment and care of other forms of violence against
    women, such as sexual violence and forced abortions, are lacking. The
    absence in Albania of any sexual violence referral centres, be they in
    a hospital or other setting, leaves victims at risk of not receiving
    the appropriate medical care. Moreover, the restrictive regulations
    subjecting forensic examinations to a request by the law enforcement
    agency or prosecution office are at odds with the best practice
    requiring forensic examinations to be carried out without delay in case
    of sexual violence regardless of whether the matter will be reported to
    the authorities. GREVIO is further informed in this respect that, in
    part due to the low fee paid for carrying out forensic examinations,
    victims have at times been required to pay additional amounts in order
    to receive an examination.

It is evident that no thought of criminal prosecution has prevented the
appellant's father from carrying out violent sexual attacks on her.
Further, as the expert Dr James Korovilas wrote in his report at page 9,
the police are unlikely to take the appellant's concern seriously, given
that they are unwilling to take action against family members. That is
consistent with the other evidence, particularly as regards the attitude to
sexual violence. He also opines, which I accept, that she would be unlikely
to be protected against imminent attack.

Even were she to return to live elsewhere in Albania, in order to get
protection (and indeed to enter a shelter - see CPIN at 6.1.6) she would
need to obtain a protection order. There are difficulties with those, even
in the context of domestic violence in terms of their enforcement. Much of
the material concerns victims of domestic violence not sexual violence, and
it is less clear how this appellant, given the lapse of time and apparent
lack of physical evidence could obtain one. I am satisfied that on the
material provided, that is unlikely given also that this case does not fit
the paradigm of domestic violence.

In the context of sexual violence, it is evident from the CPIN at 6.3.1
that there is limited availability of shelters for victims of sexual
violence as opposed to domestic violence.

Even assuming the appellant could enter a shelter, and would get assistance
with her psychological problems, she would have a small baby with her. The
support from a shelter would be only temporary and reintegration would be
difficult. Much of the material relates to Tirana, the area from which she
originates.  There would I accept be difficulties in her getting employment
and accommodation, exacerbated by her having a small baby and serious
mental health problems. I consider that the stress of having to return to
Albania where she has an understandable strong fear of being attacked again
is likely to exacerbate these problems.

Going back, then to the questions identified at [28] above, I consider that
there is little evidence of systemic protection for the victims of sexual
violence. In this case, I consider that there is a serious risk of further
attack, and no realistic prospect of the state either deterring the father,
given the apparent lack of consequences, and the very low chance of
prosecution.

Further, while TD and AD (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 92 is not
concerned directly with domestic violence, it is relevant on the issue of
shelters, and on what happens after that time-limited protection.   I am
satisfied, having had regard to TD and AD in particular at [109], [111] to
[112] and 119 that there is a real prospect of the appellant, given her
mental ill-health and the unavailability of family support as the aunt is
no longer able to help, and there would a significant risk were she to
contact other relatives of her father finding out, that she would not be
able to cope. I reach that conclusion noting that although she had been
able to obtain employment, that was in different circumstances, and when
she had no child.

In addition, there is also a risk of her father finding her. While the CPIN
indicates that there not all police officers are able to access the
relevant population register, and that unauthorised access can be
identified. That said, there is no indication of how often there are
sanctions imposed, or whether (as appears to be the case - see letter at
Annex A of CPIN), there may need to be a particular officer identified
whose access is then checked if a complaint is made. Given the level of
corruption and other well-documented problems with the police, I am
satisfied there is a real risk of the appellant's father being able to
locate her whereabouts, wherever she was in Albania.

Taking all of these factors into account, I am satisfied the appellant
would be at risk of further ill-treatment of the same level of severity as
before at the hands of her father and that there would, in her particular
circumstances, be no sufficiency of protection for her as the victim of
sexual abuse. In that regard, I note the evidence from GREVIO cited [45]
above. I am not satisfied that there would for this appellant be reasonable
protection, or that proper regard would be had to the particular
circumstances where she has been targeted by her father and faces a real
threat from him too, as in Osman.  I find also that, in her circumstances,
given her mental ill-health, the lack of family support and having a small
child outside of marriage, that it would be unreasonable or unduly harsh to
expect her to relocate within Albania.

I do not, however, consider that this appellant is at risk of being
trafficked. Even though vulnerable, she is well-educated and unlikely to be
the victim of any deception designed to entrap her, nor is it likely that
she would, having a small child, be likely to be forced into such a
situation.  I am not satisfied either that, given the protective nature of
her having a child, that she is at risk of suicide sufficiently to engage
the test set out in J v SSHD.

I am not, however, satisfied that any risk to the appellant of ill-
treatment at the hands of her father is for a convention reason. It is
personal to her, and not because of her being a member of a particular
social group.

That leaves the question of whether any failure to protect her is on
account of membership of a particular social group. In addressing that
issue, I have followed Fornah [2006] UKHL 46 where Lord Bingham wrote [16]:

    16   EU Council Directive 2004/83/EC of 29 April 2004, effective as of
    10 October 2006, is directed to the setting of minimum standards among
    member states for the qualification and status of third country
    nationals or stateless persons as refugees, or as persons who otherwise
    need international protection, and setting minimum standards for the
    content of the protection granted. The recitals recognise the need for
    minimum standards and common criteria in the recognition of refugees,
    and for a common concept of "membership of a particular social group as
    a persecution ground". The Directive expressly permits member states to
    apply standards more favourable to the applicant than the minimum laid
    down. Article 10 provides (with Roman numerals added to the text):

    "Reasons for persecution

       I  Member States shall take the following elements into account when
       assessing the reasons for persecution ...

       (d)  a group shall be considered to form a particular social group
       where in particular:

       [(i)]  members of that group share an innate characteristic, or a
       common background that cannot be changed, or share a characteristic
       or belief that is so fundamental to identity or conscience that a
       person should not be forced to renounce it, and

       [(ii)]  that group has a distinct identity in the relevant country,
       because it is perceived as being different by the surrounding
       society;

       [(iii)]  depending on the circumstances in the country of origin, a
       particular social group might include a group based on a common
       characteristic of sexual orientation. Sexual orientation cannot be
       understood to include acts considered to be criminal in accordance
       with national law of the Member States: Gender related aspects might
       be considered, without by themselves alone creating a presumption for
       the applicability of this Article."

    Read literally, this provision is in no way inconsistent with the trend
    of international authority. When assessing a claim based on membership
    of a particular social group national authorities should certainly take
    the matters listed into account. I do not doubt that a group should be
    considered to form a particular social group where, in particular, the
    criteria in sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii) are both satisfied. Sub-
    paragraph (iii) is not wholly clear to me, but appears in part to
    address a different aspect. If, however, this article were interpreted
    as meaning that a social group should only be recognised as a
    particular social group for purposes of the Convention if it satisfies
    the criteria in both of sub-paragraphs (i) and (ii), then in my opinion
    it propounds a test more stringent than is warranted by international
    authority. In its published Comments on this Directive (January 2005)
    the UNHCR adheres to its view that the criteria in sub-paragraphs (i)
    and (ii) should be treated as alternatives, providing for recognition
    of a particular social group where either criterion is met and not
    requiring that both be met. With regard to (iii), the UNHCR comments:

         "With respect to the provision that '[g]ender related aspects might
         be considered, without by themselves alone creating a presumption
         for the applicability of the article,' UNHCR notes that courts and
         administrative bodies in a number of jurisdictions have found that
         women, for example, can constitute a particular social group within
         the meaning of Article 1A(2). Gender is a clear example of a social
         subset of persons who are defined by innate and immutable
         characteristics and who are frequently subject to differentiated
         treatment and standards. This does not mean that all women in the
         society qualify for refugee status. A claimant must demonstrate a
         well-founded fear of being persecuted based on her membership in
         the particular social group.

         Even though less has been said in relation to the age dimension in
         the interpretation and application of international refugee law,
         the range of potential claims where age is a relevant factor is
         broad, including forcible or under-age recruitment into military
         service, (forced) child marriage, female genital mutilation, child
         trafficking, or child pornography or abuse. Some claims that are
         age-related may also include a gender element and compound the
         vulnerability of the claimant."

Despite Mr Chakmajian's submissions, I am not satisfied that women in
Albania form a particular social group or that I should depart from DM.  I
am not satisfied either that victims of sexual violence are a particular
social group either. There is insufficient material to show that the are a
group which has a distinct identity, or even that woman victims of sexual
abuse have such an identity.  While I accept that being a victim of sexual
assault is not something that can be changed, not all assaults are the same
such that they could be said to have a common background independent of the
persecutory act.  Nor is there evidence that the lack of protection offered
is due to membership of any particular group.

Accordingly, I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds, but I allow the appeal
on humanitarian protection grounds.   It follows also that I allow the
appeal on human rights grounds on the basis that removing the appellant to
Albania would result in a breach of article 3.

In the circumstances, it is not necessary for me to consider any argument
that removing the appellant to Albania would be in breach of her article 8
rights.

    Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

I remake the decision by:

      a) dismissing the appeal on asylum grounds; but,

      b) allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds; and,

      c) allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 14 December 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul



ANNEX:  ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05087/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2020                           |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |...............               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                                     e u
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Chakmakjian, instructed by Wimbledon solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Plumptre, promulgated on 3 October 2019, dismissing
    her appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse the
    appellant's asylum and human rights claim.

 4. The appellant's claim is relatively simply  expressed.   She  gives  an
    account of having been abused by her father and that she would  not  be
    able to relocate  elsewhere  in  Albania,  there  being  in  effect  no
    protection  from  the  authorities  for  her  or  that  it   would   be
    unreasonable or unduly harsh for her to go and live elsewhere given the
    conditions which might apply to her in her circumstances.

 5. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account nor,  for
    that matter, did the judge.  The judge considered carefully two  expert
    reports, the interview records and the other documents put  before  her
    and reached findings of credibility with respect both  to  the  experts
    and as to the appellant.  The judge  did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    account of what had happened to her in Albania which was  the  core  of
    the reason that she left the country and obviously is the  risk  to  be
    assessed on her return.

 6. The judge also rejected the evidence of Dr Young considering  that  she
    had descended into the arena.  She also concluded that it would not  be
    a breach of the applicant's rights pursuant to Article 8 to return  her
    to Albania.

 7. There are four primary grounds of appeal: first, that there is  a  lack
    of clear reasoning and findings regarding the core issue; second,  that
    the judge erred in her criticisms of the expert Dr  Young;  third,  the
    judge paid undue weight on an alleged inconsistency in an interview  in
    the appeal statement regarding whether the appellant had a relative  or
    family member in a Government  role;  and,  fourth,  the  judge  failed
    properly to address Article 8.

 8. I deal first with ground 1 which is on all accounts a  sensitive  issue
    and I do not intend to go into the detail of what is  alleged.   As  Mr
    Tarlow submits the decision by an  experienced  judge  does  appear  on
    first glance to be a well-written and properly reasoned decision.  That
    said, there are a number of factors in relation to  the  assessment  of
    credibility which give rise to concern.  First, regarding the  core  of
    what happened to the appellant, there is an inconsistency I find in the
    judge's decision at paragraph [42] into what she accepted  and  whether
    she accepted the appellant's reasons for not making a prior  disclosure
    for what had occurred.  Whilst that is not in and of itself a reason to
    set aside the decision on the basis that the credibility  findings  are
    defective, there are other aspects which also raise concerns.

 9. The judge does consider in some detail at paragraphs 44 and 45  letters
    from the appellant's mother, yet fails properly to explain why  she  is
    prepared to attach weight to parts of the evidence from the mother, yet
    to reject other parts, and it is notable that the parts that  she  does
    accept are parts that she holds against the appellant  while  rejecting
    those  that  do  not  assist  her.   Similarly,  there  is  a   similar
    inconsistency, although it has not been drawn out in much  detail  with
    regard to the evidence and declarations from a friend, Miss H, referred
    to at paragraphs [47] and [48].

10. Further, I consider  that  her  failure  to  mention  the  abuse  at  a
    screening interview is a factor that has not been  taken  into  account
    properly, given also the observation that it was reasonable for her  to
    have been more comfortable to explain a sensitive issue in writing.

11. In addition, bearing in mind that the  appellant  was  giving  evidence
    through an interpreter, it is difficult to  see  how  the  findings  at
    paragraph  39  that  the  appellant  had  embellished  her   case   are
    sustainable.  A Government role or a state job  might  not  necessarily
    include the police and there does not appear to be sufficient  evidence
    on what is said to suggest that there had been any degree as the  judge
    appears to think of collusion between the appellant and her  solicitor.
    It is unclear to me also how it came about that the appellant was being
    asked about what passed between her and her solicitor.  That  was  very
    clearly a privileged matter and caution should at the very  least  have
    been taken before relying on such evidence.

12. Looking at these and looking at the decision as a whole I consider that
    the findings as to credibility are  unsafe  and  for  that  reason  the
    decision must be  set  aside.   In  reaching  that  conclusion  I  have
    considered whether the findings were material:  I  conclude  that  they
    were, given the somewhat cursory attention  to  the  risks  that  would
    occur had the appellant's account been true.  In my view  what  is  set
    out at paragraph 65 is not sufficient in these  circumstances  to  save
    the decision.  Accordingly, I conclude that ground 1 is made out and on
    that basis the decision must be set aside.

13. I do however consider  that  it  is  necessary  to  address  the  other
    grounds.  Had it been a stand-alone ground I would not have  found  the
    ground to establish an error.  I consider that in the circumstances and
    for the reasons given the judge gave adequate and  sustainable  reasons
    for rejecting the report of Dr Young.  I  consider  that  the  comments
    regarding her descending  into  the  arena  were  well-made,  given  in
    particular that at passages in her  report  Dr  Young  is,  in  effect,
    making statements about the consistency and the quality of the evidence
    given by the appellant.

14. I consider that ground 3 is made out and I have in  effect  dealt  with
    this in assessing the issue of credibility.

15. Ground 4 is in a sense parasitic on the findings with regard to asylum,
    given that insofar as Article 8 was raised it  was  raised  in  a  very
    brief submission  in  the  skeleton  argument  put  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that the circumstances described of the  appellant  were  such
    that she would find very significant difficulties in reintegrating into
    life in Albania and therefore she met  the  requirements  of  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi).  I find as these findings are with regard to the  asylum
    claim must be set aside, but for completeness it is necessary to  grant
    permission on this ground only as the remaking of  this  decision  will
    inevitably require a consideration of Article 8 if the asylum claim  or
    Article 3 humanitarian protection claim is not made out.

16. Accordingly, for these reasons I set aside the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for it to be remade. Although none of  the  findings  are
    preserved, I am not satisfied that it would in all the circumstances of
    this case be in the interests of justice to remit it to the  First-tier
    Tribunal

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. The appeal will be remade in the Upper Tribunal on a date to be fixed.

 3. Any additional evidence upon which either party seeks to rely  must  be
    served on the other party and on the Upper Tribunal at least 10 working
    days prior to the hearing.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 21 February 2020

Jeremy K H Rintoul
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

