
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05496/2016
                                                               PA/13338/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 MAY 2019                                |On 13 June 2019               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 SIRWAN [A]
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms Khan, instructed by Legal Justice, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born on  1  January  1995  and  is  a  male
    citizen of Iraq and is of Kurdish ethnicity. He appealed to the  First-
    tier Tribunal against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  dated  9
    April 2018 refusing the appellant's asylum/human rights claim following
    the making of a deportation order. On 15 March 2018, the appellant  had
    been convicted of one offence of possession of cocaine with  intent  to
    supply  and  sentenced  to  12  months  imprisonment.  The   First-tier
    Tribunal, in a decision promulgated on 31  January  2019,  allowed  the
    appeal on human rights grounds (Article 3 ECHR). The appeal  on  asylum
    and humanitarian protection grounds and in respect  of  Article  8  was
    dismissed. The Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appeal turned on the question of whether  the  appellant  would  be
    able to obtain the necessary identity papers in Iraq (commonly known as
    a CSID). The  Secretary  of  State  contends  that  the  judge  wrongly
    expected  the  respondent  to  show  how   the   appellant   might   be
    'redocumented' with a CSID whereas the onus  of  proof  rested  on  the
    appellant. The respondent also submits that the appellant's credibility
    has been damaged by his claim that he had lost or destroyed a  passport
    in Greece; the judge found that it was more likely that  the  appellant
    had destroyed his own passport. The judge also found that the appellant
    evidence  regarding  his  relatives  in  Iraq  was  inconsistent.   The
    appellant has four brothers 11 uncles and knows a  deputy  mayor  of  a
    town in Iraq who would be up to assist him in  obtaining  new  identity
    documentation. Further, the appellant not taken any steps whilst in the
    United Kingdom to obtain the necessary documents from the Iraqi embassy
    in London.

 3. I find that the appeal should be dismissed. At [35], the judge recorded
    that  the  'Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  accepted  that  [if  the
    appellant had no CSID] the appellant must win on Article 3  ECHR.'  The
    Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944 at headnote  [9]  held
    that:

         "9.  Regardless of the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
         necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain
         one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
         required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance  from
         the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
         treatment. If P shows there are no family or other  members  likely
         to be able to provide means of support, P is in general  likely  to
         face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if,  by
         the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State  or  her
         agents to assist P's return have been exhausted, it  is  reasonably
         likely that P will still have no CSID."

 4. The question of whether the appellant had attempted or would be able to
    obtain a CSID still in the United Kingdom does not appear to have  been
    ventilated at all before the judge. As  regards  the  comments  of  the
    judge at [53]  ('the  Home  Office  has  not  been  able  to  make  any
    suggestion has to how the appellant may be re-documented...'),  I  take
    this to be a reference to the submissions of the Home Office Presenting
    Officer or rather the absence of any submission that any family members
    in Iraq would be able to assist the appellant in obtaining  a  CSID.  I
    consider the Secretary of State's grounds in this instance to amount to
    an attempt to raise arguments which could have been raised at the First-
    tier Tribunal hearing but which were not raised. There appears to  have
    been no suggestion from either party nor is there any indication in the
    documentary evidence on file that it had been  suggested  at  any  time
    that the appellant's relatives in Iraq would be  able  to  assist  him.
    Moreover, the concession recorded more than once by the judge was  made
    by the Presenting Officer is recorded in unequivocal terms: it is  said
    that the respondent accepted that the  appellant  would  succeed  under
    Article 3 ECHR 'if he did not have a CSID' which both parties  accepted
    that he did not possess. The judge was required to determine the appeal
    on the facts as he found them. I accept that prima facie the  appellant
    had relatives in Iraq and that it would have been open to the judge  to
    consider whether those individuals would assist the appellant. However,
    I do not consider that  the  judge  was  obliged  to  investigate  that
    possibility in the absence of  any  submission  to  that  effect  being
    raised by the Secretary of State, still less when  the  respondent  had
    told the judge unambiguously that he accepted that the appellant should
    succeed in his appeal because he did not possess a CSID. It is not  now
    open to the Secretary of State to resile now from the position which he
    clearly adopted before the First-tier Tribunal. The judge was  entitled
    to rely upon what was said to him by  the  Presenting  Officer  at  the
    hearing. In the  circumstances,  I  find  that  the  appeal  should  be
    dismissed.



Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 5 June 2019



