
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05949/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 May 2019                                 |On 23 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AIM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Joseph, instructed by Irving & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (AIM).  A failure to comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  His  date  of  birth  has  been
    variously stated as 20 February 1983 (in the respondent's decision), 12
    June 1986 (in the appellant's witness statement dated 1  October  2012)
    and 23 February 1986 (in the determination of the First-tier Tribunal).
     I will adopt the latter date which has most recently been accepted and
    was not disputed before me.

 4. The appellant comes from Somaliland in Somalia.  He lived  there  until
    he was 3 or 4 when he left with his grandmother and sister traveling to
    Ethiopia.

 5. In February 1994, he entered the United Kingdom with his grandmother on
    a family visa.  Before me, it was said that he had entered on the basis
    of family reunion and had been granted indefinite leave to  enter.   Mr
    Howells, who represented the Secretary of State, did not  dispute  that
    and so I shall determine this appeal on that basis.

 6. The appellant was, therefore, 7 years and 11 months old when he entered
    the UK.  From about the age of 12, after he left  primary  school,  the
    appellant engaged in progressively  more  serious  offending  beginning
    with antisocial behaviour and escalating to violent offending.  He  was
    convicted of his first violent offence  in  2002  when  aged  14.   His
    offending is set out in the printout of the PNC record contained within
    the  appeal  file.   Together  with  his  most  recent  offending,  the
    appellant has been convicted of 28 offences on 11 separate occasions.

 7. His most recent offending occurred in 2005.  He was  convicted  at  the
    Cardiff Crown Court on that date, after a  trial,  of  three  offences:
    attempted murder, robbery and violent disorder.  He was sentenced to  a
    term of imprisonment of twelve years in a Young Offenders' Institution.
     He was released from prison in 2012.

 8. On 24 September 2007, the appellant was issued with a  notice  that  he
    was liable to deportation.  On 6 July 2012,  a  deportation  order  was
    signed  against  him.   On  13  July  2012,  he  appealed  against  the
    deportation decision.  On 10  October  2012,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissed his appeal.  He was subsequently refused permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and he  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  31
    January 2012.  He was refused permission to challenge  the  refusal  of
    permission to appeal by judicial review (on a Cart basis) on  12  March
    2013.

 9. On 6 December 2013, the  appellant  made  further  submission  claiming
    asylum.  A screening interview was conducted on  22  May  2014  and  an
    asylum interview took place on 12 December 2014.

10. On 27 April 2018, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claim
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on a human rights basis.





The Appeal

11. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 18 September 2018, Judge Frazer allowed the appellant's  appeal
    under Art 3 of the ECHR and Art 8 of the ECHR.  However, she  dismissed
    his appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.

12. In summary, Judge Frazer  did  not  uphold  the  Secretary  of  State's
    certification of the  asylum  claim  under  s.72  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002").  She  found  that
    the presumption that  he  was  a  danger  to  the  community  had  been
    rebutted.  However, in assessing the appellant's  asylum  claim,  Judge
    Frazer rejected his account that he would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Somalia as a result of a 'blood feud' arising from (it  was  said)  his
    cousin having killed someone in  the  course  of  acting  as  a  police
    officer and that his uncle had been told in 2013 by the police that all
    members of the appellant's family were at risk of a revenge killing.

13. However, Judge Frazer allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 3 on the
    basis that if he were returned to Mogadishu there was a real risk  that
    he would be destitute and have to live  in  an  IDP  camp  which  would
    breach Art 3.

14. Finally, Judge Frazer found that the effect upon the  appellant's  wife
    (whom he had married in 2013) and their child ("D") amounted  to  "very
    compelling circumstances" such that, by virtue of s.117C(6) of the  NIA
    Act 2002, the public interest did not require his deportation.

15. The Secretary of State sought, and was granted, permission to appeal by
    the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Hodgkinson) on  17  October  2018.   The
    appellant filed a rule 24 response.

16. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was initially heard by UTJ Allen on  1
    February 2019.  He set aside Judge  Frazer's  decision  so  far  as  it
    related to Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

17. As regards Art 3, UTJ Allen concluded that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether the appellant could return to Somaliland.  Further, in
    relation to her assessment of his circumstances if he  were  to  return
    and relocate to Mogadishu, the judge had failed properly to  apply  the
    relevant country guidance case of MOJ and Others [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC),
    in particular she had failed properly to consider whether the appellant
    would be able to take advantage of the 'economic boom' in Mogadishu.

18. As regards Art 8, UTJ Allen concluded that  the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider whether the impact upon the appellant's partner  and  daughter
    would be "unduly harsh" and whether, since he had been sentenced  to  a
    term of imprisonment of at least four years, the  public  interest  was
    outweighed because there were "very compelling circumstances  over  and
    above" those set out in para 399 and 399A of the Immigration Rules  (HC
    395 as amended) which reflect s.117C(4) and (5) of the NIA Act 2002.

19. In para 21 of his decision, UTJ Allen observed that the impact upon the
    appellant's daughter and wife, identified by  Judge  Frazer,  were  not
    matters which "on any rational view in my conclusion amount to such  as
    to make it unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant's  wife  and/or  daughter
    consequent on his deportation".  Further, at para 22 of  his  decision,
    taking those and all other circumstances  into  account,  he  concluded
    that the test in s.117C(6) was an "extremely high one,  and  it  cannot
    properly be argued that the test was met in this case".

20. It might be thought that given those conclusions that the circumstances
    of the appellant's partner and child could not rationally  fall  within
    what is "Exception 2" in s.117C(5)  and  all  the  circumstances  taken
    together could not amount to "very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above" those in Exception 2, UTJ Allen would have not  only  set  aside
    the judge's decision to allow the appeal under Art  8  but  would  also
    have remade the decision  dismissing  the  appeal;  the  only  rational
    conclusion that the appellant could not establish a breach  of  Art  8.
    However, he did not do that as, it can be seen  from  para  23  of  his
    decision, he was persuaded by the  representatives  that  it  might  be
    helpful for further submissions to be  made  even  though  it  was  not
    proposed that any further evidence be submitted.  And, of course, there
    was also the outstanding  issue  under  Art  3  which  had  to  be  re-
    determined afresh.

21. In the result, the appeal was relisted before me on 2 May 2019 when the
    representatives who had appeared before UTJ Allen (Mr Howells  for  the
    Secretary of State and Mr Joseph for the appellant) again appeared.

The Issues and Submissions

22. The only new evidence relied upon  before  me,  and  which  I  admitted
    without objection from Mr Howells, was a birth certificate showing  the
    birth of a second child ("M") of the appellant and his  partner  on  31
    March 2019.  Appended to it is a brief postnatal care  record  relating
    to the appellant's partner.  Consequently, the only new "fact"  arising
    since the decision of Judge  Frazer  is  that  the  appellant  and  his
    partner now have a second child who is just over 1 month old.

23. It was accepted before me that there were two issues.   First,  whether
    the appellant could establish that his return to Somalia  would  breach
    Art 3 because on return he would be destitute.  That was argued both on
    the basis that he was returned to his home area in Somaliland  (whether
    via Mogadishu or directly by air to  that  area)  and  if  he  were  to
    internally relocate to Mogadishu.  Applying the  approach  in  MOJ  and
    Others, it was contended that he would be destitute and at real risk of
    being forced to live in an IDP camp in circumstances in breach  of  Art
    3.

24. The second issue concerns Art 8.  It  was  common  ground  between  the
    parties that this issue had to be resolved by applying Part 5A  of  the
    NIA Act 2002.  In particular, the appellant could only  succeed  if  he
    could establish that he fell within s.117C(6), namely that  there  were
    "very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those  described  in
    Exceptions 1 and 2".

25. Those exceptions are set out in s.117C(4) and (5) respectively.  It was
    common ground that, in accordance with NA (Pakistan) and Others v  SSHD
    [2016] EWCA Civ 662, I should  first  consider  whether  the  appellant
    could succeed under Exception 1 and/or Exception  2  and  then,  if  he
    could,  whether  his  circumstances  as  a  whole  amounted  to   "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above the applicable Exception.

26. S.117C(4) sets out Exception 1, dealing with  an  individual's  private
    life in the following terms:

         "Exception 1 applies where -

         (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of
             C's life,

         (b)  C is socially and culturally integrated in the United Kingdom,
             and

         (c)  there would be very significant obstacles to  C's  integration
             into the country to which C is proposed to be deported."

27.  In  that  regard,  Mr  Howells  accepted  that  the  requirements   of
    s.117C(4)(a) and (b) were satisfied.  On the  basis  that  he  accepted
    that the appellant had entered the United Kingdom with indefinite leave
    to enter in January 1994 when he was 7 years and 11 months old, he  had
    lived most of his life (meaning at least half of his life: see  SSHD  v
    SC(Jamaica) [2017] EWCA Civ 2112) lawfully in the UK at the date of the
    hearing when he was 33 and 2 months old or, indeed, at the date of  the
    deportation order on 6 July 2012 when he was 18 years and 6 months old.
     On either basis he met the requirement in s.117C(4)(b) - although  the
    correct date for that assessment is at the date  of  the  hearing  and,
    despite the  wording  of  s.5(1)  of  the  Immigration  Act  1971,  the
    invalidating effect of a deportation order upon the appellant's ILE  is
    to be ignored (see Tirabi (Deportation:  "lawfully  resident":  s.5(1))
    [2018] UKUT 199 (IAC).

28. The submissions, therefore, in  relation  to  Exception  1  focused  on
    whether there were "very significant obstacles" to his integration into
    Somalia on return.

29. As regards Exception 2, that is set out in s.117C(5) as follows:

         "Exception  2  applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

30. It was accepted before me that C's partner was a  British  citizen  and
    both C's children are British citizens such that they are  respectively
    his  "qualifying  partner"  and  "qualifying  child"  as   defined   in
    s.117D(1).  It was also accepted that he had a "genuine and  subsisting
    relationship"  with  his  wife  and  with  his   two   children.    The
    submissions, therefore, in respect of Exception 2 focused upon  whether
    the impact of his deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon  either  his
    partner or his children.

31. In relation to the proper approach to "unduly harsh" I was referred  to
    the Supreme Court's decision in KO (Nigeria) and Others v  SSHD  [2018]
    UKSC 53 which had approved the formulation of  the  UT  in  MK  (Sierra
    Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at [27] that:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult.   Rather,  it  poses  a   considerably   more   elevated
         threshold.  'Harsh' in this context, denotes something  severe,  or
         bleak.   It  is  the  antithesis  of   pleasant   or   comfortable.
         Furthermore, the addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an  already
         elevated standard still higher."

32. In RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq  [2019]  UKUT
    00123 (IAC) the UT noted that the expression set a "high threshold".

33. In applying s.117C(6), it was also common ground that the  individual's
    claim must be a 'very strong'  one.   I  was  referred  to  the  recent
    decision of the UT in MS (s.117C(6): "very  compelling  circumstances")
    Philippines [2019] UKUT 00122 (IAC) in which the UT set out the  proper
    approach  to  s.117C(6)  requiring   a   consideration   of   all   the
    circumstances including the seriousness of  a  particular  offence  for
    which the foreign offender had been convicted.

34. It is  of  course,  axiomatic  that  the  notion  of  "very  compelling
    circumstances", by the very wording of s.117C(6), requires more than  a
    bare satisfaction of either Exception 1 or Exception 2 in s.117C(4) and
    (5).  With those matters in mind I now turn to consider the appellant's
    claim under Art 3 and Art 8 respectively.

Discussion

    Article 3

35. Mr Joseph put the appellant's case under Art 3 on two bases.  First, he
    submitted that the appellant would be at risk of treatment contrary  to
    Art 3, namely serious harm amounting to torture, degrading treatment or
    punishment if he returned to his home area in Somaliland where  he  has
    no relatives.  Secondly, he  would  equally  be  at  risk  if  he  were
    returned to Mogadishu.  In either case, he  has  no  family  there  and
    there was no evidence that his family in the UK could  support  him  or
    that he would, in the case of Mogadishu, be able to take the benefit of
    the 'economic boom' so as to support himself and not be forced to  live
    in an IDP camp.

36. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant came from the  second  city  of
    Somaliland, Burao.  He had lived there for three to four  years  before
    moving to Ethiopia for two years and then coming to the UK in 1994.  He
    referred me to the decision of the Upper Tribunal  in  AMM  and  Others
    (Conflict; humanitarian crisis; returnees; FGM) Somalia CG [2011]  UKUT
    445 (IAC) at paras 14 and 15 of  the  headnote  which  recognised  that
    "former residents" of Somaliland could return there without  risk.   He
    could safely return to Somaliland without a breach of Art 3.

37. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the appellant could, in any  event,
    safely and reasonably  be  expected  to  return  Somalia  and  live  in
    Mogadishu.  In  that  regard,  he  relied  upon  the  country  guidance
    decision in MOJ and Others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT
    442 (IAC) in particular paras (ix)-(xi) of the  headnote.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the appellant speaks Somali even though he  says  he  is
    not  proficient  in  it.   His  own  evidence,  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, was that he  had  a  grandmother  in  the  UK  with  whom  he
    communicates but who has never learnt  English.   Further,  Mr  Howells
    submitted that the appellant had not shown that he could not, at  least
    on a temporary basis, obtain financial assistance from his relatives in
    the UK.  He  submitted  that  the  appellant  has  a  partner  (who  is
    working), a grandmother and uncle.  Mr Howells also referred me to  the
    independent social worker's report prepared by Andrew Beckwith at  para
    2.10 which refers to a cousin of the appellant.  Mr  Howells  submitted
    there was no evidence to  suggest  that  they  could  not  provide  the
    appellant with some financial assistance.  Mr  Howells  submitted  that
    the appellant was in good physical and mental health and  was  able  to
    work.  He referred me to a number of documents in the bundles including
    the report of Julia Long, a forensic psychologist at paras 7.8 and  7.9
    and 11.9-11.11 dealing with the appellant's ability and aspirations  to
    work and his educational background.  Mr Howells also referred me to  a
    number of certificates at page 111 onwards of  the  appellant's  bundle
    showing  his  educational  and  vocational  achievements.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the appellant would be able to benefit from his work and
    educational experience on return to Mogadishu.  Further, there  was  no
    evidence that his clan, the Ardin Mudowey tribe, was a  minority  clan.
    Mr Howells submitted that it was unlikely that the appellant would,  as
    a result, be destitute on his return to Mogadishu.

38. In respect of Somaliland, Mr Howells relied upon the  same  factors  as
    relevant to his position there.

39. As regards the appellant's return to Somaliland, I was not referred  to
    any  specific  background  material  concerning  the  circumstances  in
    Somaliland.  The only material to which I was referred,  and  which  is
    helpfully set out in Mr Joseph's rule 24  response  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant, was the brief treatment "Somaliland and Puntland" in the  CG
    decision of AMM and Others.  There at paras 14 and 15 of  the  headnote
    the following is said:

         "14) The present appeals were  not  designed  to  be  vehicles  for
             giving country guidance on the position within  Somaliland  or
             Puntland.  There is no evidential basis for departing from the
             conclusion in NM and others, that Somaliland and  Puntland  in
             general only accept back persons who were former residents  of
             those regions and were members of locally based clans  or  sub
             clans.  In the context of Somali  immigration  to  the  United
             Kingdom, there is a close connection with Somaliland.

         15)  A person from Somaliland will not, in general, be able without
             real risk of serious harm to travel  overland  from  Mogadishu
             International Airport to a place where he or she might be able
             to obtain an unofficial travel document for  the  purposes  of
             gaining entry to Somaliland, and then by land  to  Somaliland.
             This is particularly the case if  the  person  is  female.   A
             proposed return by air to Hargeisa, Somaliland (whether or not
             via Mogadishu International Airport) will in  general  involve
             no such risks."

40. To an extent, Mr Joseph is correct in his submission that all that  AMM
    and Others demonstrates is that return to Somaliland by a person who is
    a "former resident" of that area and who is a member of a locally based
    clan, can do so either directly by air to  Hargeisa  or  via  Mogadishu
    International Airport.   The  fact  is,  however,  that  no  background
    material was put before me as to the precise  circumstances  which  the
    appellant would face on return.  He would, of  course,  have  not  have
    lived in Somaliland since he left when he was 3 or 4 years of age.   He
    would, in my judgment, nevertheless be a returning resident  and  could
    do so safe in accordance with what is said in AMM  and  Others.   Judge
    Frazer  made  no  findings  relevant  to  the  appellant's  return   to
    Somaliland and, indeed, that was one of the reasons why UTJ  Allen  set
    aside her decision (see para 17 of his decision).  I  accept  that  the
    appellant speaks Somali on the basis that he  is  able  to  communicate
    with his grandmother who does not speak English.  He has lived with his
    grandmother previously.

41. I remind myself that the burden of proof is upon the appellant,  albeit
    to the lower standard applicable in international protection cases,  to
    establish that on his return to Somaliland there would be a  breach  of
    Art 3 in  the  sense  (relevant  in  this  appeal)  that  he  would  be
    destitute.  I accept Mr Howells' submissions that on return to Somalia,
    the appellant would have the advantage  of  his  work  and  educational
    experience in the UK and, I also accept that his family in the UK would
    be in a position to provide him financial assistance to at least  allow
    him to 'find his feet' in his home  country.   That,  in  my  judgment,
    applies whether he were returned to Somaliland or Mogadishu.  There  is
    simply no evidence concerning the economic or  other  circumstances  to
    which the appellant would return in Somaliland.  For the reasons I have
    given, together with those which I shall give shortly  in  relation  to
    Mogadishu, the appellant has failed to satisfy me that there is a  real
    risk that if he returned to Somaliland that he would be  destitute  and
    would face treatment contrary to Art 3  of  the  ECHR  because  of  his
    circumstances.

42. Turning now  specifically  to  Mogadishu,  the  relevant  situation  in
    Mogadishu was, as a matter of  common  agreement  between  the  parties
    before me, set out in the CG decision of MJ and Others where  at  paras
    (vii)-(xi) of the headnote the Upper Tribunal set out the circumstances
    as follows:

         "(vii)   A person returning to Mogadishu after a period of  absence
                will look to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the
                city, for assistance in re-establishing himself and securing
                a livelihood.  Although a returnee may also seek  assistance
                from his clan members who are not close relatives, such help
                is only likely to be forthcoming for majority clan  members,
                as minority clans may have little to offer.
         (viii)   The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
                changed.  Clans now  provide,  potentially,  social  support
                mechanisms and assist with access to livelihoods, performing
                less of a protection function than previously.  There are no
                clan militias in Mogadishu, no clan violence,  and  no  clan
                based  discriminatory  treatment,  even  for  minority  clan
                members.
          (ix)    If it is accepted that a person facing return to Mogadishu
                after a period of absence has no  nuclear  family  or  close
                relatives in the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-establishing
                himself  on  return,  there  will  need  to  be  a   careful
                assessment   of   all   of   the    circumstances.     These
                considerations will include, but are not limited to:
                 . Circumstances in Mogadishu before departure


                 . Length of absence from Mogadishu

                 . Family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu

                 . Access to financial resources

                 . Prospects  of  securing  a  livelihood  whether  that  be
                   employment or self employment

                 . Availability of remittances from abroad

                 . Means of support during the  time  spent  in  the  United
                   Kingdom

                 . Why his ability to fund the journey to the West no longer
                   enables an  appellant  to  secure  financial  support  on
                   return.
          (x) Put another way, it will be for the person facing  return  to
                explain why he would not be  able  to  access  the  economic
                opportunities that have been produced by the economic  boom,
                especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees
                are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never  been
                away.
         (xi) It will, therefore, only be  those  with  no  clan  or  family
                support who will not  be  in  receipt  of  remittances  from
                abroad and who have no real prospect of securing access to a
                livelihood on return who will face the prospect of living in
                circumstances falling below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
                humanitarian protection terms."

43. At para [344] the Upper Tribunal remarked:

         "The economic  revival  of  Mogadishu  can  be  described  only  as
         remarkable, considering what is known about conditions in the  city
         since the civil war began in 1991."

44. The economic conditions are further described in the  Upper  Tribunal's
    Decision at paras [345], [346] and [351] as follows:

         "345.    It is  beyond  doubt  that  there  has  been  huge  inward
                investment, large-scale construction  projects  and  vibrant
                business activity.  Land values are said to  be  'rocketing'
                and entrepreneurial members of the diaspora with  access  to
                funding  are  returning  in  significant  numbers   in   the
                confident  expectation  of  launching  successful   business
                projects.  The question to be addressed  is  what,  if  any,
                benefit does this deliver for so called 'ordinary returnees'
                who are not themselves wealthy businessmen or highly skilled
                professionals employed by such people.
          346.    According  to  the  respondent,  a  striking  feature  of
                developments in Mogadishu since AMM  is  the  evidence  that
                'huge numbers' of people have returned to Mogadishu, that is
                said to be indicative of a considerable reduction in  levels
                of violence and improvements in security.   Some  local  NGO
                sources  have  said  that  there  were   300,000   returning
                residents to Mogadishu in the six  months  between  November
                2011 and April 2012 alone.   By  August  2012  it  had  been
                estimated that more than 500,000 people had  moved  back  to
                the capital including the vast majority who had  fled  since
                2007.
                ....
         351. Further, there is evidence before the Tribunal, identified  by
                Dr Mullen, to the effect that returnees from  the  West  may
                have an advantage in seeking employment  in  Mogadishu  over
                citizens who have remained in the city throughout.  This  is
                said to be because such returnees are likely  to  be  better
                educated and considered more resourceful and therefore  more
                attractive as  potential  employees,  especially  where  the
                employer himself or herself has returned from  the  diaspora
                to invest in new business."

45. I accept that the appellant has never lived in Mogadishu.  I also, as I
    have  already  found,  accept  that  he  does  speak  Somali  at  least
    sufficient to communicate with his grandmother over the years  and,  no
    doubt, therefore any deficiency in that language could in  time  easily
    be overcome in Somalia.  I also accept that he would be able to  obtain
    financial assistance from his family, including his partner  and  other
    members of his family in the UK.  He is an abled bodied person and  has
    experience of work and educational qualifications which will assist him
    on  return.   As  regards  his  clan,  the   Ardin   Mudowey,   neither
    representative was in a position to assist me as to whether this was  a
    majority or minority clan.  No background material was put before me to
    assist.  In any event, as MOJ and Others emphasises, the  relevance  of
    clans in Mogadishu is now in relation to support mechanism rather  than
    creating risks to others.  I am satisfied that the appellant is likely,
    on return to Mogadishu, despite the absence  of  any  family  or  other
    connections with  Mogadishu  to  be  able  to  take  advantage  of  the
    "economic boom" and to be able to financially provide for himself.  Any
    short-term necessary  financial  support  would,  in  my  judgment,  be
    available from his family in the UK.

46. In these circumstances, the appellant  has  failed  to  establish  that
    there is a real risk that on return to Mogadishu he will  be  destitute
    and at risk of having to live in an IDP camp.

47. For these reasons, the appellant  has  failed  to  establish  that  his
    removal to Somalia would breach Art 3 and I dismiss his appeal on  this
    ground.

    Article 8

48. In relation to Art 8, the parties' submissions addressed first  whether
    the appellant could establish Exception 1 in s.117C(4) and/or Exception
    2 in s.117C(5); and,  then,  if  he  could  whether  there  were  "very
    compelling circumstances, over and above those described in  Exceptions
    1 and 2" as required by s.117C(6) in order for him  to  establish  that
    the decision breached Art 8 because the public interest was  outweighed
    by his particular circumstances.

49. As regards Exception 1, Mr Howells accepted that the appellant met  the
    requirements in s.117C(4)(a) and (b), namely that he had been  lawfully
    resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life  and  that  he  was
    socially  and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United   Kingdom.    He
    submitted, however, that there were not "very significant obstacles" to
    his integration in Somalia.  He relied upon the same factors which,  he
    had submitted, led to a finding that the appellant's return  would  not
    breach Art 3.

50. Mr Joseph submitted that the assessment under s.117C(4)(c) was not  the
    same assessment as under Art 3 even if similar factors  were  relevant.
    He submitted that the appellant  was,  in  his  word,  "effectively"  a
    British citizen.  He had no connections to Somalia and he had not lived
    in Mogadishu and had left Somalia when he was 3 or  4  years  old.   He
    invited me to consider that the appellant would have  no  accommodation
    or support in Mogadishu.

51. Whilst I accept Mr Joseph's submission that the issue of whether  there
    are "very significant obstacles" for  the  appellant's  integration  in
    Somalia is not the same question as whether or not there is a breach of
    Art 3 of the ECHR, I do accept Mr Howells' submissions that the factors
    that  are  relevant  to  the  Art  3  assessment  remain  relevant   to
    determining whether there  are  "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his
    integration.  Integration is, as the Court of Appeal held in  Kamara  v
    SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 813, to be approached holistically looking at  all
    the circumstances.   Equally,  the  requirement  that  there  be  "very
    significant obstacles" is a high threshold.  It is not satisfied simply
    by establishing  difficulties,  inconvenience  or  hardships  alone  on
    return.

52. In this case, whilst I accept that the appellant  has  never  lived  in
    Mogadishu, or indeed in Somalia  at  all  since  he  was  3  or  4,  he
    nevertheless speaks Somali, at least to a communications level, and  in
    respect of which any deficit would, in my judgment, be likely  overcome
    relatively quickly.  Whilst he has no family or friends  in  Mogadishu,
    he has, in my judgment, the ability to obtain employment and  therefore
    provide financially for himself both  in  terms  of  accommodation  and
    subsistence.  In the short-term, at least, financial support  could  be
    forthcoming from the UK.  I do not accept Mr Joseph's  characterisation
    of the appellant being "effectively" a British citizen.  True,  it  is,
    that he has lived here for over 25 years since January 1994.   He  came
    as a young child aged 7.  He has, as Mr Howells' submission in relation
    s.117C(4)(b) acknowledged, integrated into society  in  the  UK.   That
    does not, however, mean that he would face "very significant obstacles"
    to integrating in Somalia which is his country  of  birth,  origin  and
    ethnic background.  I accept that he would face difficulties  in  doing
    so, not least because of the period  of  time  since  he  was  last  in
    Somalia and his age when he left.  However, I am not satisfied that the
    level of difficulty he would face, despite those factors,  reaches  the
    level of "very  significant  obstacles"  such  that  he  satisfies  the
    requirements of Exception 1 in s.117C(4).

53. Turning now to the Exception 2, the issue is whether the impact of  his
    deportation would be "unduly harsh" upon his  partner  and/or  his  two
    children.  That decision has to be reached on the  basis  only  of  the
    impact upon them without regard to the public interest  or  seriousness
    of the appellant's offending (see KO (Nigeria) and Others).   The  test
    in MK, as approved by the Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and  Others  at
    [27], imposes a high threshold (see RA at [17]).  It is a higher hurdle
    than that of "reasonableness" in s.117B(6) (see KO (Nigeria) and Others
    at  [23]).   It  denotes  something  "severe,  or  bleak"  and  is  the
    "antithesis of pleasant or  comfortable"  (see  MK  at  [46]).   In  KO
    (Nigeria) and Others, Lord Carnwath at [23] stated that:

         "One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond  that  which
         would  necessarily  be  involved  for  any  child  faced   with   a
         deportation of a parent."

54. With the necessary change in the wording, it is equally true  that  the
    test seeks  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  that  which  would
    necessarily be involved for any partner left in the UK faced  with  the
    deportation of their partner.

55. In this case, I heard no oral evidence.  Judge  Frazer  did  hear  some
    oral evidence and that is reproduced in her decision in the  First-tier
    Tribunal together with the supporting  evidence  from  the  independent
    social worker, Andrew Beckwith  and  medical  evidence  concerning  the
    health of the appellant's partner who suffers from anxiety,  depression
    and back problems and in relation to the appellant's first  child,  who
    suffers from febrile convulsion but in respect of whom it is said  that
    she is likely to grow out of by the age of 6.

56. The evidence is helpfully summarised by the judge at paras 30-33 of her
    determination as follows:

         "30. In August 2013 the Appellant's daughter had  a  seizure.   She
             had  a  further  one  some  three   months   later   and   was
             hospitalised.  Thereafter she continued to  have  seizures  at
             intervals.  The letter from Dr Thorne  dated  13th  June  2018
             states that [M] has been diagnosed with  febrile  convulsions.
             She was seen by a Consultant Paediatrician on 15th  May  2018.
             Dr. Thorne was of the opinion that if she was  suffering  from
             febrile convulsions she would continue to grow out of them  in
             time.  I considered  the  letter  of  Dr  Stevens,  Consultant
             Paediatrician dated 29th January 2018 which also provides  the
             opinion that she was suffering from febrile convulsions  which
             she should grow out of.  The medical evidence  suggested  that
             the convulsions were connected  to  temperature  raises  which
             explained the diagnosis.

         31.  I have considered  the  report  of  Andrew  Beckwith  in  this
             context.  He reports about the Appellant's  family  situation.
             I noted in particular his observations at paragraph 2.8:

                  'Although [M] attends nursery two  days  a  week,  due  to
                  [F's] work  patterns,  which  does  include  Saturday  and
                  Sunday working, the primary carer for [M] is  her  father.
                  Throughout my visit I observed a very  close  relationship
                  between father and daughter.  For the  first  hour  of  my
                  visit, [F] was working and I spent this time  just  mainly
                  watching father and daughter  play  together.   It  is  my
                  opinion that there is a  very  strong  attachment  between
                  them.  Even when [F] did return it was noticeable that [M]
                  would gravitate towards her father, sitting on his knee to
                  read  books  and  sing  nursery  rhymes  with  him.    [F]
                  confirmed that this was not unusual.  She stated that  [M]
                  had  a  very  strong  bond  with  her  father.   She  said
                  laughingly that she sometimes feels  slightly  jealous  as
                  [M] and her father are inseparable.'

         32.  In his analysis at paragraph  3.2  Mr  Beckwith  states,  'the
             deportation of [the appellant] would deny [M]  a  relationship
             with her father.  No modern means of communication  via  Skype
             or any other social media outlet could replicate the  personal
             relationship they have.'

         33.  Mr Beckwith also commented on  the  potential  effect  of  the
             Appellant's removal on his wife's mental health and ability to
             provide effective care for the children (paragraph  3.5).   He
             provides  his  wife  with  emotional  and  practical  support,
             assisting her with the care of the children.  She suffers from
             back  problems  and  anxiety  and  depression.   Under  cross-
             examination the Appellant's wife gave evidence  that  she  had
             family in Cardiff and also  had  close  connections  with  her
             husband's family.  I find that if the Appellant were  removed,
             it would be open to the Appellant's wife to seek support  from
             her family and extended family members but I  appreciate  that
             this would not be of the same  quality  as  support  from  her
             husband, the father of her child.  I also  take  into  account
             the comments in the report which warned  that  if  her  mental
             health symptoms continued and without her  husband's  support,
             this would affect her ability  to  parent  her  children  long
             term."

57. Mr Joseph submitted that it was in the best interests of not only M but
    also the appellant's new daughter that the family should stay together.
     He accepted that the test of "undue  harshness"  sets  a  particularly
    high bar.   Nevertheless,  he  submitted  that  the  report  of  Andrew
    Beckwith established that M would not just  miss  her  father  but  his
    removal would have an impact upon her (and now her new sibling) as they
    grew up.  He pointed out that the appellant was a full-time  father  as
    his partner worked and he could not because of the  deportation  order.
    He was, Mr Joseph submitted, effectively her primary carer although  he
    recognised that the care was shared.  He was devoting all of  his  time
    to his family and his older child was fully aware of  her  relationship
    with her father.  He submitted it would  be  devastating  to  lose  her
    father.  He pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  "turned  his  life
    around".

58. In respect of the appellant's partner, Mr Joseph  submitted  that  they
    have been together since 2013 and their relationship  was  strong.   He
    relied upon her medical  condition  and  what  the  independent  social
    worker said, namely that she would struggle without  the  appellant  to
    look after the children.

59. Mr Joseph submitted that taking all  these  factors  into  account  the
    appellant's deportation would be "unduly harsh" on both his partner and
    his two children.

60. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant's partner had  the  support  of
    other  family  members  who  could  both  assist  her  in  relation  to
    monitoring her own health and help with the children.  He  relied  upon
    paras 3.1, 3.2, 3.4, 3.5 and 4.1-4.2 of the independent social worker's
    report.  He submitted that the appellant's partner would not  be  alone
    living without the appellant.

61. In respect of the  appellant's  eldest  child,  he  accepted  that  the
    medical evidence was that she suffered from seizures but that  she  was
    likely to grow out of them possibly by the age of 7 and he referred  me
    to the report of a consultant paediatrician, Dr Stevens,  in  a  letter
    dated 5 February 2018 at page 37 of the appellant's bundle.

62. Mr Howells reminded me that more than the normal effect  of  separation
    had to be shown in order to establish the "unduly harsh"  requirements.
    Mr Howells submitted that the impact upon the appellant's  partner  and
    his children was not such as to amount to "undue harshness"  such  that
    Exception 2 had not been established.

63. I state at the outset that I accept that the evidence  shows  that  the
    appellant's partner suffers from anxiety, depression and back problems.
     I note, however, that the appellant's partner works.   I  also  accept
    the evidence that the appellant's  older  child  suffers  from  febrile
    convulsions but that the evidence is that she is likely to grow out  of
    these seizures possibly by the age of 6.  I accept that, in relation to
    caring for both the appellant's older child and  now  a  second  child,
    that will be harder as  a  single  parent  than  it  would  be  if  the
    appellant were to  remain  in  the  UK.   I  find,  however,  that  the
    appellant's partner has extended family in the  UK  who  could  provide
    support for her.  I take fully into account  what  is  said  by  Andrew
    Beckwith, in particular at paras 3.1-3.5, in relation to  his  view  of
    the impact of the appellant's deportation both upon M and his wife.   I
    do not accept,  however,  that  that  impact  reaches  the  significant
    threshold of "undue harshness" required to establish Exception  2.   It
    falls short of it, in my judgment, by quite some way.  I  have  reached
    that assessment on the basis of all the  evidence.   I  note,  however,
    that UTJ Allen in his earlier decision went even further in  expressing
    the view that the impact upon M and the appellant's wife (the  evidence
    in respect of which was not materially different from that  before  me)
    could not "on any rational view"  reach  the  level  of  being  "unduly
    harsh".  As I have said, I reach my finding on the evidence independent
    of that view expressed in the earlier hearing.

64. For these reasons, therefore, I am not satisfied that the appellant can
    establish either Exception 1  or  Exception  2  in  s.117C(4)  and  (5)
    respectively.

65. With those findings in mind, I turn to consider s.117C(6)  and  whether
    it is established that there are "very compelling  circumstances,  over
    and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2" (my  emphasis).   Only
    if that is established, can it be shown that the public interest in the
    appellant's offending is outweighed  so  as  to  make  his  deportation
    disproportionate.

66. In that  regard,  I  accept  that  the  appellant's  deportation  would
    interfere with his private and family life established  over  his  long
    residence in the UK and in respect of his family life with his wife and
    (now) two children.  There is no suggestion they should  leave  the  UK
    with him.

67. I apply the approach set out by the Upper Tribunal in MS.  I must  take
    into account the seriousness of the appellant's offending.   I  accept,
    of course, that the appellant's last offence occurred in 2012.  He  had
    a previous history, mostly as  a  juvenile,  of  persistent  offending.
    That most recent conviction was, however, for a number of very  serious
    offences including the extremely serious offence  of  attempted  murder
    and for which he was  sentenced  to  twelve  years'  imprisonment.   Mr
    Howells told me that there was no available record  of  the  sentencing
    judge's remarks because the Crown  Court  had  lost  the  'tape'.   The
    seriousness of that offence, however, speaks for itself.  It is one  of
    the most serious criminal offences.  And, the sentence also  speaks  to
    the seriousness of the appellant's offending.  I also accept  that  the
    appellant has not  offended  since  he  was  released  from  prison  in
    September 2012.  Mr Howells did not seek to look behind Judge  Frazer's
    finding at para 24 of her determination where she found, on  the  basis
    of all the evidence including that of the  independent  social  worker,
    that the appellant was "no longer at any significant level of risk  for
    general offending".  She found that "his rehabilitation  has  had  some
    success".  She further expressed the view that he had turned  his  life
    around.  In RA, the Upper Tribunal concluded that  the  fact  that  the
    individual has not committed any further  offences  since  his  release
    from prison is:

         "highly unlikely to have a material bearing, given that everyone is
         expected not  to  commit  crimes.   Rehabilitation  will  therefore
         normally do no more than show that the individual has  returned  to
         the place where society expects him  (and  everyone  else)  to  be.
         There is, in other words, no material weight which ordinarily falls
         to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality balance ..."

68. In addition, the Upper Tribunal  also  recognised  that  it  could  not
    categorically say that rehabilitation was "never" capable of playing  a
    significant role.

69. Even taking into account Judge Frazer's finding (which I have no reason
    to doubt) that the appellant  has  changed,  perhaps  as  a  result  of
    marrying and  having  children  since  2013,  the  public  interest  is
    reflected in the seriousness of his offence (see  s.117C(1)  and  (2)).
    He has been convicted of a number of serious  offences,  including  the
    extremely  serious  offence  of  attempted  murder  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to twelve years in a YOI.  There is, in my judgment,  a  very
    strong public interest, including deterring  other  foreign  criminals,
    reflected in the facts of that offence.

70. My attention was not drawn  to  any  factors  under  s.117B  that  were
    pertinent to my decision.  It was accepted, by  Mr  Howells,  that  the
    appellant had  ILE,  albeit  that  that  was  now  invalidated  by  the
    deportation order in July 2012.  Whether, as a result of the effect  of
    s.5 of the Immigration Act, or because of  the  known  existence  of  a
    deportation order, the appellant's family life  with  his  partner  was
    established and formed at a time when his continued presence in the  UK
    was precarious in  the  sense  that  it  was  always  at  risk  of  not
    continuing.

71. Given  that  the  appellant  cannot  establish  that  he  falls  within
    Exception 1 or Exception 2, it is difficult to see how  he  could  show
    "very compelling circumstances" which are "over and  above"  either  of
    those exceptions since the substance of his case based upon his private
    life in the UK or his family life with his partner and children are the
    subject matter of those two exceptions respectively.

72. In reaching my conclusion in respect of s.117C(6), I bear in mind  that
    the appellant has been in the UK since he was 7  years  old.   He  has,
    however, a lengthy criminal record albeit  one,  apart  from  the  most
    recent offences, committed when he was a  juvenile.   His  most  recent
    offences are  very  serious  or,  in  the  case  of  attempted  murder,
    extremely serious indeed.  Only a "very strong" case  could  amount  to
    "very compelling  circumstances"  over  and  above  there  being  "very
    significant obstacles to his integration" or that  the  impact  on  his
    partner and/or his children would be "unduly harsh".  That  is  a  very
    high hurdle to overcome  indeed.   The  only  new  evidence  since  the
    decision of UTJ Allen is that the appellant and his partner now have  a
    second child born in March of this year.

73.  In  my  judgment,  taking  all  the  circumstances  cumulatively,   in
    particular the fact of the appellant's rehabilitation,  the  children's
    best interests and the impact  upon  them  and  his  wife  if  he  were
    deported  and  his  circumstances  on  return  to  Somalia,  cannot  be
    described as "very compelling circumstances" which are "over and above"
    those in Exception 1 and Exception 2.  Indeed, they come  nowhere  near
    establishing that there are "very compelling  circumstances"  over  and
    above Exceptions 1 and/or 2.

74. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the appellant's  deportation  is
    proportionate and not a breach of Art 8 of the ECHR.

Decision

75. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    was set aside by the Upper Tribunal in its decision  sent  on  6  March
    2019.

76. I remake the decision dismissing the appeal under Arts 3 and 8  of  the
    ECHR.

77. The First-tier tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal on asylum  and
    humanitarian protection grounds stands.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                22, May 2019

