
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/05777/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 17th May 2019                       | On 4th July 2019                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     NLK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms NLK, in person
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT) has made an anonymity order and for the
      avoidance of any doubt, that order continues.  NLK is granted
      anonymity throughout these proceedings.  No report of these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her or any member of
      her family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to the
      respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to
      proceedings being brought for contempt of court.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge O'Brien promulgated on 22nd June 2018.  The FtT Judge dismissed
      the appellant's appeal against the decision of the respondent dated
      9th April 2018, to refuse her claim for international protection and
      leave to remain on human rights grounds.


   3. The appellant is a national of Burundi. Her immigration history is set
      out at paragraph [2] of the decision on FtT Judge O'Brien.  It appears
      that she arrived in the United Kingdom on or about 22nd March 2000 and
      made a claim for asylum.  The claim was refused and an appeal against
      that decision was dismissed by the Tribunal.  She had exhausted her
      rights of appeal in 2005.  On 4th December 2003, the appellant gave
      birth to her son ("NK") in the UK.  His father is a national of Sierra
      Leone.


   4. The appellant left the UK for Belgium in 2008/9 and claims to have
      returned to the UK in December 2012. On 7th December 2012, the
      appellant made further submissions to the respondent. The respondent
      again refused the claim for international protection for reasons set
      out in a decision dated 10th October 2014. On 27th February 2018, the
      appellant made yet further submissions to the respondent.  The
      respondent again refused the claim international protection and
      decided that the appellant does not meet the requirements under the
      immigration rules for leave to remain in the UK, on the basis of her
      family and private life. That decision gave rise to a right of appeal.
      The appeal was heard by FtT Judge O'Brien on 1st June 2018 and it is
      his decision promulgated on 22nd June 2018, that is the subject of the
      appeal before me.


The decision of FtT Judge O'Brien


   5. At paragraphs [5] and [6] of his decision, FtT Judge O'Brien
      summarises the reasons provided by the respondent for refusing the
      claim for international protection.  At paragraphs [12] to [16] of the
      decision, the Judge sets out the evidence received, and submissions
      made by the parties. The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out
      at paragraphs [36] to [45] of the decision. In reaching his decision,
      the FtT Judge noted that the appellant is a citizen of Burundi and has
      a son, NK, who was born in the UK. It was common ground that NK is a
      national of Burundi.  The Judge noted that NK's father is not a
      British citizen, and he does not have any relationship with NK. The
      Judge noted, at [37], that the appellant and NK left the UK sometime
      at or around the beginning of 2009, and returned on 7th December 2012.
       The Judge notes, at [38], as follows:


             "... her claim to have been raped by Tutsis was rejected by
             Adjudicator Hanes, as was her claim that her father was wanted
             by the Tutsis, that she had no contact with her family, that
             she had no family or relatives to return to in her home
             village, or that she would be persecuted on return, either
             because of her ethnicity or because she was a single woman
             with a child. The appellant has provided no evidence to
             suggest that the situation would be any different now, or that
             I should depart from the unappealed findings of Adjudicator
             Hayes.  Therefore, I reject the suggestion that the appellant
             would be at risk of persecution or serious harm on the grounds
             of ethnicity, because of her family circumstances, or at all."


   6. The appellant had maintained that she has no contact with her family.
      FtT Judge O'Brien was unconvinced that the appellant has become
      estranged from her family. He considered her claims to the contrary,
      to be self-serving and motivated by a clear desire to avoid removal to
      Burundi at all costs. He noted that in any event, the appellant admits
      that she still has friends in Burundi.  FtT Judge O'Brien considered
      the appellant's claim that she will be destitute if she is returned to
      Burundi. He found there to be no evidence of the likelihood of
      destitution, and noted that contrary to her claim, she would have
      family (and at least friends) to return to. He noted that in any
      event, the appellant could make use of the respondent's assisted
      voluntary return program to secure some financial resources for her
      return.  As to the best interests of NK, the Judge states at paragraph
      [41] as follows:


             "The appellant frankly states that one of the reasons that she
             does not want to return is because her son would have better
             opportunities in this country. However, he is not, and has not
             been entitled to the free education he has received; The
             United Kingdom is not obliged to educate the world. The
             appellant has not demonstrated that he would not have access
             to education in Burundi; on the contrary some free education
             appears to be available in Burundi. It is clear from the
             documents before me that [NK] speaks Swahili. He clearly
             adapted to the move from the United Kingdom to Belgium in
             2008/2009 and back again four years later. He is likely to
             have extended family in Burundi. He would have no less a
             relationship with this father there, than he does in the
             United Kingdom. All in all, I do not consider that [NK's]
             removal to Burundi would be contrary to his best interests."


   7. The Judge accepted that the removal of the family would interfere
      sufficiently with their private life, to engage Article 8.  The Judge
      noted that the appellant and NK would be removed together, and that NK
      does not have a relationship with his father. The Judge concluded that
      the removal of the appellant and NK would not be disproportionate, and
      the appeal on Article 8 grounds was dismissed.


The appeal before me


   8. In the written grounds of appeal, the appellant claims that FtT Judge
      O'Brien erred in law at paragraph [44] of his decision, in stating
      that the family's private life attracts little weight. The appellant
      accepts that in the assessment of proportionality, the private life
      that she has established, attracts little weight, but, she claims, NK
      was born in the UK, and "has spent a total of over 10 years in this
      country".  The appellant claims that the Judge erred in attaching
      little weight to NK's private life, as the UK is the only country that
      he has lived in, aside from a three-year spell in Belgium. The
      appellant also claims that in his assessment as to the best interests
      of NK, the FtT Judge refers to NK having adapted to a new life in
      Belgium in 2008/9, and then returning back to life in the UK.  She
      claims it is impossible to extrapolate from that, that NK would be
      able to adapt to a move to Burundi, and that in his consideration of
      the best interests of NK, the Judge fails to state what would be in
      NK's best interests.


   9. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Shimmin on 23rd July
      2018.  In granting permission, the Judge noted "It is arguable that
      the judge eerily erred in law in stating that the family's private
      lives attracted little weight when the appellant's son has spent over
      10 years in the UK."  The matter comes before me to consider whether
      the decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of
      law, and if so, to remake the decision.


  10. The appellant was not represented at the hearing of her appeal before
      me, but she was accompanied by a children's practitioner, namely Susan
      Watson, employed by Derby City Council. I permitted Ms Watson to act
      as a 'McKenzie friend', and assist the appellant. As the appellant was
      unrepresented, notwithstanding the fact that the appeal before me is
      an appeal by the appellant, I invited Mr Tan to make submissions
      first, so that the appellant can understand why the respondent
      maintains that the decision of FtT Judge O'Brien does not contain any
      material error of law capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.


  11. The respondent has filed a rule 24 response dated 24th September 2018
      in which the respondent confirms that the appeal is opposed.  The
      respondent adopted that response. It is said that the fact that NK may
      have lived in the UK for a total period in excess of 10 years, is not
      relevant. That would be to ignore the fact that the appellant and NK
      lived outside the UK, in Belgium, between 2009 and 2012.  The
      respondent submits that the FtT Judge correctly proceeds upon the
      premise that NK is not a qualifying child.  The respondent submits
      that the FtT Judge carefully considered the best interests of NK, and
      it was open to the Judge to conclude that NK's removal to Burundi
      would not be contrary to his best interests. In reaching that
      conclusion, the FtT Judge did not limit his consideration simply to
      the fact that NK had adapted to life in Belgium before returning, and
      adapting to life in the UK again. The FtT Judge also considered other
      relevant matters including the provision of education in Burundi, his
      ability to speak Swahili, and the fact that the appellant would, on
      the findings made by the Judge, have family, or least friends, to
      return to in Burundi.


  12. Mr Tan submits that the there was no substantial evidence before the
      FtT regarding the private life that NK has established in the UK. He
      submits that the FtT Judge considered all relevant matters in his
      assessment of the best interests of the child, and that the grounds of
      appeal amount to nothing more than a disagreement with findings and
      conclusions that were properly open to the Judge.


  13. The appellant adopted her grounds of appeal.  She accepts that she
      took NK to Belgium in or about 2009, but she submits, that is a
      European country, and it was easier for NK to adapt to life there.
      She maintains that she has no links to Burundi, and she submits that
      NK would be unable to adapt to life there.





Discussion


  14. S117B(vi) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the
      2002 Act"), confirms that in the case of a person who is not liable to
      deportation, the public interest does not require the person's removal
      where-(a)the person has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
      with a qualifying child, and (b)it would not be reasonable to expect
      the child to leave the United Kingdom. The term "qualifying child" is
      defined in s117D.  A "qualifying child" means a person who is under
      the age of 18 and who-(a) is a British citizen, or (b)has lived in the
      United Kingdom for a continuous period of seven years or more.  NK was
      born in the UK in December 2003 and lived in the UK with the appellant
      until sometime in 2008/2009, when they left to live in Belgium.  They
      returned to the UK in December 2012.  On any view of the facts, as at
      the time of the respondent's decision, and the hearing before the FtT,
      NK had not lived in the United Kingdom for a continuous period of
      seven years or more.  I accept, as the respondent submits, that the
      fact that NK may have lived in the UK for a total period in excess of
      10 years is not relevant.  To benefit from s117B(vi) of the 2002 Act,
      the requirement is that NK must have lived in the United Kingdom for a
      continuous period of seven years or more.  In my judgment, the FtT
      Judge properly proceeded upon the premise that NK is not a qualifying
      child. In any event, s117B(vi) not only requires there to be a genuine
      and subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child, but
      additionally, some evidence that it would not be reasonable to expect
      the child to leave the United Kingdom.


  15. S55 of the Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 requires the
      respondent to make arrangements for ensuring that her functions in
      relation to immigration, asylum or nationality are discharged having
      regard to the need to safeguard and promote the welfare of children
      who are in the UK.


  16. I reject the claim that the Judge erred in making his decision without
      considering the best interests of NK, or by failing to apply the
      principles set out by the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) and
      considering the best interests of the child as a primary
      consideration. It is plain from a careful reading of paragraphs [41]
      to [44] of the decision, that the Judge had regard to the duty under
      s55 and the best interests of the child.  The best interests of NK,
      whilst a primary consideration, is not the only consideration.


  17. In my judgment, from a careful reading of the findings and conclusions
      of FtT Judge O'Brien, it is clear that the Judge addressed matters
      relevant to an assessment of whether the removal of the appellant and
      NK is proportionate.  I accept that NK is in no way to be held
      responsible for the appellant's misconduct, but as has been said
      repeatedly, children are not a "trump card".  In the real world,
      families move countries and continents all the time, frequently so
      that their parents can find, or continue with work.  It is clear from
      a careful reading of the decision of the FtT Judge, that he considered
      the particular circumstances of this family, in the real world.


  18. The obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in sufficient detail
      to show the principles on which the Tribunal has acted and the reasons
      that have led to the decision.  Such reasons need not be elaborate,
      and do not need to address every argument or every factor which
      weighed in the decision.  In my judgement, the findings reached by the
      Judge were neither irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury
      sense, or findings that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The
      assessment of such matters is always a highly fact sensitive task.
      The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole. He
      clearly did so.


  19. I accept the submission made by Mr. Tam on behalf of the respondent.
      The written grounds of appeal amount to nothing more than a
      disagreement with the findings of the Judge that were properly open to
      him


Notice of Decision


  20. The appellant's appeal is dismissed and the decision of FtT Judge
      O'Brien promulgated on 22nd June 2018 is to stand.


 Signed                                 Date          20th June 2019



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal but in any event, as no fee  is  payable,  there
can be no fee award.


Signed                                                20th June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
