
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05367/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14th September 2018                        |On 26th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

                                    a p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Singer, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Z Kiss, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant appeals with  leave  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Bird who, in a Decision and  Reasons  promulgated  on  2
    July 2018, dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision dated 12 April 2018 refusing his application  for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.

2.   Miss Kiss did not  disagree  with  Mr  Singer's  submissions  that  the
    judge's decision contained errors of law such that the  decision  could
    not stand.

3.   The judge at paragraph 20 said that at the  end  of  the  evidence  she
    heard submissions from both representatives which were recorded in  the
    Record of Proceedings.  The appellant's Counsel, Mr  Georget,  had  not
    prepared a  skeleton  argument  but  undertook  to  provide  a  written
    skeleton with objective evidence that was being relied on by the end of
    the week.  The judge stated that on 31 May no written skeleton had been
    received from Mr Georget.  She therefore decided to  proceed  with  the
    evidence that she had received both at the hearing  and  prior  to  the
    hearing and the submissions she had heard and recorded at the  hearing.



4.   It was not in dispute that Mr Georget's written submissions  were  sent
    to the Tribunal by e-mail on 30 May 2018 at 16.27 hours.  Though it was
    not the judge's fault that she did not receive the written submissions,
    I find that the judge would have benefitted from having  sight  of  the
    written submissions.

5.   Consequently, I find that the judge acted unfairly  in  assessing  that
    the appellant's advocate had  not  submitted  a  skeleton  argument  or
    country information evidence, when he had.  Had these  submissions  and
    country information evidence been considered, the  ultimate  conclusion
    as to risk on return may have been different.

6.   Mr Singer submitted that the appellant produced and relied  on  various
    documents to show that he was charged with criminal offences  in  2005,
    2009 and 2013.  The appellant claimed that his political  opponents  in
    the Awami League brought  these  charges  against  him  and  they  were
    politically motivated.  The appellant asserted  that  in  2015  he  was
    listed as an absconder in relation to the 2009 matter.  The  judge  did
    not accept that the appellant was charged with murder in 2005, although
    she accepted that the appellant had faced charges in 2009 and absconded
    from these.

7.   Mr Singer submitted that the judge erred in law in  characterising  his
    absconsion as simply fleeing  prosecution  and  not  persecution.   The
    judge should have asked herself  whether  she  accepted  to  the  lower
    standard of proof  that  the  charges  were  politically  motivated  as
    claimed by the appellant.  I accept that in failing to ask herself this
    question and also failing to direct herself that prosecution can amount
    to persecution in certain circumstances, the judge erred in law in  her
    approach to this issue.

8.   I accept Mr Singer's submission that the judge erred in law in  failing
    to have proper regard to the evidence  of  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activity.  The evidence in relation  to  his  sur  place  activity  was
    mentioned  by  Mr   Georget   in   his   written   submissions   which,
    unfortunately, the judge did not have before her  when  she  determined
    this appeal.

9.   In the light of the above reasons, I find that the judge's decision  is
    materially flawed and cannot stand.  It is remitted to Taylor House for
    rehearing by a different judge.

10.  It was agreed by the parties that the evidence given by  the  appellant
    and recorded at paragraphs 10 to 16, and  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant's witness which is recorded at paragraphs 17  to  19  of  the
    decision should be preserved.

11.  The appellant will require a Sylheti Bengali interpreter.

12.  The appellant's solicitor is  directed  to  submit  a  fully  paginated
    bundle of documents to the First-tier Tribunal  and  the  Secretary  of
    State.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                  Date:  20 September 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun



