
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05036/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 May 2020                       |On 29 May 2020                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SRH
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The Respondent (SRH) is a national of Iraq. On the 25th July 2019 First-
    tier Tribunal Judge C Mather allowed his appeal on protection  grounds.
    The Secretary of State was granted permission to  appeal  against  that
    decision on the 14th November 2019.

 2. The hearing of the Secretary of State's appeal was listed before me  at
    Manchester Civil Justice Centre on the 31st March 2020 but that hearing
    was vacated at the request of the Respondent, who was having difficulty
    securing representation. It was relisted for the 18th May 2020 but that
    hearing was adjourned as a result of the measures taken to  combat  the
    spread of Covid-19.

 3. On the 13th April 2020 I gave directions relating to  the  disposal  of
    this matter, which I understand were sent to the parties  by  email  on
    the 15th April.  By these directions I invited the views of the parties
    on whether this matter was suitable for determination on the papers;  I
    further gave leave for further submissions to be made  in  writing.  To
    date I have received written submissions from the Secretary  of  State,
    dated 28th April 2020 and authored  by  Senior  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Tufan. I have received no  communication  from  the  Appellant  or  his
    representatives.   The deadline for responding to my directions was the
    6th May 2020. That deadline having passed, I now proceed  to  determine
    the issues in the appeal, having satisfied myself that it would  be  in
    the interests of justice to do so without the need for an oral hearing.

    Background and Chronology

 4. SRH claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on the 21st January  2019.  He
    was refused protection on the 15th May 2019.

 5. SRH pursued an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds that he
    could not be returned to Iraq because his home-town  of  Kirkuk  was  a
    'contested' area and as  such  Article  15  (c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive applied: AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC).
    He further  averred  that  he  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    internally relocate within Iraq  because  he  had  no  CSID  or  family
    support:  he  was  therefore  reasonably  likely  to  encounter  living
    conditions that were  'unduly  harsh':  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC).

 6. The First-tier Tribunal accepted  both  propositions  and  allowed  the
    appeal.  Permission was granted to the Secretary of State on  the  14th
    November 2019 by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Peart.

    Ground 1: Article 15 (c) Risk

 7. The Secretary of State's grounds read as follows:

         "The Judge found  that  the  security  situation  in  Kirkuk  meets
         Article 15(c) threshold. According to case law AA (Iraq - 2015) and
         the latest HO CPIN Feb 2019 paras 2.5.5 and 7 it does not and it is
         thus neither reasonable or unduly harsh  to  relocate  to  the  IKR
         especially for a Kurd"

 8. That ground makes no sense for a number of reasons.

 9. First, the country guidance cited, presumably AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq
    CG [2015] UKUT 544, did find that that the security situation in Kirkuk
    was such that Article 15(c)  was  engaged.  That  being  the  operative
    country guidance at the time that Judge Mather made her  decision,  she
    was perfectly entitled, indeed obliged, to follow it.

10. Second, if the author of the grounds meant to suggest that Judge Mather
    had failed to make findings on  whether  the  country  guidance  in  AA
    remained good law, then this is a suggestion  that  is  misplaced.  The
    Home Office 'reasons for refusal' letter dated 15th May 2019  expressly
    accepts that AA should be followed. Having perused the Judge's note  of
    the hearing I can see that the  Presenting  Officer  on  the  day  made
    submissions on  credibility,  and  on  issues  pertaining  to  internal
    flight: there is no invitation to  the  Tribunal  to  depart  from  the
    country guidance.

11. Third, the author of the grounds conflates the question of risk arising
    under  Article  15(c)  with  the  matter  of  internal   flight.    The
    formulation "it is thus neither unreasonable or unduly harsh" betrays a
    fundamental misunderstanding of the applicable law.

12. For those reason I  find  that  ground  (i)  fails  to  articulate  any
    intelligible error of law on the part of Judge Mather.

13. By her submissions of the 28th April 2020 the  Secretary of  State  now
    relies on the decision in  SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC), wherein the Upper  Tribunal
    found that the situation in Kirkuk following the  defeat  of  ISIL  has
    improved to the extent that Article 15(c) is no longer engaged. I  note
    that the decision in SMO post-dated the decision of Judge  Mather,  and
    at the time that she determined the appeal,  she  applied  the  correct
    country guidance of AA.  Whilst the Secretary of State's submission  is
    understandable it is therefore of course the case that I can only  take
    SMO into account if some  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision is established.  Insofar as ground 1 is concerned, that burden
    has not been discharged.

    Grounds 2 & 3: Documents

14. The issue of  identity  documents  was  relevant  to  the  question  of
    internal flight. Following AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  CG
    [2018] UKUT 212  the  First-tier  Tribunal  was  required  to  consider
    whether SRH had a CSID, and if not, whether it  was  reasonably  likely
    that he would be unable to obtain one.   If he could not  get  a  card,
    then this raised the spectre  of  him  having  to  live  in  conditions
    falling  below  acceptable  humanitarian  standards,  such   that   the
    Secretary of State would accept that SRH could not  be  removed.  Judge
    Mather found that SRH did not currently have a CSID card, and  that  he
    would not be able to obtain a  replacement  within  a  reasonable  time
    frame. The appeal was allowed on that basis.

15. The Secretary of State's first submission on this  point  is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal, in reaching those conclusions, made  contradictory
    findings:

         "At para 19 the appellant clearly states that "his CSID card was in
         Iraq. He would be able to obtain it if needed". This undermines the
         Judge's reasoning completely at paras 19-21,23."

16. Whilst the selective excerpt  in  the  grounds  may  be  suggestive  of
    contradiction, in fact a complete reading of the paragraph in question,
    and indeed the determination as a whole, reveals  no  such  error.  The
    First-tier Tribunal's conclusion - in full - is as follows:

         "At his substantive interview the Appellant stated that he had lost
         his passport in Turkey and his CSID card was in Iraq. He  would  be
         able to obtain it if needed. In his written statement the Appellant
         subsequently said that when Hashd al-Sha'abi looted the  area  they
         went into people's houses and took everything. He had lost his CSID
         card since then. On the lower standard of proof, I accept that  the
         Appellant does not  currently  have  a  CSID  or  indeed  an  Iraqi
         passport".

17. In respect of the Tribunal's acceptance that SRH  would  not  be  able,
    within a reasonable time frame, to obtain a new CSID, the Secretary  of
    State further submits - at both grounds (ii) and (iii) - that  SRH  has
    family in Iraq who could help him get a card, or alternatively that  he
    could have got one from the embassy in London.  She  submits  that  "it
    would have been helpful if the Judge had scrutinised this aspect more".

18. There is no merit in this  submission.  The  Judge  clearly  considered
    whether it was reasonably likely that SRH would be able to get  a  CSID
    in London at the end of her paragraph 19:

         "I note what is said in AAH (Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG
         UKUT 00212 (IAC) particularly the  headnote  1(i)-(iii)  about  the
         difficulty of obtaining a replacement or  identification  cards  in
         either the Iraqi embassy in the UK or in Baghdad itself..."

    As to the likelihood of a card being issued in  Iraq,  to  a  proxy  or
    otherwise, the Judge said this:

         "I assess his ability on  the  basis  that  he  has  no  family  in
         Baghdad. His main language is Kurdish Sorani.  The  procedures  are
         from the case law challenging and  the  willingness  of  the  Iraqi
         authorities to assist would no doubt be adversely  influenced  when
         the applicant is a Kurd from an area previously under  the  control
         of ISIS, a community that is viewed with a degree of  hostility  in
         Iraq, and they are already having to deal with so many other  IDPs.
         I accept the Appellant's ability to  negotiate  these  bureaucratic
         challenges would be exacerbated  by  the  fact  that  he  would  be
         required to survive in Baghdad, without  the  language  skills  and
         work experience that might secure him  employment  and  he  has  no
         family members or friends who might provide him with accommodation.
         The test is whether the Appellant could obtain a CSID card within a
         reasonable time frame and taking all these factors into account,  I
         accept that he could not do so".

19. The arguments made by the Secretary of State under this heading  amount
    to no more than a disagreement with the outcome of the appeal and  fail
    to establish any material error of law.  It was open to  the  Judge  to
    find, on the evidence before her, that it was reasonably likely that  a
    replacement CSID could not be obtained in  time  to  prevent  SRH  from
    falling into destitution in Baghdad.

    Ground 4 - Poor Credibility

20. Finally the Secretary of State submits that in its  assessment  of  the
    'CSID' issues, the Tribunal should have given more weight  to  its  own
    negative credibility findings on the asylum  claim,  and/or  section  8
    issues arising from SRH's failure to  claim  asylum  en  route  to  the
    United Kingdom.  This ground is manifestly unfounded. The Judge plainly
    had in mind these matters that weighed against SRH, not  least  because
    she  had  just  made  those  negative  findings.  That   she   decided,
    nevertheless, to accept on the basis of uncontested country  background
    material that Hashd al-Shaabi had looted SRH's home area, and  that  in
    those circumstances it was reasonably likely that  his  card  would  be
    gone, was a matter for her on the evidence.

    Conclusion

21. The grounds of appeal before me are unimpressive in the  extreme.  They
    contain misstatements as to the law, and misrepresent the  findings  of
    the Judge. Had this been  a  hearing,  and  had  SRH's  representatives
    bothered to engage with this process, I would have considered making  a
    wasted costs order.  For the sake of completeness I would add that even
    if I had been minded to accept Mr Tufan's suggestion that I  apply  the
    guidance in SMO it would  have  made  no  material  difference  to  the
    outcome of this appeal, since SRH is from Kirkuk. At paragraph  431  of
    SMO the Tribunal accept that  the  civil  registry  in  Kirkuk  is  now
    issuing only INIDs,  which  cannot  be  released  to  proxies,  whether
    lawyers, family members or others.   If his appeal  were  being  remade
    today, I would have allowed the appeal on the grounds that he would  be
    stuck at  Baghdad,  with  no  means  of  onward  travel,  no  means  of
    supporting himself and a real risk of  falling  into  destitution  such
    that  the  minimum  standard  contained  at  Article   15(b)   of   the
    Qualification Directive would apply.

    Anonymity

22. Having regard to the fact that this is a protection claim  I  make  the
    following direction for anonymity, pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and  the  Presidential  Guidance
    Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders.

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant (as he was before the  First-tier  Tribunal)  is  granted
        anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
        indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
        court proceedings".

    Decision

23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of
    law and the Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

24. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                               27th May 2020
