
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05011/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th December 2017                        |On 23rd April 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                      ANES HUSSEIN AHEMD QASEM AL-YAFEI
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Yemen.  On 10th May 2017, the respondent
    refused the protection and human rights' claims that had been  made  by
    the appellant.  The appellant appealed the refusal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


 2. The appeal before me is an appeal  against  the  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated by First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Knowles  in  which  he
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


   3. The appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraph [6] of the
      decision of the FtT Judge.  At paragraph  [8]  of  his  decision,  the
      Judge sets out a summary of the account of events relied upon  by  the
      appellant in support of his claim for  international  protection.   At
      paragraphs [9] to [14], the Judge sets out the reasons provided by the
      respondent for refusing the claim.  At paragraphs [15]  to  [24],  the
      Judge sets out the appellant's evidence.   The  Judge's  findings  and
      conclusions are to  be  found  at  paragraphs  [33]  to  [41]  of  his
      decision.  For present purposes it suffices to refer  to  the  summary
      that is to be found at paragraph [41] of the decision;


             "Considering all the Appellant's  evidence  in  the  round,  I
             concluded that the Appellant's evidence is  not  credible  and
             his core situation is not reasonably likely to be true.  I  do
             not accept that it is reasonably likely that the Appellant  is
             wanted by the  authorities  in  Yemen  on  the  basis  of  the
             evidence he has presented to me upon appeal. Whilst  there  is
             evidence that the appellant is a Southern Movement  supporter,
             the evidence does not indicate that it  is  reasonably  likely
             that he has come to the attention of the  authorities  in  the
             Yemen."


   4. At paragraph [42], the Judge addresses the  background  material  that
      was relied upon by the appellant in the following way:


             "The appellant produces a considerable  volume  of  background
             information concerning in Yemen, but this is all referring  to
             the  general  security   situation   (see   below   concerning
             humanitarian protection). There is nothing in  the  background
             information provided by the Appellant, or in the  Respondent's
             CPIN, which suggests  that  a  member  and  supporter  of  the
             Southern Movement is at any particular risk in Aden. It is for
             the Appellant to establish that membership and  support  alone
             would place him at particular individual  risk.  However,  the
             appellant refers only upon the significant activity he  claims
             to have participated in,  organising  demonstrations,  hosting
             the leadership of the Southern Movement and fighting with  the
             Southern Movement in 2011; he has  not  presented  a  case  in
             evidence or in submissions that mere membership or support for
             the Southern Movement causes a risk. It does not appear to me,
             on the evidence, reasonably likely  that  the  authorities  in
             Aden have any interest in supporters of the Southern  Movement
             that would place them at any particular risk."


 5. The Judge then turned to consider whether the appellant  qualifies  for
    humanitarian  protection  under  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  To that end, the Judge states, at [46]:


             "I have considered  the  background  information  provided  on
             appeal by the Appellant in support of  his  claims  concerning
             the  humanitarian  situation  in  the  Yemen.  The  background
             information provided all pre-dates the Respondents CPIN  which
             is dated June 2017 and states that "Yemen is  in  a  state  of
             armed conflict which has led to deterioration in the  security
             and humanitarian situation. Airstrikes and  armed  clashes  on
             the ground continue particularly in the east, north and centre
             of the country,  in  and  around  Sana'a.  Despite  this,  the
             situation has  improved  in  Aden  and  some  other  parts  of
             southern Yemen since July  2015,  although  Aden  still  faces
             security challenges including a rise of targeted killings  and
             the presence of militant groups such as Al  Qaeda  and  Daesh.
             While harsh, the humanitarian situation in Aden and some other
             areas of southern Yemen is not in general at such a  level  as
             to breach Article 15 of the Qualification Directive.  However,
             it may do so for vulnerable  people  (e.g.  Single  women  all
             disabled people, etc). Each case it should be assessed on  its
             individual merits". The Appellant is not a vulnerable  person.
             The appellant states that he last  lived  in  Aden  in  Yemen.
             Whilst he previously lived in Yafe, when asked  why  he  could
             not live in Aden his response is because he is wanted  by  the
             authorities. That part of his core situation  I  have  already
             found not reasonably likely to be true. Whilst  the  situation
             may have changed as the Appellant states concerning Yafe,  the
             Appellant  may  relocate  himself  again  in   Aden.   In   my
             conclusion,  the  Appellant  is  not  facing  a  serious   and
             individual  threat  to  his  life  or  person  by  reason   of
             indiscriminate violence  in  situations  of  international  or
             internal armed conflict in Yemen."


The appeal before me


 6. The respondent advances one ground of appeal. That is, the judge failed
    to deal properly with all  the  appellant's  arguments  concerning  the
    Article 15(c) risk in Yemen.    It is said that the Judge does not make
    clear in his decision  which  part  of  the  respondent's  CPIN  he  is
    referring to in the  extract  cited  at  paragraph  [46],  although  it
    appears to be accepted that the passage appears to be  taken  from  the
    section entitled "Policy Summary".  The  appellant  contends  that  the
    Judge makes no attempt to engage with the evidence relied upon  by  the
    appellant  and  has  misdirected  himself  as  to  the  effect  of  the
    respondent's CPIN, by treating the document, and applying  it  akin  to
    country guidance, by which the Judge is bound.  It  is  said  that  the
    appellant had provided a significant amount of evidence supporting  his
    claim to an Article 15(c) risk upon return, and it was  incumbent  upon
    the Judge to consider the entirety of the  evidence,  and  resolve  the
    disputed issue of whether there is an Article 15(c) risk upon return.


 7. Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  FtT  Judge  Easterman  on  29th
    September 2017. The matter comes before  me  to  consider  whether  the
    decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and
    if so, to remake the decision.


 8. Mr Holmes adopts the grounds of appeal and makes four points on  behalf
    of the appellant.  First, the FtT Judge treats the respondent's CPIN as
    if it is binding upon him. Second, although the  respondent's  CPIN  is
    dated June 2017, a closer examination  of  that  document  demonstrates
    that the background material relied upon in the document,  either  pre-
    dates the background material that was relied upon by the appellant, or
    is it at least contemporaneous  to  it.   Third,  the  Judge  gives  no
    discernible reasons as to why he prefers the matters  set  out  in  the
    respondent's CPIN, to  the  background  material  relied  upon  by  the
    appellant. He submits that there was a wealth of  evidence  before  the
    Judge that the Judge simply did not consider.  Finally,  there  was  no
    individual assessment by the judge of the Article 15(c) risk  that  the
    appellant would be exposed to upon return.


 9. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits that the Judge  has  adequately  considered
    the humanitarian protection claim, and was entitled to attach weight to
    the summary set out in the respondent's  CPIN  which  is  supported  by
    adequately sourced objective evidence from a range of  sources  over  a
    period of time. The weight to be attached to the document was a  matter
    for the Judge. It is not disputed that there is a  humanitarian  crisis
    in Yemen, but as the judge found, there are areas  that  the  appellant
    can safely return to. The Judge  adequately  addressed  the  risk  upon
    return, based upon the findings made.


Discussion


10. At paragraph [42], the Judge refers to the background material that was
    relied upon by the appellant and noted that the background material  is
    concerned with the general security situation, and is relevant  to  the
    humanitarian protection claim.  There is nothing in the  language  that
    the Judge has adopted at paragraph [46] of the decision, that  suggests
    that the Judge has treated the respondent's CPIN as binding  upon  him.
    In fact,  the  Judge  expressly  states  that  he  has  considered  the
    background information provided on appeal by the appellant  in  support
    of his claim concerning the humanitarian situation.  The language  used
    by the Judge does not support the appellant's claim, but indicates that
    the Judge preferred the material  set  out  in  the  respondent's  CPIN
    because it was more recent background material.


11. The Judge was plainly aware that the background material relied upon by
    the appellant was concerned with the  general  security  situation  and
    relevant to his assessment of the humanitarian protection claim.  Pages
    8 to 400 of the appellant's bundle before the FtT, contained the wealth
    of background material that was relied  upon  by  the  appellant.   The
    Judge was not required in his decision to address each  piece  of  that
    background material.  It would be entirely disproportionate to expect a
    Judge of the FtT to address each of the reports relied  upon  in  turn.
    The weight that the FtT  Judge  attaches  to  the  background  material
    either individually or cumulatively, is a matter for him, as long as it
    is clear that the Judge has not disregarded it.


12. I have carefully considered the matters set  out  in  the  respondent's
    CPIN and the background material relied upon by the  appellant.   There
    is a common theme to the background material that was  before  the  FtT
    Judge.  The background material clearly establishes  that  the  general
    situation in Yemen remains volatile  and  extremely  tense.  There  are
    several internal conflicts going on between various groups.   There  is
    no doubt that Yemen  is  experiencing  a  severe  humanitarian  crisis,
    although the situation varies in different parts of  the  country.  The
    background material confirms that since July 2015,  the  situation  has
    somewhat improved in Aden and in other parts of southern  Yemen.   Pro-
    government forces remain in control of  areas  such  as  Aden  and  the
    lowland areas of southern Yemen.  The levels of violence in Aden do not
    match those witnessed in other parts of the country.


13. I reject the submission that the Judge gives no discernible reasons  as
    to why he prefers the matters set out in the respondent's CPIN, to  the
    background material relied upon by the appellant.  I  accept  that  the
    CPIN is dated June 2017 and so that does not in itself  mean  that  the
    CPIN post-dated the background material relied upon by  the  appellant.
    The respondent's CPIN draws upon background material from a  number  of
    reports from a  range  of  sources,  over  a  period  of  time  and  in
    particular from 2016 and 2017.  The  note  draws  in  particular,  upon
    reports such as the US State Department Country Reports on Human Rights
    Practices for 2016, the Human  Rights  Watch  World  Report  2017,  and
    various UNHCR reports relating to the humanitarian situation in  Yemen.
    Many of the reports relied upon by the appellant  from  these  sources,
    are in fact referred to  in  the  respondent's  CPIN.   It  was  in  my
    judgment, open to the Judge to conclude that the background information
    relied upon by the appellant pre-dates the respondent's CPIN  which  is
    dated June 2017, and which draws together the threads of the background
    material.   Even  with  the  deterioration  that  is  set  out  in  the
    background evidence since 2015, the background material relied upon  by
    the appellant does not undermine the background material referred to in
    the CPIN and the summary referred to by the Judge.


14. The assessment of the risk must be assessed on the individual merits of
    the claim and the facts as found by the  Judge.   The  appellant's  own
    case was that he had last  lived  in  Aden  in  Yemen.  The  Judge  had
    rejected the appellant's account that he is wanted by  the  authorities
    in Aden, and it is in that context, that the Judge had to consider  the
    humanitarian protection claim.


15. In my judgment, based upon the evidence  and  the  findings  made,  the
    Judge was entitled to conclude that the appellant's home area, being in
    the south of Yemen was not one where the appellant faces a real risk of
    indiscriminate violence as a result  of  an  internal  armed  conflict.
    The conclusion by the Judge that the  appellant  is  not  a  vulnerable
    person and therefore has not  established  that  he  falls  within  the
    category of those who may be at risk as  a  result  of  their  personal
    profile, such as single women or a disabled  person,  demonstrates  the
    fact specific assessment carried out by the Judge.  The Judge  resolved
    the disputed issue of whether there  is  an  Article  15(c)  risk  upon
    return to the appellant, in light of  the  evidence  and  the  findings
    made, as he was required to.


16. It follows that in my judgment, there is no material error  of  law  in
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge's decision and  the  determination  shall
    stand.


Notice of Decision


  17. The appeal is dismissed.


      Signed                                 Date         15th March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


18. The FtT Judge made no fee award.


       Signed                                Date         15th March 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia





