
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05633/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 November 2018                        |On 25 January 2019               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Sood, instructed by Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gurung-Thapa,  promulgated  on  29  August  2018
    dismissing his appeal under the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act
    2002 against the decision made on 13 May 2016 refusing his  asylum  and
    human rights claim.

 2. In Mibanga v SSHD  [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367  the  Court  of  Appeal  drew
    attention to an earlier statement HE (DRC -Credibility and  Psychiatric
    Reports) [2004] UKIAT 00321:

         "Where the report is specifically relied on as a factor relevant to
         credibility, the Adjudicator should deal with  it  as  an  integral
         part of the findings on credibility rather than just as an  add-on,
         which  does  not  undermine  the  conclusions  to  which  he  would
         otherwise come."


 3. The Court of Appeal also said this:

         "What the fact-finder does at his peril is to reach a conclusion by
         reference only to the appellant's  evidence  and  then,  if  it  be
         negative, to ask whether the conclusion should be  shifted  by  the
         expert evidence."


 4. Despite the 14 or so years since these clear statements, that is,  with
    all due respect, exactly the error that Judge  Gurung-Thapa  committed.
    As both parties  rightly  agreed,  Judge  Gurung-Thapa  simply  ignored
    relevant reports from  two  medical  experts  which  went  to  (a)  the
    appellant's learning disabilities and (b) as to whether he should  have
    been treated as vulnerable  witness.  Both  of  these  were  manifestly
    relevant to a proper assessment of the appellant's credibility.   Judge
    Gurung-Thapa's failure even to indicate she had taken them into account
    in assessing credibility undermines the  entirety  of  the  credibility
    finding.  Judge Gurung-Thapa's decision must therefore be set aside and
    remade.

 5. Given that, owing to the nature of Judge Gurung-Thapa's manifest  error
    of law, none of the findings she made can  be  sustained,  this  appeal
    must be remade in the First-tier Tribunal. I therefore remit it  to  be
    heard again by a judge other than Judge Gurung-Thapa.

 Notice of Decision


      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and I set it aside.


      2) I remit the  decision  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision on all issues, the appeal not to be  heard  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa.


      3) I maintain the anonymity direction made.



Signed                                  Date 19 November 2018
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

