
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05848/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 September 2018                          |On 5 October 2018             |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  manh [n]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mahmood (instructed by Kothala & Co, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Manh Huu Nguyen, was born on 7 August 1996 and is a male
    citizen of Vietnam.  He appealed against the decision of the respondent
    dated 24 April 2018 to refuse him international protection.  The First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Hodgkinson) in a decision promulgated  on  1  June
    2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Permission was granted by Designated Judge  Shaerf  on  19  June  2018.
    Subsequently, Upper Tribunal Judge Gill issued detailed  directions  to
    the parties.  Those directions reached the respondent but had not  been
    seen by Mr Mahmood, who represented the appellant before the First-tier
    and Upper Tribunal.  Inter alia, the directions provided for Mr Mahmood
    to prepare a witness statement concerning the notes of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  Obviously, that  direction  had  not  been  complied
    with.  I asked Mr Mahmood to contact his instructing solicitors  during
    a brief adjournment but he was unable to reach them by  telephone.   As
    summarised by Judge Gill, ground 1 concerns a  Rule  35  report  of  Dr
    Sayed who had interviewed the appellant with the help of  a  Vietnamese
    interpreter by telephone.  Ground 2 concerns the appellant's  delay  in
    claiming asylum.  Ground 3 concerns the grant of  permission  by  Judge
    Shaerf in respect of arguably "inadequate reasons ... for  [the  First-
    tier Tribunals] adverse credibility assessment".  Judge Gill noted that
    that ground had never been raised by the  appellant.   This  led  Judge
    Gill to issue directions to "clarify the precise scope  of  ground  3".
    It is those directions  which,  for  whatever  reason,  have  not  been
    complied with.

 3. Mr Clarke submitted, notwithstanding the  directions  issued  by  Judge
    Gill, it would have been for the appellant to have attended before  the
    Upper Tribunal today in order to prove ground 3  which  could  only  be
    done by adducing the evidence  of  proceedings  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which are the subject of Judge Gill's directions.   Since  the
    appellant had failed to do so, ground 3 was bound to fail. I agree.  Mr
    Mahmood, for the appellant, did  not  seriously  seek  to  oppose  that
    submission.  In the circumstances, I proceeded with the hearing  and  I
    heard oral submissions from both representatives in respect of  grounds
    1 and 2.

 4. Regarding ground 1, the  parties  agree  that  the  appellant  had,  in
    effect, two interviews on successive days starting  with  the  Rule  35
    report submitted by Dr Sayed after  an  examination  of  scars  on  the
    appellant's body.  It had been the appellant's account that he had been
    injured when detained by police in Vietnam in May 2014.  However, it is
    apparent that the Rule 35 report contents differ from the account given
    by the appellant on the subsequent day in his asylum interview.   Judge
    Hodgkinson refers to those inconsistencies at [31]:

         "However, as noted in the appellant's asylum interview, the content
         of the Rule 35 report is inconsistent with other  evidence  of  the
         appellant.  In his  asylum  interview,  the  appellant  gave  clear
         indication that the attack upon him, described by Dr Sayed, was the
         2014 attack when the police attended the family's home in May 2014.
          The Rule 35 report records  the  appellant  was  attacked  by  the
         police using sticks and handcuffs.  In his  asylum  interview,  the
         appellant replied that he was not attacked with handcuffs but  with
         a cup.  He answered the interpreter, at the Rule 35 interview  with
         the doctor, "got it wrong".  The appellant adds that  he  said  (to
         the doctor) "that they picked up a cup and hit me in the back of my
         head yesterday" (AIR Q92-99).  As I understand it, the reference to
         "yesterday" is a reference to the  fact  the  Rule  35  report  was
         prepared the day before the asylum interview.  I  do  not  find  it
         reasonably likely there would be a misinterpretation to the  extent
         claimed by  the  appellant  and  I  find  this  discrepancy  to  be
         materially damaging to his credibility."

 5. Further discrepancies are referred to by the judge  at  [32].   In  his
    Rule 35 statement to the doctor, the  appellant  claimed  that  he  had
    travelled to a clinic for treatment following his assault at the  hands
    of the police.  However, the appellant said at interview,  "I  did  not
    say that when I went to the clinic to get  treatment.   I  said  I  was
    running to a house to get treatment but not the clinic".  In  the  Rule
    35 statement it is recorded that the appellant  also  claimed  that  he
    needed stitches at the local clinic.  The appellant  then  went  on  to
    claim at the hearing (as recorded by the judge) that he had not had the
    interview record in connection with the Rule 35  report  read  back  to
    him.  He claimed that he had not said anything about receiving stitches
    at a clinic.

 6.  The  grounds  do  little  more  than  rely  on  the   assertion   that
    interpretation by telephone (as used here in  the  preparation  of  the
    Rule 35 report) is "less reliable" than face-to-face interpretation.  I
    am aware, as Mr Mahmood submitted, that the appellant drew attention to
    what he claimed were inaccuracies in the interpretation as early as the
    following day when he had his asylum interview.  However, I also  agree
    with Mr Clarke, for the respondent, that the challenge  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision is essentially on the grounds  of  perversity.
    I find that it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find that the two
    interviews  contain  significant  discrepancies  which  impacted  in  a
    negative way on the appellant's credibility.   It  makes  no  sense  to
    assert that the difficulties of interpretation by telephone are such as
    to excuse very significant discrepancies in the account of past events.
     For example, it is difficult to see how an assault  with  "sticks  and
    handcuffs" could possibly be mistaken by an interpreter for assault  by
    a person using a "cup".  Given that the judge was not bound  to  reject
    the submission that there were discrepancies between the two  accounts,
    he has reached a finding open to him on the evidence and has  supported
    that finding by clear and cogent reasoning.

 7. As regards ground 2, the appellant asserts that he had failed  to  make
    his claim for  asylum  at  an  earlier  date  because  he  feared  "all
    authorities" having  suffered  at  the  hands  of  the  authorities  in
    Vietnam.  I find that that ground has no merit.  As the judge noted  at
    [34], the appellant claims to have arrived clandestinely in the  United
    Kingdom by lorry in late May 2016.  He was encountered, by  chance,  by
    the authorities whilst he was working in a nail bar in Sheffield on  31
    August 2017.  The judge found that it was not  reasonably  likely  that
    the appellant would have failed to gain  sufficient  knowledge  of  the
    asylum system in the United Kingdom on 4 August 2017 such as to  enable
    him to make a claim for asylum.  In essence,  the  judge  rejected  the
    appellant's claim that he was afraid to make such a claim.  That  again
    was a finding open to the judge on the evidence; it was not a  perverse
    finding.  In other words,  the  judge  was  not  bound  to  accept  the
    appellant's explanation which the grounds of appeal appear to  suggest.
    Consequently, it was open to the judge to attach  weight  to  the  fact
    that the appellant had made no attempt to claim  asylum  and  had  only
    done so belatedly and having been detained  by  the  authorities.   The
    finding regarding the delay together with the discrepancies between the
    two interviews (see above) amply  justified  the  negative  credibility
    findings and the dismissal of the claim for protection and  in  respect
    of human rights.  In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 24 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 24 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


