

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/05654/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Determination Promulgated    |
|On 19 December 2017                           |On 11 January 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel instructed by Luqmani
                    Thompson & Partners solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was  not  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  a
protection claim, it is appropriate that the direction is continued.  Unless
and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  Appellant  is  granted
anonymity. No report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly
identify him or any member of his family.  This  direction  applies  amongst
others to all parties. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge  Hendry  promulgated  on  9  August  2017   ("the   Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 30 May 2017 refusing his protection and human  rights
       claim.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came to the UK  as  a
       student in 2011  with  leave  until  31  May  2014.   Thereafter  he
       overstayed.  He claimed asylum on 1 December 2016.


    3. The Appellant's protection claim is  based  on  his  sexuality.   He
       claims to be gay.  He says that his family have  disowned  him  and,
       due to prevailing attitudes to homosexuality in Bangladesh  and  the
       criminal law which  renders  sexual  acts  between  men  a  criminal
       offence, he says that he will be  at  risk  on  return.     Although
       Judge Hendry accepted that a person who is a homosexual or perceived
       as such would be at risk on  return  to  Bangladesh,  he  found  the
       Appellant not to be credible and did not accept that  the  Appellant
       is in fact gay.


    4. The Appellant raises six grounds of appeal.  First, he says that the
       Judge has unlawfully required corroboration for the protection claim
       and has viewed as  inconsistencies  a  lack  of  specific  forms  of
       evidence rather than internal  discrepancies  within  the  evidence.
       Second, he submits that the Judge  has  unlawfully  failed  to  give
       reasons for the adverse credibility findings.  Third, he  says  that
       the Judge has misunderstood or left  out  of  account  some  of  the
       evidence and has therefore unlawfully failed to  take  into  account
       relevant evidence.  The fourth ground focusses on what is said to be
       an  inconsistency  between  findings   regarding   the   Appellant's
       relationship with his family.   The  fifth  and  sixth  grounds  are
       targeted at the Judge's findings (or lack of findings)  in  relation
       to the evidence of two supportive witnesses.


    5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pooler
       on 31 October 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):-


            "...3.     The judge's reasons are found at [104] - [107].   It
           is arguable that she relied on matters which were in  truth  not
           inconsistencies; failed to make findings on the  credibility  of
           two witnesses; failed to give adequate reasons for  finding  the
           appellant to have been eg muddled and unreliable; and took  into
           account irrelevant factors while  failing  to  take  account  of
           relevant evidence.  All grounds may be argued."




    6.  The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision  contains
       a material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision or remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Decision and Reasons


    7. The focus of ground one is what is said at [104]  of  the  Decision.
       The Judge there sets out a series of bullet points listing what  are
       said to be inconsistencies.  Those can be summarised as follows:-
                  a) The Appellant's evidence  lacked  detail  about  those
                     with whom he claimed to have had a relationship
                  b)  There  was  a  lack  of  evidence  other   than   the
                     Appellant's own evidence about those relationships
                  c) There was an inconsistency between the evidence of one
                     of the witnesses and the Appellant about  a  visit  to
                     the gay club "Heaven" (the Appellant did  not  mention
                     that the witness had attended  with  him  whereas  the
                     witness said that he had)
                  d) There was no evidence regarding the  Appellant's  call
                     to his parents after November  2016  during  which  he
                     said that his parents  had  cut  him  off;  there  was
                     similarly no evidence other than the  Appellant's  own
                     evidence that his parents had disowned him due to  his
                     sexuality.


    8. I accept that the majority of the points relied upon at [104] cannot
       be classified as inconsistencies as such.  They are  however  points
       which are valid regarding the sufficiency of the evidence.   This is
       not a case where the Judge has required corroboration of the  claim.
       However, as the Judge observed at [102] of the Decision, the central
       question for her to determine was whether the Appellant  is  gay  or
       likely to be perceived as gay.   In  assessing  that  question,  the
       Judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the  content  of  the
       Appellant's  own  evidence  and  whether  that  contained   specific
       information or was vague.  She was entitled  to  take  into  account
       whether there was other  evidence  supporting  the  Appellant's  own
       evidence when deciding what weight to give to that evidence and  she
       was entitled to rely on such  inconsistencies  as  there  were  when
       assessing the evidence.


    9. Taken as a whole,  the  content  of  [104]  of  the  Decision  is  a
       statement of the deficiencies which the Judge considered existed  in
       the evidence.   Those were  all  matters  to  which  the  Judge  was
       entitled to have regard.  There is a separate question  whether  the
       Judge has misunderstood any of  that  evidence  or  failed  to  have
       regard to other evidence to which I will turn when I come to grounds
       three to six.  However, the Appellant has not made  out  his  ground
       one.


   10. The complaint made in ground two is that the Judge has not  provided
       examples  of  where  the  Appellant's  answers  were   "disjointed",
       "rambling",  "long",  "unfocussed",  "muddled  and  unreliable".   I
       accept that it is rarely if ever appropriate to judge an appellant's
       credibility by reference to  his  demeanour  when  giving  evidence,
       particularly absent specific examples. Certainly, if what is said at
       [102] and [109] of the Decision were  the  only  reasons  given  for
       finding the Appellant not to be credible, I would have no hesitation
       in finding an error of  law.   However,  the  Judge  provided  other
       reasons at [104] for finding against the Appellant  on  the  central
       issue.   For that reason, even if there were an error in the Judge's
       reliance on the nature of the Appellant's oral evidence  that  would
       not be material.


   11. There are a number of separate issues raised at ground  three  which
       all focus on the Judge's understanding of the evidence  and  whether
       she has  taken  all  into  account.   I  deal  with  each  of  those
       separately.


   12. The evidence given by the Appellant  as  recorded  at  [33]  of  the
       Decision concerning  the  details  of  those  with  whom  he  had  a
       relationship does not impact on the Judge's finding  at  [104]  that
       the Appellant did not know those details.  His own evidence was that
       he found out the details at a later stage by other means.  The Judge
       was entitled to find that the Appellant did not know the details  of
       those with whom he was said to have  had  longer  relationships  and
       that this might impact on the weight to be  given  to  his  evidence
       about those relationships.  The point made about the  Appellant  not
       being able to find out more detail about G because  he  had  deleted
       G's contact details simply serves to underline the  point  that  the
       Appellant did not know those details for himself by  having  learned
       them during his relationship.


   13. I accept that if the Judge had relied exclusively  on  the  lack  of
       evidence from the Appellant's former partners themselves there might
       be a material error in failing to have regard to the fact  that  two
       of them had left the UK (or are said to have done so).  However, the
       point made at [104] of the Decision is that there  was  no  evidence
       from them not that they did not attend.  Again, it might be an error
       to require evidence from G with whom the Appellant said  he  had  no
       contact.  However, on his own admission he had the means to  contact
       H and the fact that his relationship with A was a brief one did  not
       preclude him obtaining evidence from him.  More  centrally,  in  any
       event, is the fact that the Appellant  was  unable  to  produce  any
       evidence of having been in these relationships including by  way  of
       evidence of those friends who did give evidence that  they  had  met
       his partners.  There is one minor point about evidence given by Mr H
       (one of his friends) which I will come to when dealing  with  ground
       five.  However, there is no material error disclosed in this  regard
       by  the  Judge's  reliance  on  the  lack  of  evidence  as  to  the
       relationships.


   14. It is said that the Judge  has  failed  to  take  into  account  the
       Appellant's evidence about the obtaining of  the  newspaper  article
       which is said to show that his parents have  disowned  him.   It  is
       said that the Appellant gave evidence that  he  only  obtained  this
       online and that the Judge  failed  to  take  this  explanation  into
       account when relying on the lack of any paper copy of that  article.



   15. This aspect of the grounds is ill-founded.  The Judge  was  entitled
       to give such weight to the evidence as it deserved.  The  fact  that
       the Appellant only obtained the article online may explain the  lack
       of a paper copy but  the  fact  of  the  absence  of  a  paper  copy
       (particularly an original paper copy) inevitably affects the  weight
       which can be given to that evidence.  The Judge was entitled to give
       less weight to the article (effectively to discount it) as a result.


   16. Similarly, it is difficult to see what material difference the  fact
       of the Appellant mentioning his sexuality to his GP  can  have  when
       that is itself based only on what the Appellant himself  says  about
       it.  The Judge had evidence from the Appellant and  it  is  for  the
       Judge to determine the credibility of the Appellant's own  evidence.
       The references are only in the medical notes  of  GP  consultations.
       There is a suggestion that the GP intended to refer the Appellant to
       a relevant organisation to discuss his problems but no evidence that
       he did so.


   17. Similarly, the text message screenshots are incapable  of  providing
       substantiation of the Appellant's sexuality.  They show only that he
       is sending text messages on Grindr.  That is  mentioned  in  general
       terms at [41] of the Decision  in  the  report  of  the  Appellant's
       evidence about what those showed.  There is no error in the  Judge's
       failure to mention that evidence in the  context  of  his  findings,
       particularly since it is not contended that any of those persons are
       men with whom the Appellant has been in a relationship and there  is
       no witness evidence from any of those persons.   The  text  messages
       are in general very unspecific and do not lend any substance to  the
       Appellant's claimed sexuality.


   18. Ground four focusses on what is said to  be  a  discrepancy  between
       what is said at [110] and [104] of the Decision regarding a  claimed
       telephone conversation between the Appellant and his  parents  prior
       to his asylum claim.  I do not readily follow the complaint made  in
       this regard.  What is said at [110] appears to relate  only  to  the
       Appellant's evidence as recorded at [26] of the  Decision  that  his
       mother had spoken to him about getting married  (in  November  2016)
       and he had therefore told her at this point that he  was  gay.   She
       had then told his father who had abused him and then  published  the
       article disowning him.  The point made  at  [104]  of  the  Decision
       (penultimate bullet point) relates to the Appellant saying  that  he
       tried to contact his family after November 2016 and they cut him off
       (ie terminated the telephone call).  Neither point seems to me to be
       central  to  the  question  whether  the  Appellant  is  in  fact  a
       homosexual but in any event there  is  no  discrepancy  between  the
       Judge's findings in this regard.


   19. Grounds five and six relate  to  the  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
       witnesses and therefore I take these two grounds together.   As  the
       Judge pointed out, none of the witnesses are themselves  gay.   That
       is not to say as the grounds  complain  that  the  effect  of  these
       findings is that an appellant's credibility about sexuality  depends
       on him obtaining a large number of witnesses from the gay  community
       to say that he is gay or producing a large number of photographs  of
       him with others from the gay  community.    However,  the  criticism
       again turns on the weight which the Judge  gave  to  the  witnesses'
       evidence.


   20. As I have  already  observed,  the  central  issue  is  whether  the
       Appellant is credible in  his  claim  to  be  gay.   Obviously,  the
       witnesses who  gave  oral  evidence  were  not  partners  or  former
       partners.  The other deficiency in their evidence is that  they  had
       never met those men with whom the Appellant claimed to have been  in
       a relationship and therefore could not give  evidence  as  to  those
       relationships either.  The most they could say is that the Appellant
       has told them he is gay.


   21. There are only two exceptions to that general point.  The  first  is
       that Mr H said in evidence that he had been  to  "Heaven"  nightclub
       with the Appellant.  However, that is the one  actual  inconsistency
       in evidence relied upon at [104] of the Decision and about which  no
       complaint is made as the Appellant apparently did not corroborate Mr
       H's account in this regard.   The other is that Mr H claims to  have
       overheard a conversation between the Appellant and G with  whom  the
       Appellant says he was in a relationship.  That evidence is recounted
       at [52] of the Decision as follows:-
           "Mr [H] did not meet the  man,  who  he  knew  was  called  [G],
           because he and the appellant broke up.  He  had  spoken  to  the
           appellant on the phone when [G] was there.   The  impression  he
           gained was that they were in an intimate  relationship,  because
           they were talking affectionately.  The appellant was very  upset
           when the relationship broke down..."


   22. That conversation is not mentioned in Mr H's  witness  statement  so
       there is no more detail about it than what is said in the  Decision.
       It is extremely difficult to understand how a person could  reach  a
       view about the intimacy  of  a  relationship  from  overhearing  two
       people speaking (I assume in the background) when on  the  phone  to
       one of them.  Absent any detail of what that conversation was or how
       it was that the witness reached the view that this was  an  intimate
       relationship based on something overheard in  the  background  of  a
       telephone conversation which was directly with the Appellant and did
       not involve any direct communication with G, I am  quite  unable  to
       accept that any failure to  mention  this  in  the  context  of  the
       Judge's findings on the evidence is material.  As the Judge records,
       neither of  the  witnesses  who  gave  evidence  had  ever  met  the
       Appellant's claimed former partners.


   23. As Ms Everett very fairly accepted in  her  submissions,  a  Judge's
       assessment of credibility in relation to sexuality  is  a  difficult
       one to make because it often will turn in large part on the evidence
       of the appellant himself.  However, as  she  also  submitted  and  I
       accept the obligation on the Judge is to assess the evidence in  the
       round.  That is what this Judge has done.


   24. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not
       contain a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.




    DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law.  I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hendry
    promulgated on 9 August 2017 with the consequence that the  Appellant's
    appeal stands dismissed


    Signed
            [pic]
    Upper                Tribunal                Judge                Smith
                  Dated: 10 January 2018
