
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05302/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 April 2019                     |On 29 April 2019                     |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     PY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr B. Bundock, Counsel
For the Respondent: Mr N. Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008


 1. The appellant, a citizen of Uganda, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
    ("FtT") against a decision  to  refuse  a  protection  claim.  The  FtT
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and
    (by implication) Article 3 grounds but allowed the appeal on Article 8,
    private life grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal against the FtT's decision  having  been  granted,
    the appeal came before me on 24 April 2019.

 3. At the hearing before me it was agreed between the parties that the FtT
    had erred in law in its assessment of how the appellant was  reasonably
    likely to behave on return to Uganda in terms of whether she would want
    to live openly as a lesbian but would fear persecution if she  were  to
    do so. That error of law arises against the background of the  positive
    credibility findings made by the FtT, the appellant's witness statement
    dated 10 April 2018 and having regard to the decision in  HJ  (Iran)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department 2011] 1 AC596.

 4. It was further agreed between the parties that in  those  circumstances
    the appropriate outcome is for the decision of the FtT to be set  aside
    in relation to asylum and Article 3 and for the decision to be  re-made
    allowing the appeal on asylum and human rights grounds, with  reference
    to Article 3 of the ECHR.

 5. I agree that that is the appropriate course and I decide this appeal in
    the terms set out in paragraph 4 above.

 6. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 24/4/19



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
