
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05610/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester CJC                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 14 January 2019                        |On: 25 January 2019           |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Jagadesham, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

 1. I maintain the anonymity direction  made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ('FTT').  The FTT was clearly concerned about the  respondent's  mental
    health - see [6] of the FTT decision.   This  decision  refers  to  the
    respondent's international protection claim and sensitive matters of  a
    personal nature.

 2. The respondent ('SK') is a citizen of Iraq, of  Kurdish  ethnicity  who
    originates from the Iraqi Kurdish Region ('IKR').   He  claimed  asylum
    but this was refused by the appellant ('the SSHD') in a decision  dated
    25 April 2018.

Background

 3. The appellant ('the SSHD') has appealed against a FTT  decision  (Judge
    Holt) dated 15 August 2018 in which she allowed SK's appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.  The FTT carefully considered SK's evidence together with  the
    country background evidence and country guidance in AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -
    internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 212 (IAC), and made findings of fact,
    inter alia, set out below.

      i) SK's evidence was "compelling  and  candid".   SK  had  deep-rooted
         problems as a result of  the  humiliation  he  felt  following  his
         disclosure to a friend in Iraq that his genitals were so small that
         he believed he had a medical or "physical problem" -  see  [18]  of
         the FTT decision.


     ii) SK's family had "washed their hands" of him.  His mother refused to
         answer his calls and his brother advised  him  to  commit  suicide.
         They were angry because of the family shame  and  humiliation  that
         SK's "problem" had brought on them - see [20] and [21] of  the  FTT
         decision.


    iii) If returned to Iraq, SK would not have a CSID and his family  would
         not assist him in replacing his identity documents - see  [24]  and
         [25] of the FTT decision.


     iv) Given SK's particular circumstances, including  the  absence  of  a
         CSID, the absence of family support, the country conditions and the
         bizarre manifestations of his mental state, he would not be able to
         obtain employment or accommodation,  notwithstanding  his  previous
         employment as a carpenter - see [20] and [26] of the FTT decision.

Grounds of appeal

 4. The SSHD appealed against the FTT decision.   Mr  Bates  accepted  that
    when the pleaded grounds are read as a whole, they raise two grounds of
    appeal.

          1) The FTT's  factual  findings,  in  particular  SK's  "physical
             problem" and his risk of suicide are inadequately reasoned and
             entirely unsupported by any medical evidence.


          2) The FTT's findings on internal relocation fail  to  take  into
             account that SK:


             a)  is a young healthy man who has been employed in the past;


             b)   disposed  of  his  CSID,  and  this  raises   section   8
                  credibility concerns;


             c)  can obtain identity documents from the UK Embassy,  having
                  had a CSID in the past;


             d)  can avoid Baghdad by taking a return flight  from  the  UK
                  directly to Erbil.


 5. The SSHD was granted permission to appeal by  FTT  Judge  Parkes  in  a
    decision dated 7 September 2018.  He observed it to  be  arguable  that
    the FTT erred in law in (i) accepting SK's  claim  in  the  absence  of
    supporting evidence, effectively at face value and  (ii)  in  assessing
    his ability to return to Iraq and find employment.

Hearing

 6. At the hearing before me, Mr Bates relied upon the  grounds  of  appeal
    summarised above.  He invited me to find that the key  factual  finding
    that SK's family had disowned him was not one that was open to the FTT.
     This is because, it was predicated firmly upon SK's demeanour  at  the
    hearing and not on any clear background or medical evidence.

 7. Mr Jagadesham relied upon a rule 24 response dated 17 December 2018 and
    submitted that the decision was adequately reasoned,  when  read  as  a
    whole.   This has been served  late  but  for  entirely  understandable
    reasons.  SK was not represented before the FTT or before me  when  the
    matter was first listed in the Upper  Tribunal  ('UT')  on  26  October
    2018.  I adjourned the hearing to enable SK to instruct solicitors  and
    issued directions requiring a rule 24 response to be filed.   In  these
    circumstances, I give  permission  for  the  rule  24  response  to  be
    admitted late.

 8. After hearing from both representatives I reserved my decision, which I
    now provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

Ground 1 - findings of fact

 9. When the decision is read as a whole, I am satisfied  that  whilst  the
    factual findings may be generous, they are not perverse and  were  open
    to the FTT.  The FTT judge carefully considered all  the  evidence  and
    having applied the lower standard of proof, as  set  out  at  [17]  and
    having heard SK give evidence, was entitled to reach  the  findings  of
    fact she did.  The FTT clearly acknowledged the  difficulties  in  SK's
    case.  In particular:

      i) The judge was open about her initial skepticism  upon  reading  the
         papers and before hearing SK give evidence at [5].


     ii) Having heard his evidence,  the  judge  found  it  to  be  genuine,
         candid, disturbing and compelling at [6] and [18].   This  was  not
         just based upon SK's oral  evidence  and  demeanour.   Rather,  the
         judge noted at [28] that "from the outset" he was consistent in his
         claim.


    iii) The judge properly directed herself to the fact that  she  was  not
         medically qualified but that nonetheless SK's own credible evidence
         over the  course  of  his  asylum  interview  and  at  the  hearing
         supported his claim to have significant emotional problems  focused
         on his physical problem at [22].


     iv) The judge noted that SK's reasons for coming to the UK were to  get
         a job to "fix" his "physical problem" at [19],  but  then  properly
         went on to consider prospective risk not necessarily because of  an
         inability to address this issue in his home area (the IKR)  but  by
         reference to the country guidance on  Iraq  and  the  situation  he
         would face by reason, inter alia, of his lack of CSID at [26].


      v) The judge acknowledged there was  a  complete  absence  of  medical
         evidence in a case "crying out" for it at [22] but  an  adjournment
         to obtain such would be futile in the particular  circumstances  of
         the case as set out at [23].  It  is  noteworthy  that  the  SSHD's
         representative must have been of  the  view  that  the  case  could
         fairly proceed in the absence of medical evidence, as there was  no
         application for an adjournment of the FTT hearing on his part.


     vi) The judge clearly "agonised"  about  the  case  and  gave  it  very
         careful consideration given the  paucity  of  expert  evidence  and
         relevant material to conduct a forensic analysis  -  see  [26]  and
         [28].


10. The factual findings I have summarised at [3] above have therefore been
    made notwithstanding  and  in  the  full  knowledge  of  a  paucity  of
    supporting independent evidence.  The immediate question raised in  the
    first ground of appeal is whether the factual findings were  rationally
    open to the judge in the absence of supporting  medical  evidence.    I
    accept that the judge's observations that  the  chances  of  SK  having
    access to the medical attention he believed he needed in the IKR to  be
    very low at [19] and to genuinely be a suicide risk at  [22],  properly
    required supporting evidence if they were to  form  the  foundation  of
    prospective risk upon return to Iraq.  However, when  the  decision  is
    read as a whole, these are not matters that materially led the judge to
    find that SK is at  prospective  risk  in  Iraq.  Rather,  having  made
    findings of fact open to her (as summarised at [3]), the judge properly
    applied those findings to the country guidance in AAH.  The  head  note
    to AAH includes the following:

         "1.      Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national  returnee
         (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able  to  do  so,  or  do  so
         within a reasonable time  frame,  will  depend  on  the  individual
         circumstances. Factors to be considered include:


             i)   Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
             information about the location  of  his  entry  in  the  civil
             register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or  an
             expired CSID would  all  be  of  substantial  assistance.  For
             someone in possession of one or more of  these  documents  the
             process should be straightforward. A laissez-passer should not
             be counted for these purposes: these can be issued without any
             other form of ID being available, are not of any assistance in
             'tracing back' to the family record and are  confiscated  upon
             arrival at Baghdad;


             ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
             is in  an  area  held,  or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
             operational?


             iii)      Are there male family members who would be able  and
             willing to attend the  civil  registry  with  P?  Because  the
             registration system is patrilineal  it  will  be  relevant  to
             consider whether the relative is from the mother  or  father's
             side. A maternal uncle in possession of his CSID would be able
             to assist in locating the original place  of  registration  of
             the individual's mother, and from there the trail  would  need
             to be followed to the place that her records were  transferred
             upon  marriage.  It  must  also  be  borne  in  mind  that   a
             significant  number   of   IDPs   in   Iraq   are   themselves
             undocumented; if that is the case it  is  unlikely  that  they
             could be of assistance. A woman without  a  male  relative  to
             assist with the process of  redocumentation  would  face  very
             significant obstacles in that officials  may  refuse  to  deal
             with her case at all.


         Section E of Country Guidance annexed  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
         decision in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  is  replaced  with  the
         following guidance:


         2. There are  currently  no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
         Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United  Kingdom  are  to
         Baghdad.


         3. For  an  Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
         possession of a valid CSID or  Iraqi  passport,  the  journey  from
         Baghdad to the IKR, whether by  air  or  land,  is  affordable  and
         practical and can be made  without  a  real  risk  of  P  suffering
         persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would  any
         difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


         4. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad  and  the
         IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


         5. P will  face  considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
         between Baghdad and the  IKR  by  land  without  a  CSID  or  valid
         passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including  two
         checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of  the  airport.  If  P  has
         neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk of P being
         detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security  personnel
         are able to verify P's identity. It is not reasonable to require  P
         to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability  of  P
         to verify his identity at a checkpoint. This normally requires  the
         attendance of a male family member and production of  P's  identity
         documents but may also be achieved by  calling  upon  "connections"
         higher up in the chain of command."


11. AAH makes it clear at [100] that a critical part of the enquiry will be
    what documents the individual in question has or might be  expected  to
    get.  The FTT accepted that SK does not have a CSID and  would  not  be
    able to engage the necessary support of his family  to  get  one.   The
    suggestion in the grounds that he could obtain a CSID  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy in the UK, given the  finding  as  to  the  absence  of  family
    support, is inconsistent with the country guidance - see [101-[106]  of
    AAH.  The assertion in the grounds that SK can get a direct  flight  to
    the IKR  is  patently  inconsistent  with  headnote  2  of  AAH,  which
    unequivocally states that there are no  flights  to  the  IKR  and  all
    returns from the UK are to Baghdad.  As headnotes 3 and 4  make  clear,
    SK would be unable to board a plane from Baghdad to the IKR  or  travel
    overland safely without a CSID.  It follows that the  finding  that  SK
    would not be able to obtain a new CSID was sufficient to dispose of the
    appeal in his favour, irrespective of any suicide risk - see the  first
    half of [26] of the FTT decision.

12. Mr Bates submitted that the finding that SK's family had  disowned  him
    following his disclosure of his "problem" was not adequately  reasoned.
    He submitted that the FTT did no more than accept from  SK's  demeanour
    and presentation that he had a physical problem that  his  family  were
    told about.  When the decision is read as a  whole,  the  FTT  did  not
    accept that SK in fact had small genitals.  The FTT merely decided that
    SK perceived that he had a problem with his  genitals  and  his  family
    were told about this.  The judge has provided  adequate  reasoning  for
    accepting this evidence - she believed the  evidence  provided  by  SK.
    This was not just evidence given at the hearing, in relation  to  which
    there was cross-examination, but  was  also  based  on  the  consistent
    claims provided within the asylum interview.  The judge gave sufficient
    reasons for believing SK having acknowledged  that  she  was  initially
    sceptical.

Ground 2 - internal relocation

13. The findings as to whether SK could live a "relatively normal life"  in
    terms of accessing accommodation and employment in the latter  half  of
    [26] appear to be predicated on the erroneous assumption that he  would
    be internally relocating to the IKR.  However, the IKR  was  SK's  home
    area.  This is not a material error of law for two  reasons.   Firstly,
    the FTT was entitled to find that  SK  could  not  safely  get  out  of
    Baghdad airport without a CSID.  Second, the finding that SK  would  be
    unable to access employment and accommodation in the IKR is relevant to
    the alternative finding that he would face a breach of Article 3 of the
    ECHR, if able to safely get to the IKR.

14. I can deal with the additional matters raised in  ground  2  succinctly
    given my observations in relation to ground 1 above.

    a.     The FTT was well aware that SK had been employed in the  past  -
    see [20] and [26] of the FTT decision.


    b.     The grounds faintly criticise the FTT's approach to section 8 of
    the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act  2004,  but
    the judge properly directed herself to this at [16] and  gave  adequate
    reasons why section 8 considerations did not influence her decision  at
    [27].  In  any  event  the  decision  letter  did  not  invite  adverse
    inferences from the disposal of the  CSID  and  passport  but  only  in
    relation to SK's failure to apply for asylum in France.


    c.     Ground 2 fails to engage with the country guidance to the effect
    that SK would not be able to obtain  identity  documents  from  the  UK
    Embassy having had a CSID in the past, without the assistance of family
    in Iraq, which he will not have.


    d.     The only returns from the UK are to Baghdad and SK is unable  to
    take a return flight from the UK directly to Erbil.


Decision allowing appeal on asylum grounds

15. The past treatment sustained by the respondent clearly does  not  cross
    the threshold required to constitute persecution. At most, he  suffered
    humiliation which significantly  impacted  upon  him.   Notwithstanding
    this, the FTT was entitled to find that he was at prospective  risk  of
    serious harm given the relevant country guidance in AAH.  The  FTT  has
    not clearly identified a Convention Reason for  SK's  fear  of  serious
    harm but the SSHD has appealed on this basis.  There was no application
    to amend the grounds of appeal.

Decision

16. The FTT has not made an error of law such that its decision  should  be
    set aside.

17. I dismiss the SSHD's appeal.


UTJ Plimmer

Signed: Ms Melanie Plimmer                             Dated: 14 January
2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
