
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/05574/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     KH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss L Bashow, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
a court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Parker promulgated on  3  October  2019  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated 15 May 2019
    to refuse his protection claim made on arrival in the UK on 25 February
    2015.

 2. Designated First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Manuell  refused  permission  to
    appeal in the Upper Tribunal on 18 November  2019.  However,  when  the
    application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Pitt granted permission to appeal on 9 December 2019.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below I am satisfied that there was a  material
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such as to require it to be set aside and remitted to be remade  afresh
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

 4. The appellant first  came  to  the  UK  in  2008  and  claimed  asylum.
    Thereafter, that claim was rejected and his subsequent appeal dismissed
    by the First-tier Tribunal in June of 2010.  He returned to the  UK  in
    2015.  In fresh submissions the appellant maintained he remains at risk
    on return to Iraq owing to a conflict with a rival family.   He  relied
    on further evidence to substantiate parts of  his  factual  claim  that
    were not substantiated previously by documentary evidence.

 5. In granting permission to appeal Judge Pitt granted permission only  on
    the  grounds  set  out  in  paragraphs  7  and  9  through  12  of  the
    application.  Although rejecting the  other  grounds  as  being  either
    devoid of any merit or immaterial to the outcome of the  appeal,  Judge
    Pitt considered it arguable that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    address the new evidence provided by the appellant  which  specifically
    sought to address the  adverse  credibility  findings  of  the  earlier
    Tribunal decision, observing that the error may  potentially  undermine
    the  overall  credibility  assessment  and  the  findings  as  to   the
    appellant's circumstances in Iraq on return, in particular  whether  he
    is in contact with his family and whether he can obtain a CSID.   Judge
    Pitt also stated that the comment in paragraph 39 of the decision about
    there being no need for a solicitor if someone is telling the truth  is
    not easy to understand and is arguably an  incorrect  approach  to  the
    assessment of the evidence.

 6. At paragraph 25 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal  observed  that
    the previous Tribunal decision found the  appellant  not  credible  and
    concluded that those findings had not been successfully answered by the
    appellant in the hearing before Judge Parker.  The  judge  acknowledged
    the change in the law since the earlier decision and took into  account
    the new documents but found  that  the  basic  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence remained.  In the succeeding paragraphs the  judge
    then set out those inconsistencies and credibility  findings.  However,
    the grounds submit that nowhere does the  judge  engage  with  the  new
    documentary material.  I have to  agree  and,  very  properly,  Mr  Tan
    conceded that it is plain from the decision  that  the  judge  had  not
    grappled with that new material.  In those circumstances and  for  that
    reason independently of the other grounds this decision cannot stand.

 7. In relation to the comment about a solicitor  and  telling  the  truth,
    from paragraph 32 of the decision the judge addressed what were said to
    be inconsistencies between the appellant's screening interview and what
    he said in oral evidence at the hearing.  The judge correctly  referred
    to the case law of YL, which explains that whilst not intended to be  a
    comprehensive account, answers  given  at  a  screening  interview  are
    expected to be true and  may  fairly  be  compared  with  a  subsequent
    account.  At paragraph  38  the  judge  considered  that  a  completely
    different story had been given to  that  put  forward  in  the  earlier
    screening interview.   At  paragraph  39  of  the  decision  the  judge
    addressed the concerns raised on the appellant's  behalf  that  he  was
    interviewed  over  the  phone  at  a  time  when  he  was  not  legally
    represented.  The judge then stated, "if a person tells the truth in an
    interview a solicitor is not required."

 8. It is not clear what the judge meant by this comment.  The  grounds  at
    paragraph 9 assert that if this represents the judge's approach to  the
    assessment of credibility, it is wholly inconsistent with the case  law
    and provides no scope for, for example a mistake, human  error,  errors
    of translation or a distressed claimant representing himself.   I  find
    the comment was unnecessary and I am not satisfied  that  it  ought  to
    have been made. I am not even clear what it was intended to convey.

 9. On consideration of the submissions, I accept that it  may  indicate  a
    flawed approach and for that reason is an error of law.   I  also  note
    that the decision gives inadequate  assessment  to  the  issue  of  the
    availability of a CSID. At paragraph 44 it appears that in stating "the
    appellant does have a CSID card" the judge may  have  intended  to  say
    that he did not have a CSID card but went on to say he had parents  and
    siblings in Iraq who could help him and make sure he had got  his  CSID
    card as soon as he arrived.  Whether or not there was  a  typographical
    error in paragraph 44 or not, I am satisfied, and Mr Tan concedes, that
    the judge failed to properly address the issue of  the  CSID  card  and
    there is a clear lack of reasoning in the  decision  for  the  findings
    made, which findings take no more than a few lines.

10. In all the circumstances, for the reasons outlined above, it  is  clear
    that this decision is flawed for error of law, cannot stand and must be
    set aside to be remade.

Remittal

11. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal had been set  aside  Section
    12(2) of the Tribunal's Courts and Enforcement  Act  of  2007  requires
    either that the case  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  with
    directions or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal.  The  scheme  of
    the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement  Act  2007  does  not  assign  the
    function of primary fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal given the errors
    in this case.  Effectively there has not been a valid determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.  Further given the very recently  issued  new
    country guidance in SMO, KSP and IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)
    Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC), a remaking of the decision in the appeal
    will have  to  take  into  account  this  new  guidance.   In  all  the
    circumstances at the invitation and  the  request  of  both  parties  I
    relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the basis that it falls squarely within the Senior President's Practice
    Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error of law on a point of  law  such  that  the  decision
    should be set aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 20 January 2020



Consequential Directions

 1. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester.

 2. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved.

 3. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge with  the
    exception of Judge Parker and Judge Manuell.

 4. The estimated length of hearing is three hours.

 5. An interpreter in Kurdish Sorani will be required.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 20 January 2020

