
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05001/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 May 2021                        |On 24 May 2021                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     JM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 28 May,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill  set
    aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Her  reasons  are  as
    follows:

         "1.  The appellant, a national of Albania born on 16 December 1999,
         appeals against a decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  R
         Handley  who,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19  December  2019
         following a hearing on  27  November  2019,  dismissed  her  appeal
         against a decision of the respondent of 13 May 2019 to  refuse  her
         claim  made  on  28  August  2018  for  asylum   and   humanitarian
         protection.


         The issues


         2.   The following are the issues I have to decide  (hereafter  the
         "Issues"):


             (i)   whether  it  is  appropriate  to  decide  the  following
             questions without a hearing:


                  (a)  whether the decision of the judge involved the making
                  of an error on a point of law; and


                  (b)  whether the judge's decision should be set aside.


             (ii) if I conclude that it is appropriate to proceed without a
             hearing and if the answer to both questions (a) and (b)  above
             is "yes", then whether the appeal should be  remitted  to  the
             First-tier Tribunal or whether  the  decision  on  the  appeal
             should be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.


         3.   I come to decide these issues after the  following  have  been
         issued by the Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  (the
         "Tribunal") after the  "lockdown"  due  to  the  Covid-19  pandemic
         commenced on 23 March 2020:


             (i)  A "Note and Directions"  by  Mr  C  M  G  Ockelton,  Vice
             President of the Tribunal dated 18 March 2020  and  issued  by
             the Upper Tribunal on 20 March 2020. Para 1 of the  "Note  and
             Directions" stated that, in light of the present need to  take
             precautions against the spread of Covid-19, the Vice President
             had reached the provisional view, having reviewed the file  in
             this case, that it would be appropriate to determine questions
             (i)(a) and (b) above without a hearing.


                  Para 2 of the  "Note  and  Directions"  issued  directions
                  which provided for the party who had sought permission  to
                  make submissions by 2 April 2020 in support of an error of
                  law and on the question whether the decision of the First-
                  tier Tribunal ("FtT") should be set aside if error of  law
                  is found; for any other party to file and serve by 9 April
                  2020 submissions in response; and, if such submissions  in
                  response were made, for the party who sought permission to
                  file a reply no later than 16 April 2020.


                  Para 3 of the "Note and Directions" stated that any  party
                  who considered that despite  the  foregoing  directions  a
                  hearing was necessary to consider questions 1(a)  and  (b)
                  may submit reasons for that view no  later  than  9  April
                  2020.


             (ii) A  decision  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  O'Connor  on  an
             application made on the appellant's  behalf  for  time  to  be
             extended for compliance with para 2 of  the  Vice  President's
             directions from 2 April 2020. Judge O'Connor extended the time
             limit to 30 April 2020.


         4.   I have received the following documents from the parties:


             (i)   from   the   appellant   (hereafter   the   "Appellant's
             Submissions"):


                  (a)  "Further Submissions in assertion of  error  of  law"
                  submitted by Rashid & Rashid Solicitors by email  dated  1
                  April 2020 timed at 22:38 hours; and


                  (b)  "Further representations" dated 29 April 2020 from Mr
                  R Parkin, of Counsel.


             (ii)  From  the  respondent   (hereafter   the   "Respondent's
             Submissions"), "SSHD's written submissions on  error  of  law"
             from Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting  Officer,  dated  8  April
             2020 and submitted to the Upper Tribunal by email of the  same
             date timed at 11:33 hours.


             (iii)    The appellant's "Response to R.24 Statement" dated 20
             May 2020 (hereafter the "Appellant's Response").


         To the extent that any of the above submissions were late, I extend
         time for compliance with the relevant direction and admit them.


         5.   Para  2  of  the  Respondent's  Submissions  states  that  the
         respondent's response was  based  on  the  appellant's  grounds  of
         appeal and that the respondent was not aware of any further written
         submissions. It is therefore clear that the respondent had not  had
         sight of the Appellant's Submissions.


         6.   I  considered  whether  the  respondent  should  be  given  an
         opportunity  to  consider  the  Appellant's  Submissions  and  make
         submissions in response. I  decided  to  proceed  to  consider  the
         Issues because I concluded that there would be no prejudice to  the
         respondent for the following reasons: (i) Mr Jarvis  had  accepted,
         in the Respondent's Submissions,  that  the  judge  had  materially
         erred in law and that his decision should be  set  aside;  (ii)  Mr
         Jarvis had made submissions on  the  question  whether  the  appeal
         should be remitted to the FtT or whether the decision on the appeal
         should be re-made in the Upper Tribunal; and (iii) accordingly,  no
         useful purpose would be  served  by  postponing  the  making  of  a
         decision on the Issues in order to allow the respondent to  respond
         to the Appellant's Submissions.


         7.   I therefore proceeded to consider the  Issues  notwithstanding
         that  the  respondent  had  not  had  sight  of   the   Appellant's
         Submissions at the time  that  the  Respondent's  Submissions  were
         made.


         Issue (i) - whether it is appropriate to proceed without a hearing


         8.   In his submissions dated 29 April 2020,  Mr  Parkin  contended
         that the appeal should be heard at an oral hearing. At  para  4  of
         his submissions dated 29 April 2020, he stated that, given the fact-
         heavy nature and extent of the issues involved in this  appeal,  it
         is likely that the Tribunal would be significantly assisted by oral
         arguments from the parties, in  that,  it  is  probable  that  some
         points may not  have  been  anticipated  in  the  drafting  of  his
         representations. Secondly, given that findings of fact  are  likely
         to be or may become relevant in this appeal, it may  also  be  that
         the Tribunal wishes to hear oral evidence, particularly if, in  the
         event of the appeal succeeding, the Tribunal wishes to re-make  the
         decision itself.


         9.   In the Respondent's Submissions, Mr Jarvis did not advance any
         objection to the Tribunal proceeding to decide the Issues without a
         hearing.


         10.  I have carefully considered the appellant's representations on
         the question whether it is appropriate to proceed without  hearing.
         I have  considered  the  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  2020:
         "Arrangements during the  Covid-19  Pandemic"  and  the  overriding
         objective.


         11.  Having considered everything very carefully, I have  concluded
         that it is appropriate to proceed to decide the  Issues  without  a
         hearing, for the following reasons:


             (i)  It is not  enough  to  say  that  the  Tribunal  will  be
             significantly assisted by oral arguments from the parties  and
             that it is  probable  that  some  points  may  not  have  been
             anticipated in the drafting of written submissions.  That  can
             be said in respect of many, if not most  cases.  It  does  not
             follow that a  just  decision  cannot  be  reached  without  a
             hearing.


             (ii) Given that this decision is limited  to  the  Issues  and
             given that the grounds of appeal to the Tribunal do not  raise
             any ground that will require oral  evidence  to  be  heard  in
             order to decide the Issues, there is no question of my  making
             findings of fact or hearing oral evidence at this stage.


             (iii)    Although this is a case which involves a  trafficking
             claim, the fact  is  that  Mr  Jarvis  has  accepted,  in  the
             Respondent's Submissions, that the judge materially  erred  in
             law and that his decision should be set aside.


         Issues (i) (a) and (b) - whether the judge erred in law and whether
         his decision should be set aside


         12.  Although Mr Jarvis has  accepted  that  the  judge's  decision
         should be set aside, it is necessary to explain the  basis  of  the
         appellant's asylum claim and  summarise  relevant  aspects  of  the
         decision letter and the judge's decision.  This  is  necessary  not
         only in order to set in context  the  respondent's  concession  but
         also to set in context the ambit of the re-making of  the  decision
         on the appellant's appeal.


         Summary of the appellant's asylum claim


         13.  The appellant's asylum claim was based on her claim  that  she
         had been trafficked to the  United  Kingdom  and  that  she  feared
         persecution  in  Albania  at  the  hands  of  her  father  and  the
         traffickers.


         14.  The appellant said that her family was very strict and she was
         not allowed to go anywhere without someone  accompanying  her.  She
         stated that she began a relationship on Facebook with a  man  named
         Aurel in December 2017. On 17 May 2018, she went to Macedonia  with
         her father and brother who were going there on  business.  She  had
         arranged to meet Aurel in Macedonia without the  knowledge  of  her
         father and brother. They left her in a boutique whilst they went to
         a supermarket. She messaged Aurel  to  come  and  collect  her.  He
         arrived 20 minutes later and they both  then  travelled  to  Skopje
         airport and flew  to  Belgium  on  her  own  passport.  They  lived
         together in Belgium for 2-3 weeks after which she was invited to  a
         party at a house where Aurel left her  with  a  group  of  men  who
         exploited her that night and for a further 3 months. She was forced
         into prostitution and locked in a room in a cellar.  She  was  then
         brought to the United Kingdom in  the  back  of  a  lorry  but  she
         managed to escape when the lorry driver got out because  he  had  a
         flat tyre.


         15.  The appellant said (para 33 of the decision letter)  that  her
         father had told her that because she had fled he now  disowned  her
         and if he was to see her again he would kill her,  burn  her  alive
         and cut her flesh because she had brought shame  and  left  Albania
         without his permission. However, she had also stated that  she  had
         not spoken to her family since 17 May 2018 when she was in  Belgium
         (para 34 of the decision letter).


         Summary of the decision letter


         16.  At paras 29 and 32 of  the  decision  letter,  the  respondent
         stated that the appellant had not  substantiated  her  relationship
         with her trafficker and that she was a victim of trafficking/forced
         prostitution. However, the respondent proceeded to consider whether
         the appellant  should  be  given  the  benefit  of  the  doubt  and
         concluded that she should, stating, at  para  43  of  the  decision
         letter, that the respondent accepted the  appellant's  nationality,
         her evidence about her relationship with her  trafficker  and  that
         she was a victim of trafficking/forced prostitution.


         17.  It is clear, from paras 33-39 and  para  43  of  the  decision
         letter,  that  the  respondent  rejected  the   appellant's   claim
         concerning her fear of her parents.


         18.  The respondent also considered that the  appellant's  fear  of
         her  family  and  traffickers  was  not  well-founded  because  she
         considered that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  sufficient
         protection from  the  Albanian  authorities  (paras  47-59  of  the
         decision letter) and that she would be able to internally  relocate
         (paras 60-72 of the decision letter). The  respondent  stated  that
         the appellant had failed to demonstrate that her family have either
         the power or influence to locate her throughout Albania  (para  61)
         or that her father, traffickers and Aurel have any ongoing interest
         in her or clear motivation in pursuing her (para 62 of the decision
         letter).


         Summary of the judge's decision


         19.  In summarising the decision  letter  at  paras  11-18  of  his
         decision, the judge noted (at paras 13 and 14) that the  respondent
         had  stated  that  the  appellant   had   not   substantiated   her
         relationship with her trafficker and  that  she  was  a  victim  of
         trafficking/forced prostitution. This is based on paras 29  and  32
         of the decision letter.


         20.  However, there is no mention in the judge's  decision  of  the
         respondent's concessions at para 43 of the decision letter.


         21.  The judge found that the appellant  had  not  established  her
         relationship with her alleged trafficker and rejected her claim  to
         have been trafficked. He did not accept her claim that  her  father
         would want to harm her if she returned to  Albania  (para  41).  He
         then summarised aspects of MK (Lesbians) Albania  CG  [2009]  UKAIT
         00036 (para 42) and TD and AD (trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT  92
         (para  43)  as  well  as  a  report  entitled  "Country  Policy  an
         Information Note: People Trafficking, Albania:  March  2019"  (para
         44) before stating, at para 45:


             "45. As indicated, I do not accept that the appellant has been
             a victim of trafficking but even if I  am  wrong  in  reaching
             that conclusion I find that there are facilities available  to
             victims of trafficking in Albania."


         22.  The judge  therefore  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum  and
         humanitarian protection claims.


         Grounds of appeal


         23.  The grounds may be summarised as follows:


         24.  The judge erred  in  law  in  going  behind  the  respondent's
         acceptance in the decision letter that the appellant was  a  victim
         of trafficking/forced prostitution and her relationship with Aurel.
         The judge's alternative finding at para 45 of  his  decision,  that
         even if he  had  reached  a  contrary  conclusion,  he  would  have
         dismissed the appeal "as there are facilities available to  victims
         of trafficking in Albania"  was  fundamentally  undermined  by  the
         error in going behind the respondent's concession. In addition, the
         judge gave very limited consideration to the criteria in TD and  AD
         which requires consideration of various factors in order to  decide
         whether sufficient protection is available and whether it would  be
         unduly harsh for an individual to relocate. In the instant case,  a
         number of these factors  were  engaged,  for  example,  the  social
         status and economic standing of the appellant's family,  the  state
         of her mental health and her age.


         Assessment


         25.  Whilst it is clear that the judge noted paras 29 and 32 of the
         decision letter, he appeared  not  to  have  been  aware  that  the
         respondent had proceeded to consider whether the  appellant  should
         be given the benefit of the doubt and had stated, at para 43 of the
         decision  letter,  that  the  respondent  accepted  not  only   the
         appellant's  nationality  but   also   her   evidence   about   her
         relationship with her trafficker and  that  she  was  a  victim  of
         trafficking/forced prostitution.


         26.  At para 5 of the Respondent's Submissions,  Mr  Jarvis  stated
         that it was evident from the Presenting  Officer's  minute  of  the
         hearing that there was no  attempt  to  withdraw  the  respondent's
         concessions at para 43 of  the  decision  letter  and  that  cross-
         examination at the  hearing  was  only  based  on  the  appellant's
         alleged problems with her family and what difficulties there  would
         be for her on return  to  Albania.  This  is  consistent  with  the
         judge's  summary  of  the  appellant's  oral  evidence  in   cross-
         examination, at paras 24-30 of his decision.


         27.  I am therefore satisfied, as contended by  Mr  Parkin  in  the
         Appellant's Submissions  and  as  accepted  by  Mr  Jarvis  in  the
         Respondent's  Submissions,  that  the   judge   went   behind   the
         respondent's concessions at para  43  of  the  decision  letter  by
         considering the credibility of the appellant's evidence  about  her
         relationship with her trafficker and her evidence that  she  was  a
         victim of trafficking/forced prostitution.


         28.  On this basis, I am satisfied that the judge's  assessment  at
         paras  33-37  of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's   evidence
         concerning her relationship with Aurel and that he and others  were
         responsible for trafficking  her  to  the  United  Kingdom,  cannot
         stand.


         29.  I am further satisfied  that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
         appellant's evidence concerning her relationship with, and fear of,
         her family cannot stand because  this  finding  was  based  on  his
         overall assessment of her credibility, including his assessment  of
         the credibility of her evidence concerning  her  relationship  with
         Aurel and her claim that she had been trafficked.


         30.  I also agree with Mr Jarvis that  the  judge's  assessment  at
         para 45 of his decision is not truly a finding in  the  alternative
         as he did not engage with the question whether it is reasonable for
         the appellant to internally relocate.


         31.  It follows that the judge's assessment and findings  at  paras
         32-45 cannot stand.  I  set  aside  his  decision  to  dismiss  the
         appellant's asylum claim, humanitarian  protection  claim  and  the
         appellant's related Article 3 claim.


          Issue (ii) - whether the appeal should be remitted to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal or whether the decision on the appeal should  be  re-
         made in the Upper Tribunal.


         32.  At para 8 of the Respondent's Submissions,  Mr  Jarvis  stated
         that the respondent is neutral about whether the  decision  on  the
         appellant's appeal should be remitted to the  FtT  or  whether  the
         decision on  the  appellant's  appeal  should  be  re-made  in  the
         Tribunal.


         33.  At para 25 of his submissions dated 29 April 2020,  Mr  Parkin
         sought a remittal of the appeal to the FtT stating that this appeal
         will require extensive findings of fact and that it is not entirely
         clear whether any of the judge's  findings  are  capable  of  being
         preserved.  At para 4 of the Appellant's Response, Mr Parkin stated
         that it is difficult to see how the Upper Tribunal could  make  re-
         make the decision itself, given the agreement reached that findings
         cannot be preserved.


         34.  I have carefully considered the  parties'  submissions.  As  I
         have stated at para 31 above the judge's assessment and findings at
         paras 32-45 cannot stand. In effect, this means that  none  of  his
         findings in relation to the appellant's asylum claim,  humanitarian
         protection claim and the appellant's related Article  3  claim  can
         stand.


         35.  However, it does not follow  that  this  appeal  will  require
         extensive findings of fact. In view of the respondent's concessions
         at para 43 of the decision letter, credibility is  limited  to  the
         appellant's evidence concerning her relationship with  her  family;
         in particular, her evidence as summarised at  para  15  above.  Her
         account as summarised at para 14 above has  been  accepted  by  the
         respondent.


         36.  The grounds of appeal to the Tribunal did  not  challenge  the
         judge's  assessment  at  paras  46-47  of  his  decision   of   the
         appellant's Article 3 claim based on her medical condition  and  at
         paras 48-49 of her Article 8 claim. Although para 10 of the grounds
         mentions "the state of her mental health", this was  in  connection
         with the assessment of the appellant's trafficking claim,  and  not
         her Article 3 claim based on her medical condition.


         37.   It  follows  that  the  re-making  of  the  decision  on  the
         appellant's appeal falls to be limited to the following:


             (i)  the credibility of the  appellant's  evidence  concerning
             her relationship with her family; in particular, her  evidence
             as summarised at para 15 above;


             (ii) whether there would be sufficient protection for  her  in
             Albania against any acts of persecution (if there  is  a  real
             risk of such acts) by her father and/or her traffickers and/or
             against being re-trafficked; and


             (iii)    whether she would be able to  safely  and  reasonably
             relocate internally.


         It follows that this appeal will not require extensive findings  of
         fact.


         38.  In addition, the judge's  summary  of  the  oral  evidence  he
         heard, at paras 24-30 of his decision, stands as a  record  of  the
         evidence that was given in cross-examination before the judge.


         39.  Given what I have said at paras 37-38 above and having  regard
         to paras 7.2-7.3 of  the  Practice  Statement  and  the  overriding
         objective, I am not satisfied that para  7.2  (a)  or  (b)  of  the
         Practice Statements apply. I am satisfied that  it  is  appropriate
         and just that the decision on the appellant's appeal be re-made  in
         the Tribunal.


         40.  For the same reasons, and bearing in mind, in particular, that
         the Tribunal will have the  benefit of the judge's summary  of  the
         appellant's oral evidence before him and, further, having regard to
         the Pilot Practice Direction and the UTIAC Guidance Note  No  1  of
         2020, I am provisionally of the following view:


             (i)   if  there  is  no  further  oral  evidence,   that   the
             forthcoming hearing in this appeal  can  and  should  be  held
             remotely by telephone.


             (ii)  If  there  will  be  further  oral  evidence,  that  the
             forthcoming hearing in this appeal  can  and  should  be  held
             remotely by Skype for Business, provided that the Tribunal  is
             by then able to arrange for the appellant and any witnesses to
             be assisted by an interpreter (if an interpreter is required),
             such remote hearing to take place on a date to be fixed.


         Notice of Decision


         41.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of
         errors on points of law such  that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
         appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds  and  the
         related Article 3 claim is set aside. The decision to  dismiss  the
         appeal on the appellant's Article 3  claim  based  on  her  medical
         condition stands and her Article 8 claim stands."


 2. Following a Transfer Order, the resumed hearing took  place  before  me
    remotely on 7 May 2021. Mr Walker, who appeared for the  respondent  at
    the resumed hearing, told me that the Secretary of State  accepts  that
    the appellant's appeal should be allowed on asylum and Article  3  ECHR
    grounds (in the latter case, subject to Judge Gill's decision  at  [41]
    above).

 3. In the circumstances, I allow the appeal on asylum and Article  3  ECHR
    grounds.




    Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 13 May 2019 is allowed on asylum and Article 3 ECHR grounds




    Signed   Date 7 May 2021


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants
    are granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings  shall  directly
    or indirectly identify them  or  any  member  of  their  family.   This
    direction applies  both  to  the  appellants  and  to  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.
