
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05302/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2020                         |On 5th March 2020             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     MA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Armatrading, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Corben of Counsel, instructed by Lawmans
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Wright promulgated on  28  October  2019,  in
    which MA's appeal against the decision to  refuse  her  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 21 May 2019 was allowed.  For ease I continue
    to refer to the parties as they were before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
    with MA as the Appellant and the Secretary of State as the Respondent.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Algeria, born  on  10  April  1989,  who
    first arrived in the United  Kingdom  in  January  2013  as  a  Tier  4
    (General) student with leave to remain as such to 9 July  2013.   On  6
    May 2016 the Appellant was convicted of possession  of  false  identity
    documents and sentenced to eight months' imprisonment.  On 18 July 2016
    she claimed asylum on the basis that she feared persecution  on  return
    to Algeria as a bisexual woman; as a Christian convert; that she  would
    be subject to honour killing by her father and that she as at  risk  of
    re-trafficking and/or from her traffickers on return to  Algeria.   The
    referral was made through the NRM in respect of the Appellant's  claims
    to have been trafficked and the victim of slavery, which resulted in  a
    positive conclusive grounds decision on 2 October 2017.

 3. The Respondent refused  the  application  for  the  following  reasons.
    First, although it was accepted that the  Appellant  was  a  victim  of
    trafficking and slavery, it was not accepted that there was any current
    risk on return from her traffickers of  being  re-trafficked.   In  any
    event it was considered that there would be a sufficiency of protection
    available to the Appellant in Algeria.  The Appellant's claims to  have
    been threatened by her family on the basis of  religion  and  sexuality
    were rejected on the basis that there was a lack  of  detail,  lack  of
    substantiation of the claim, a lack of clarity and overall the  benefit
    of doubt did not apply to the claim.  The Appellant's  credibility  was
    also  considered  to  be  damaged  by  section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 due to the delay  in
    her claiming asylum.  Overall, the Appellant was not  recognised  as  a
    refugee, nor was there any need for  humanitarian  protection  and  her
    removal would not entail a  breach  of  Articles  2  and/or  3  of  the
    European Convention on Human Rights.  Finally, the  Appellant  had  not
    established family life in the United Kingdom and in terms  of  private
    life, she did not meet the requirements  of  paragraph  276ADE  of  the
    Immigration Rules and there were no  exceptional  circumstances  for  a
    grant of leave to remain.

 4. Judge Wright allowed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 28 October
    2019 on asylum grounds.  I return to below to  the  findings  made  and
    reasons given for the decision.  The Appellant had produced evidence in
    relation to an Article 8 claim, raised as a new matter  as  defined  in
    section 85(5) of the Nationality, Immigration Act 2002  but  which  was
    not determined by the First-tier Tribunal because  the  Respondent  did
    not consent to the same.

The appeal

 5. The Respondent appeals  on  two  grounds.   First,  that  there  was  a
    material misdirection in law by the First tier Tribunal by  considering
    only whether the Appellant had a subjective fear on return to  Algeria,
    whereas  the  Refugee  Convention,  Qualification  Directive  and   the
    Immigration Rules all require a  well-founded,  or  objective  risk  on
    return.  Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal has failed  to  provide
    adequate reasons as to whether the Appellant is objectively at risk  of
    re-trafficking on return to Algeria.

 6. At the oral hearing, the written grounds of appeal were  relied  on  by
    the Respondent.  In relation to the first ground, although the decision
    of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  contains  a  correct  self-direction  in
    paragraph  52,  expressly  referring   to   the   need   of   objective
    determination of a well-founded fear, in paragraph 67,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal finds only that the Appellant has shown a  genuine  subjective
    fear of re-trafficking on return and nowhere else in  the  decision  is
    there any express consideration of whether this  is  objectively  well-
    founded, nor  and  finding  that  it  is.   The  First-tier  tribunal's
    consideration of whether there  is  a  sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation on return is  not  relevant  unless  and  until  an
    objective risk has been established.

 7. On behalf of the Appellant, Mr Corben submitted that this is not a case
    which on its facts starts from the usual point of the Appellant needing
    to show risk on return because it  is  already  been  accepted  by  the
    Respondent that the Appellant has been trafficked and  by  whom,  taken
    together with the provisions in paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules
    provides a sufficient indication of a real future risk.  In effect, the
    First-tier Tribunal has  considered  the  case  from  this  standpoint,
    reversing the burden of proof looking to the whether there any  reasons
    why they wouldn't be a well-founded fear on return by  considering  the
    options of sufficiency of protection and internal  relocation,  neither
    of which were found to be viable.  It was further submitted that in any
    event, the First-tier Tribunal did consider objective risk on return in
    paragraphs 71 of the decision, which goes through factors relevant to a
    consideration of an objective risk.  Although this is within a  section
    of the decision expressly dealing with sufficiency  of  protection,  Mr
    Corben submitted that even if the decision approaches the matter in the
    wrong order, the relevant factors had been considered.

 8. In the alternative, Mr Corben submitted that any error  in  failing  to
    expressly refer to objective risk would not be material to the  outcome
    of the appeal on the facts of this case, given there is clear objective
    risk on return based on the findings set out in  paragraph  71  of  the
    decision and paragraph 339K of the Immigration Rules.

Findings and reasons

 1. In determining this appeal it is necessary to set out the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal in more detail.  Following  a  summary  of  the
    reasons for refusal and evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    decision sets out the burden and standard of proof and  applicable  law
    in paragraphs 49 to 52.  It is not disputed that this is an appropriate
    self-direction of the relevant  law  and  requirements.   The  findings
    begin in detail at paragraph 59 of the decision, reiterating  what  has
    and has not been accepted by the Respondent,  with  a  summary  of  the
    Appellant's accepted claim to be a victim of trafficking.

 2. The main factual conclusions appear in paragraph 62 as follows:

         "62.  However, whilst I have noted the  SSHD's  acceptance  of  the
         facts (see above) that the appellant was "forced into  prostitution
         and trafficked into the UK" ("After an investigation into this part
         of your claim by the National Referral Mechanism ['NRM'] and noting
         your claim has been accepted on the  balance  of  probabilities,  a
         higher standard of proof") and whilst, therefore, I  must  consider
         (in due course close, risk of re-trafficking on return to  Algeria,
         I find that the appellant's clear propensity/capacity for deception
         as demonstrated on the evidence simply leads me to conclude in  the
         round that she lacked sufficient  credibility,  even  applying  the
         requisite  lower  standard,  to  accept  her  claimed   bisexuality
         (described by Mr Corben in closing as "small beer compared to other
         aspects"), Christian conversion, threats  from  family  or  threats
         from [named trafficker] (other than  as  regards  the  latter,  the
         accepted fact by  the  SSHD  of  the  appellants  trafficking  must
         inevitably have involved some threat or threats at the time)."

 3. The First-tier Tribunal in paragraph 63 sets out what it  finds  to  be
    the Appellant's clear propensity/capacity for deception, including  the
    use of a false passport to enter the United Kingdom in 2013; the use of
    false Facebook account to contact her  friend;  having  run  away  with
    E7000 belonging to her traffickers; her description of her  journey  to
    the United Kingdom; her failure to claim asylum  on  arrival  and  only
    following her conviction; an  inconsistency  about  how  the  Appellant
    described her religion in Algeria; working unlawfully  and  then  being
    convicted of possession of a false identity document.  In paragraph  64
    there is a reference to the Appellant's marriage  entered  into  within
    less than six months of arrival in the United Kingdom, with  separation
    only two months after marriage.  Paragraph 65 refers to the Appellant's
    'unaccepted  claims  being  fatally   undermined'   by   inconsistency,
    including an inconsistent  date  and  reason  for  needing  to  support
    herself in Algeria; delay  in  her  asylum  claim  and  inconsistencies
    between her screening interview substantive  interview.   In  paragraph
    66, there is a further reference to the Appellant's 'unaccepted  claims
    also being fatally undermined' by the evidence from her sister referred
    to as undated,  unsigned  and  self-serving  and  evidence  upon  which
    reliance could not properly be placed when looked at in the round.

 4. Following these findings in paragraphs  62  to  66,  which  are  almost
    exclusively critical of the  Appellant  and  make  significant  adverse
    credibility  findings  against  her  (albeit  in  the  absence  of  any
    assessment of much of her  claim,  evidence  and  reasons  for  certain
    matters) and the evidence of her sister there is a conclusion paragraph
    67 that the Appellant  to  show  only  a  genuine  subjective  fear  in
    relation to re-trafficking return to Algeria.  It was accepted that  as
    a trafficked woman she was a member of a particular  social  group  for
    the purposes of the Refugee Convention.  From  paragraphs  68  onwards,
    the First-tier Tribunal considers whether there would be a  sufficiency
    of protection  available  to  the  Appellant  on  return  and  finally,
    internal relocation in paragraphs 73 and 78.

 5. In relation to  sufficiency  of  protection,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    refers to the US State Department report and then a number  of  factors
    in paragraph 71, as follows:

         "71.  Furthermore, whilst the appellant  did  not  seek  protection
         from the authorities in Algeria prior to  coming  here  and  whilst
         "Officials  continue  to  allow  victims  to   report   abuses   to
         authorities", nevertheless the fact remains that it is accepted  by
         the SSHD that the appellant was trafficked;  [x  and  y]  were  the
         traffickers (notwithstanding Mr Archie's [HOPO] position in closing
         that the "RFRL accepts A [appellant] has been trafficked but not by
         a prominent figure [...]", no doubt based on [61] of the RFRL which
         states "it has not been possible to verify your claim of [y]  being
         a member of Parliament or even Mayor of [...] as per your  sister's
         letter  with  external  information");  both  are  Algerian;  there
         connected to the appellant through the sister [...] of  her  friend
         [...];  the  accepted  fact  of  the  appellants  trafficking  must
         inevitably have involved some subtle threats at the time; and [x or
         y] (whether prominent/high profile not)  also  have  a  motive  for
         trafficking the appellant again (to recover the 7000 Euros taken by
         her from them even on her own account) and/or harming her (fear  of
         being   reported   to   the   authorities   by   the    appellant),
         notwithstanding the unreliable (as found in the round,  see  above)
         'Whatsapp' evidence."

 6. The paragraph quoted above is very difficult to read and understand and
    does not expressly disclose any specific findings at all, let alone  on
    the objective risk on return as suggested by Mr Corben.  On a  generous
    reading, the paragraph appears to identify a number of  reasons  as  to
    why the Appellant could be at  risk  of  re-trafficking,  primarily  in
    terms of motive; but does not go further and assess whether there is an
    objective risk of re-trafficking on return to Algeria now  (as  opposed
    to previous threats); whether or not the identified traffickers had the
    means to find the Appellant (the only reference being to the Respondent
    not having accepted that they were prominent or high profile  figures);
    nor whether sufficiency of protection is relevant to all or some of the
    factors identified or not.  I can not  accept  Mr  Corben's  submission
    that this paragraph contains an objective assessment of  risk,  despite
    being  clearly  within  the  section  dealing   with   sufficiency   of
    protection, as in any event the paragraph lacks clarity and any  actual
    findings.  For the same reasons, I reject the  alternative  proposition
    that any error was immaterial based on findings in this paragraph.

 7. I find that despite the correct  self-direction  in  paragraph  52  and
    further reference to the need to consider  risk  of  re-trafficking  on
    return to Algeria in paragraph 62; the First-tier Tribunal erred in law
    in not in fact considering whether the Appellant's fear on  return  was
    well-founded, or put another way, whether there was an  objective  risk
    on return.  At its highest and without any express reasons being  given
    for the finding, the Appellant was found to  have  established  only  a
    genuine subjective fear of re-trafficking.  It is  trite  to  say  that
    this is insufficient to allow an appeal on asylum grounds and to do  so
    is  a  material  error  of  law.   The  second  ground  of  appeal   is
    inextricably linked to the first in that if no findings are made as  to
    objective risk on return, it goes without saying that  there  are  also
    inadequate reasons for the same and for allowing the appeal.  For these
    reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside  and
    the appeal remade.

 8. Overall, I would also add that whilst not raised as a  cross-appeal  by
    the Appellant, there are Robinson  obvious  errors  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's approach to findings of fact in this  case  outside  of  the
    errors identified by the Respondent.  First, there is no  consideration
    at all of whether the Appellant is a vulnerable witness in light of her
    being  an  accepted  victim  of  trafficking  and  modern  slavery;  no
    reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: 'Child,
    vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance' relevant both to the
    conduct of the hearing and  assessment  of  evidence  of  a  vulnerable
    witness; and no consideration at  all  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and
    evidence in the context of her being a victim of trafficking and modern
    slavery.  To the contrary, there are numerous  examples  of  where  the
    First-tier Tribunal  holds  against  the  Appellant  as  indicators  of
    deception a number of factors  without  considering  the  context,  the
    Appellant's  explanation  or  reasons  for  particular  actions.    For
    example, the fact that the Appellant falsely obtained a student visa to
    enter  the  United  Kingdom,  which  she  says  was  arranged  by   her
    traffickers for her forced journey to the United Kingdom; the fact that
    she created a false Facebook account, on the  Appellant's  account,  to
    make contact with a friend to seek help having been trafficked  to  the
    United Kingdom; and the fact that she stole money from her  traffickers
    on her account, whilst escaping from them.

 9. Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal repeatedly refers to the  Appellant's
    'unaccepted claims' which appears  to  either  adopt  the  Respondent's
    decision or reaches a conclusion dismissing the claims without any real
    assessment of them or reasons for rejecting them other than, as  above,
    generic points about a propensity for deception  and  inconsistency  of
    claims.   The  latter  without  any  consideration  of   whether   such
    inconsistencies are material  (for  example  discrepancies  between  an
    asylum interview and the  fuller  substantive  interview,  about  which
    caution  should  be  exercised),  whether  they  are  affected  by  any
    vulnerability and without any  reference  at  all  to  the  Appellant's
    evidence or detailed claim on  the  issues.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    simply dismisses the Appellant's claims to be at risk on return due  to
    her sexuality, religion and family circumstances solely  because  of  a
    propensity to deception and without any consideration of the fact  that
    the Appellant has, in terms of her claim to have  been  trafficked  and
    subjected to modern slavery, been found to be credible on  the  balance
    of probabilities.

10. Thirdly, no reasons at all are given for the rejection in paragraph  66
    of the evidence from the Appellant's sister save for  the  fact  it  is
    undated,  unsigned  and  self-serving.   Given  the  evidence  included
    'Whatsapp' messages (which would not be signed and the date may not  be
    clear for each); that the Appellant's sister is  in  Algeria  and  that
    caution should in any event be applied before simply labelling evidence
    as self-serving (it may be, but that does not necessarily mean that  it
    is not credible); there  are  insufficient  reasons  for  finding  that
    reliance can not be placed on the evidence at all.

11. For these reasons, which show self-evident and obvious  errors  in  the
    fact finding approach of the First-tier Tribunal,  I  do  not  consider
    that it is appropriate to preserve any findings of fact from the First-
    tier Tribunal.   Taking  into  account  paragraph  7  of  the  Practice
    Statements of the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal and in particular the concerns  I  have
    raised as to whether there should at the very least have  been  express
    consideration of whether the Appellant is  a  vulnerable  witness  such
    that the Joint Presidential Guidance applies;  it  is  appropriate  and
    necessary for this matter to be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing de novo.

12. At the end of the oral hearing, Mr Corben raised the issue  of  whether
    if remitted, there could be  fresh  consideration  as  to  whether  the
    Respondent consents to the new matter  relating  to  Article  8  to  be
    considered by the Tribunal in a de novo hearing.  In my view, this is a
    matter that can appropriately be dealt with by the parties prior to any
    further hearing being listed  and  that  it  may  be  helpful  for  the
    Appellant to set out her claim on this  basis  (with  any  up  to  date
    information) with a  specific  fresh  request  for  the  Respondent  to
    consent to the matter being dealt with as part of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Hatton  Cross  hearing
centre to be heard de novo by any Judge except Judge Wright.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]         Date         14th February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

