
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05420/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 November 2018                   |On 16 November 2018                  |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |[G L]                                             |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr B Lams, of Counsel, instructed by Farani Taylor
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Kiss, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By my decision promulgated on 30 August 2018 (hereafter the  "Error  of
    law decision", attached to this decision as an Annex), I set aside  the
    decision of Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Telford  (hereafter  the
    "judge") by which he dismissed the appeal of the appellant, a  national
    of Nepal born on 1 November 1988, on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds, against a decision of the  respondent  of  16
    April 2018 refusing to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection and
    refusing his human rights claim.

 2. Before the judge, the appellant's human rights claim was based  on  his
    relationship with his partner, Ms KP, and  her  daughter,  Z  (date  of
    birth: April 2007), and also his private  life  established  since  his
    arrival in the United Kingdom on 25 January 2011 as a student.  He  has
    not had leave in the United Kingdom since his leave  was  curtailed  to
    expire on 9 March 2013. The evidence before  the  judge  was  that  the
    appellant and Ms KP met in November 2013 and that he moved in  to  live
    with Ms KP in November 2014. Ms KP and  Z  are  British  citizens.  The
    evidence before the judge and before me was that Z had not had  contact
    with her biological father for some years.

 3. At the Error of law hearing, the appellant was represented by  Mr  R  K
    Rai, of Counsel, and the respondent by  Ms  K  Pal,  Senior  Presenting
    Officer. At paras 17 and 18 of the Error of law decision,  I  explained
    the extent to which the decision of the judge was  set  aside  and  the
    issues to be decided at the resumed hearing as follows:

         "17.     For the above reasons, I set aside  the  decision  of  the
             judge to dismiss the appellant's Article 8 family life  claim.
             The following findings shall stand:


             (i) The judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal  on
                  asylum grounds.


             (ii)      The judge's decision that  the  appellant's  removal
                  will not be in breach of his rights under Articles 2 and 3
                  of the ECHR.


             (iii)     Since the grounds  did  not  challenge  the  judge's
                  assessment of the appellant's  private  life  claim  under
                  para 276ADE and Mr Rai did not mention para 276ADE at  the
                  hearing before me, the judge's decision that the appellant
                  does not meet the requirements of para 276ADE of the Rules
                  stands. This includes the judge's  finding,  at  para  50,
                  that the appellant had not established that he is  not  in
                  contact with his family and that he has not shown that  he
                  cannot expect their support upon his return.


             (iv)       The  judge's  adverse  credibility  assessment  and
                  findings in relation to the appellant's  protection  claim
                  stand.


         18.      The issues at the next hearing  will  be  limited  to  the
             following:


             (i) Whether Appendix FM and EX.1(a) and/or (b) are satisfied.


             (ii)      Whether s.117B(6) is satisfied.


             (iii)     The appellant's Article 8 family life claim  outside
                  the Rules. If I find  that  the  appellant's  relationship
                  with Ms [P] and/or Z does not amount to family life within
                  Article 8(1) but that it does form  part  of  his  private
                  life, then his  private  life  claim  will  be  considered
                  outside  the  Rules.  If  I  find  that  the   appellant's
                  relationship with Ms [P]  and/or  Z  does  not  amount  to
                  family life within Article 8(1) and also that it does  not
                  form part of his private  life  (i.e.  that  there  is  no
                  genuine relationship or connection), the parties will need
                  to address me on whether the judge's decision in  relation
                  to para 276ADE has addressed fully his private life  claim
                  so that it is unnecessary to  consider  his  private  life
                  claim outside the Rules."


 4. At the resumed hearing, Mr Lams and Ms Kiss  agreed  that  the  factual
    issues for me to decide are as follows:

    i)     whether there was a genuine and subsisting parental relationship
         between the appellant and Z; and

    ii)    whether there was a genuine and subsisting relationship  between
         the appellant and Ms KP.

 5. Ms Kiss agreed that:

    i)     if I were to find  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         parental relationship between the appellant and Z, the  appellant's
         appeal on human rights grounds should be allowed with reference  to
         s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  (the
         "2002 Act"). Ms Kiss accepted that, in the particular circumstances
         of this case, it would be unreasonable to expect  Z  to  leave  the
         United Kingdom.

    ii)    if I were to find  that  there  was  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship between the appellant and Ms KP but  the  relationship
         between  the  appellant  and  Z  did  not  amount  to  a   parental
         relationship, then notwithstanding s.117B(4) of the 2002  Act,  the
         appellant's appeal on human rights grounds should be  allowed  with
         reference  to  EX.1(a)  of  Appendix  FM,  i.e.  that   there   are
         insurmountable obstacles to family life between the  appellant  and
         Ms KP continuing outside the United Kingdom on the basis that there
         would be no one left in the United Kingdom to look after Z if Ms KP
         were to relocate outside the  United  Kingdom  in  order  to  enjoy
         family life.

 6. Mr Lams informed me that, if I were to find that the appellant did  not
    enjoy a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with Z and that he
    did not enjoy a genuine and subsisting relationship with  Ms  KP,  then
    the appellant's private life claim could not succeed given the  judge's
    dismissal of his private  life  claim  under  para  276ADE(vi)  of  the
    Immigration Rules.

 7. In view of paras 5 and 6 above, I have only  dealt  with  the  evidence
    before me concerning the impact on Z and Ms KP of moving to  Nepal  and
    the evidence before me of the appellant's own circumstances if returned
    to Nepal to the extent that I considered necessary in order  to  decide
    the factual issues before me.

Adjournment request

 8. At the commencement of the resumed hearing, Mr Lams informed me that Ms
    KP was unable to attend the hearing because the arrangements  that  she
    had made for Z's care  whilst  she  attended  the  hearing  had  fallen
    through. Ms KP was informed at 18:00 hours on 1 November 2018 that  her
    friend, who had agreed to look after Z, was taken to hospital. Mr  Lams
    submitted a hand-written letter  from  Ms  KP  dated  1  November  2018
    explaining her absence and requesting the Court not to "use our absence
    in your decision and keep our family together".

 9. I refused to adjourn the hearing. I shall now give my reasons.

10. The judge had refused a request to adjourn the hearing before him. That
    request was made on the basis that the hearing date fell  on  the  same
    date as Z's SATS examinations and therefore Ms KP could not attend  the
    hearing.

11. At the Error of law hearing, I  made  it  clear  that,  an  exceptional
    basis, I would hear oral evidence from Ms KP  about  the  circumstances
    leading to the adjournment request made to the judge. On the  basis  of
    the evidence I heard, I decided that Ms KP had  good  reasons  for  not
    asking her mother to look after Z on the  day  in  question,  that  her
    friends could not help her because they were working  and  that  Ms  KP
    only came to know about the hearing date late. It was  clear  from  her
    evidence before me that she had two friends who she could call upon  to
    look after her daughter (para 5(ii) of the Error of law decision). I am
    satisfied she fully understood not only that I heard her oral  evidence
    about the arrangements for Z's care on the day of  the  hearing  before
    the judge on  an  exceptional  basis  but  also  that  there  would  no
    adjournment of the resumed hearing if she  was  unable  to  attend  the
    hearing.

12. In refusing Mr Lams' adjournment request, I took into account not  only
    the above but the overriding interest. Ms KP's letter did  not  mention
    whether she had made any back-up arrangements in case the  arrangements
    she had put in place fell through nor does she  actually  suggest  that
    she would attend a future hearing if the hearing is adjourned: she only
    requests that the Court does not rely upon her absence in reaching  its
    substantive decision. I acknowledge that Ms KP attended  the  Error  of
    law hearing. Given Ms KP's failure to attend two  substantive  hearings
    because she was  unable  to  arrange  for  Z's  care,  I  can  have  no
    confidence that, if the hearing on 2 November 2018 was  adjourned,  she
    would attend the hearing on the next occasion.

13. In all of the circumstances and  taking  into  account  the  overriding
    interest, I refused to adjourn the hearing.

14. The above were my reasons for my decision at the  commencement  of  the
    hearing to refuse to adjourn the hearing. However, I  kept  the  matter
    under review during the course of the hearing. As will be apparent from
    my summary of the oral evidence, the appellant was questioned in detail
    about the reasons for Ms KP's absence from the hearing. Mr [B] was also
    questioned. By the end of the hearing, I saw no reason  to  re-open  my
    decision to refuse to adjourn the  hearing.  I  found  the  appellant's
    evidence about the  reasons  for  Ms  KP's  absence  contradictory  and
    incredible, for reasons which I give below (see paras 84 and 85 below).
    I found Mr [B]'s ignorance of the reason why Ms KP was unable to attend
    the hearing lacking in credibility (see para 101 below). On  the  whole
    of the evidence before me, taking it into account the contradictions in
    the appellant's evidence in this regard, the lack of credibility of  Mr
    [B]'s evidence in this regard and having had the benefit of hearing the
    oral evidence they gave in this regard at the hearing, I find that  the
    explanation I was given for Ms KP's absence from the hearing is  not  a
    genuine explanation.

Oral evidence

15. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and Mr [AB], his friend.  Both
    gave evidence in the English language which they spoke fluently.

Oral evidence of the appellant

16. The appellant adopted his witness statement dated 14 May 2018 (pages 40-
    44 of the bundle).

17. In  examination-in-chief,  the  appellant  said,  in  relation  to  his
    relationship with Z, that he was not her biological father but  he  has
    been with her since she was 5 or 6 years old and that he has taken  the
    role of the man, like a father. He has never seen or met Z's biological
    father.  Sometimes he takes Z to  school  and  sometimes  Ms  KP  does.
    Sometimes he picks Z up from school and sometimes Ms KP does.  He  said
    that Z has settled down very well in her new school and is very  happy.
    She is doing very well in school, in year 7.

18. Asked what activities he shares with Z, the appellant  said  that  they
    play in the garden and they take their dog to the park. She  goes  with
    him when he goes shopping for food.

19. I asked the appellant to explain why the photographs he  had  submitted
    were, in the main, blur. He told me that the person in  the  middle  in
    the photographs on pages 32 and 33 was Z and the person  to  the  right
    was Ms KP. I told him that the photographs were so blur  that  I  could
    not recognise the person on the right as the person I saw at the  Error
    of law hearing.  I  declined  Mr  Lams'  suggestion  that  I  view  the
    photographs on the appellant's mobile phone.

20. In relation to the photograph on page 27, the appellant  said  that  he
    was the person on the right and Z was on the person on  the  left.   He
    told me that Z was 11 years old in this photograph. She is currently 11
    years old. I asked him whether this was a photograph of a girl who  was
    11 years old. He said: 'yes'. I observed that it was difficult to tell,
    when comparing the photographs of Z at pages 27 and at 32/33,  that  it
    was the same person in both photographs. The appellant explained that Z
    was a year younger in the photographs at pages 32 and 33.

21. If the appellant were to leave Ms KP and Z behind in the United Kingdom
    and return to Nepal, Z would be affected because it would be as if  she
    has lost her parents again, as she lost her  grandmother  earlier  this
    year. Ms KP is currently o.k., being not too good and not too bad.

22. At pages 29 and 30 are photographs of the appellant with the  dog  that
    had belonged to Ms KP's mother who has unfortunately passed away.

23. The appellant said that he has no one in Nepal  that  he  could  obtain
    assistance from. He said that he does  talk  to  his  parents  but  the
    earthquake has destroyed their business and  they  have  nothing  left.
    They therefore cannot support him. Before he met Ms KP, his  family  in
    Nepal supported him in the United Kingdom. After he met Ms KP, she  and
    her mother have supported him in the United Kingdom.

24. Concerning the arrangements for Z's care on  the  day  of  the  resumed
    hearing, the appellant said that he and Ms KP had arranged for Z to  be
    looked after by a friend. The friend had agreed  to  keep  Z  overnight
    because the appellant and Ms KP would have had to leave for the hearing
    centre early in the morning. He said that the friend  "called"  to  say
    that they had a "family issue problem" and could not keep  Z  overnight
    or even get her ready for school. He and Ms KP found out at about 18:30
    hours on 1 November 2018. There was no one else that he and Ms KP could
    ask to look after Z.

25. I asked the appellant to explain what the "family issue" was.  He  said
    that the family had something happen to them. Ms  KP's  friend,  Sarah,
    fell over at home and was taken to the hospital. This happened at 16:00
    hours on 1 November 2018. Sarah's daughter sent a text to Z  to  inform
    her that her mother had fallen over and asked whether Z could come over
    and fetch her (Sarah's daughter). Ms KP and Z then went  over  to  pick
    the friend's daughter up and took her back  to  their  home.  He  said,
    initially, that "we" received the text from Sarah's daughter  at  18:00
    hours, then said that, when he had said "we", he had meant  Ms  KP  had
    received the text from Sarah's daughter.

26. I referred the appellant to his earlier evidence, that Sarah's daughter
    had sent a text to Z and asked whether it  was  Z  or  Ms  KP  who  had
    received the text. He said it was the same phone, because Z and  Ms  KP
    shared one phone, i.e. Z uses her mother's phone to text her friends. I
    referred him to his earlier evidence that the news was  first  received
    by a telephone call,  whereas  his  later  evidence  was  that  it  was
    received by text message and that he had said  variously  that  it  was
    received at 18:30 hours and at 18:00 hours. He acknowledged that he had
    said earlier that the news was received by a telephone call but said it
    was in fact received by text message and that it was received at  18:00
    hours.

27. I asked the appellant what steps had  been  taken  by  Ms  KP  to  make
    alternative child care arrangements. He said that  she  has  two  other
    friends but it was too late to ask their  employers  for  the  day  off
    work. He said that Sarah does not work. She stays  at  home  and  looks
    after her children. The hospital did not discharge Sarah. Her  children
    stayed with Ms KP that night.

28. In  cross-examination,  the  appellant  confirmed  that  he  had  never
    previously worked and that his parents had supported him. Asked how  it
    came about that he was encountered working illegally in  January  2018,
    he said that his family had stopped supporting him. He told the  person
    who employed him during those two days that he would get his  paperwork
    in two days' time and so he started work but he was arrested on the day
    that he started work. He had therefore only worked for one  day.  Asked
    why he gave a false name when arrested, he said that he had panicked.

29. Ms Kiss put to the appellant that he had failed to report on  a  number
    of occasions when  he  was  given  temporary  admission  in  2015.  The
    appellant said that he left the place where he used  to  live  at  that
    time in order to go and live at Ms KP's home. He initially said that he
    did not inform the immigration authorities of his change of address and
    then said that he had emailed the change of address and that he did not
    receive any further letters from immigration.

30. The appellant said that he was detained in  immigration  detention  for
    six months. During that time, Ms KP and  visited  him  "a  few  times".
    Asked why Ms KP only refers to one visit,  in  February  2018,  in  her
    recent witness statement (para 26,  page  15),  he  said  that  it  was
    because that was when Z was crying and wanted the appellant  to  return
    home.

31. The appellant said that he has lived with Ms KP  since  November  2014.
    Asked to explain why Ms KP is claiming single occupant's  discount  for
    her Council tax (page 111), he said that it was  because  he  does  not
    have a passport and therefore could not put his name  for  her  Council
    tax.

32. Ms Kiss referred the appellant to the letter from Sheppey  Dental  Care
    in Sheerness (page 21). Asked why he had a letter from a dentist so far
    away from Canterbury where he said he lived with Ms KP,  the  appellant
    said that he knew the doctor at the dental surgery.  He  spoke  to  the
    doctor to floss his teeth because he had bleeding in his mouth. It  was
    the doctor who booked the appointment for him. The surgery sent him the
    letter.

33. Asked how he helped Z when she was bullied, he said that  he  told  her
    not to listen to people who are bullying her, not to be close to people
    who bully her and just to say 'hello' to them.

34. Asked why Z had not provided up-to-date evidence,  he  gave  an  answer
    which was simply intelligible. When the question was repeated, he  said
    it was because they did not know  that  they  had  to  make  a  witness
    statement again.

35. The appellant confirmed that he was named as a contact  person  at  Z's
    school. She has been at her new school for 3 months. He  said  that  he
    had not obtained evidence from her previous school but had done so from
    her current school.

36. At question 125 of his asylum interview, the appellant had  said,  when
    asked how it would affect Ms KP if he were to return to Nepal, that "it
    would affect her. She would get depression if I go back they will  kill
    themselves they are both telling me".  The appellant said that this  is
    what he believes. Ms KP had not harmed herself before. Asked to explain
    why Ms KP had not said in her witness statement  that  she  would  kill
    herself if he were to leave the United Kingdom, he said that Ms KP  had
    told him that there would be no point in her being alive if he were  to
    return to Nepal.

37. Asked to explain why he had said at the hearing before the  judge  that
    he was in fear of his family whereas he had said at the resumed hearing
    that he is in contact with his parents, he said  that  he  has  contact
    with his mother. His problem is with his father and brother. The reason
    why he had said earlier that he had contact with his parents is because
    he does not want to tell people that he only speaks with  this  mother.
    He therefore says that he speaks to his parents when he means  that  he
    actually speaks only to his mother.

Oral evidence of Mr [B]

38. In examination-in-chief, Mr [B] adopted his witness statement dated  17
    September 2018 (pages 17-18 of the bundle).

39. Mr [B] said that he met the appellant in December 2014. Since then,  he
    has been to the home of Ms KP and the appellant on one occasion. He has
    seen the appellant, Ms KP and Z in the public environment more than  at
    their home. Asked how many times he has seen them,  he  said  "quite  a
    handful of times over the years", a "good few times  a  month".  If  he
    travelled ten times  to  Canterbury  in  a  month,  he  would  see  the
    appellant six or seven times and the appellant, Ms KP and  Z  three  or
    four times. If he sees them in the evening, this would normally  be  in
    the town where they would go for something to eat or they would have  a
    coffee or go to the bar.

40. Asked why he goes to Canterbury so often (his witness  statement  gives
    his address as an address in Ilford in Essex),  he  said  that  he  has
    quite a few friends and family in Canterbury.

41. Asked to describe the appellant's relationship with Z, Mr [B] said that
    the appellant cares for Z like a father should, even  though  he  knows
    that he is not Z's biological father. Z's biological father  has  never
    been a topic of conversation at anytime, nor has Mr [B] ever met him or
    seen him.

42. Asked to give examples of how the appellant cares for Z like a  father,
    Mr [B] said: "In relation to mental  support,  when  you  start  a  new
    school, it is quite daunting for a child. Having the support of parents
    helps. [The appellant] plays his part, he is like a male role model. He
    builds a lot of confidence in her life as she is  growing  up".   Asked
    how he knows this, he says he sees it and the appellant also  talks  to
    him about it.  Asked to explain how he sees this, he  said:  "It's  the
    way she talks to him and how they are together". He said he knows  this
    from his own physical observation of them together  when  he  goes  out
    with them.

43. Mr [B] said that he has also observed Ms  KP's  relationship  with  the
    appellant. The three of them have been out for drinks. He said that the
    appellant and Ms KP bond very well. He has never seen them argue.

44. Asked to explain in detail what he had meant at para 8 of  his  witness
    statement, where he said that "the family are going through a difficult
    time", Mr [B] said that that statement says it all. The fact that Ms KP
    lost her mother recently has impacted upon Ms KP and Z.

45. Asked how it would impact upon Ms KP and Z if  the  appellant  were  to
    leave the United Kingdom, Mr [B] said  that  "You  have  to  take  into
    consideration that [Z] has lost her grandmother and she's never  had  a
    father figure in her life. [GL] plays a huge part in her  life.  Taking
    that away disrupts the child going through a growth period".

46. In cross-examination, Mr [B] confirmed that he first met the  appellant
    in December 2014. In his witness statement, he had  said  that  he  has
    similar interests and hobbies, such as eating out and going to bars and
    pubs. Asked who looks after Z if  he  goes  out  with  Ms  KP  and  the
    appellant, he said it would normally be a friend but he  was  not  100%
    sure. There  was  one  occasion  when  she  was  looked  after  by  her
    grandmother. The only friends of Ms KP that he has met are  people  who
    came over to say "hello" when they out having a drink.

47. Mr [B] said that he found out the day before the resumed  hearing  that
    Ms KP would be unable to attend the hearing. All he knows about this is
    that the arrangement that had been made for Z to be looked  after  fell
    through for some reason; he did not know why.

48. Mr [B] said he did not know which school Z attends. He last  saw  Z  "a
    few months or a few weeks" ago;  it  has  been  a  while.  He  saw  her
    definitely once after her grandmother died in August 2018.

49. Asked whether he knows what Ms KP does for a living, he  said  that  he
    did not think that Ms KP was working at present. He could not say  when
    she stopped working. Asked to describe Ms KP's health, Mr [B] said that
    she is pretty much in good health; she does fall ill when she  stresses
    but that happens to everybody. When she falls ill, she  gets  headaches
    and does not sleep properly. He was not aware whether she  was  on  any
    medication.

50. Mr [B] confirmed that he was a surety for the appellant's bail. He does
    not know who the other surety was. He stood as surety  in  the  sum  of
    �1,500.

51. Mr [B] said that he does not know whether the  appellant  has  had  any
    contact with his father.  Asked  whether  it  was  the  case  that  the
    appellant does not talk about it, Mr [B] said that the  situation  with
    the appellant's father is quite sensitive.

52. Mr Lams informed me that he did not wish to  recall  the  appellant  to
    clarify any matters.

Submissions

53. Ms Kiss reminded me that the appellant came to the United Kingdom as  a
    student. His leave was subsequently curtailed. He was  given  temporary
    admission  and  required  to  report  but  he  failed  to  report   and
    subsequently absconded. In evidence before me,  he  said  that  he  had
    emailed his address to the Home Office but there  was  no  evidence  of
    this. He was encountered working illegally, he says for two  days.  The
    judge found his evidence of the basis of his asylum claim incredible.

54. Ms Kiss reminded me that Ms KP had been told in no uncertain terms that
    there would not be any adjournment if she did not attend. She  had  not
    attended. The account of the events that led to her not  attending  the
    hearing was not supported by any documentary evidence. There  was  only
    the appellant's word for it and a brief letter from Ms KP that does not
    go into any detail about the reasons why  she  could  not  attend.  The
    appellant's evidence on the  issue  was  itself  contradictory,  saying
    variously, that they had received  a  phone  call  and  then  that  the
    friend's daughter had sent a text. In terms of timing, that  they  were
    informed at 18:00 and also at 18:30 hours and at 16:00 hours. A  number
    of issues would have been put to Ms KP if she had attended in light  of
    the fact that she asserts in her witness statement that  the  appellant
    has been living with her since November/December 2014 and yet  she  has
    been claiming the single occupier's discount in respect of her  Council
    Tax liability. This does throw disrepute on her evidence.  It  was  not
    clear why the fact that the appellant does not have his passport was  a
    bar to the Council being informed of  the  true  position.  This  issue
    impacts upon her integrity.

55. Ms Kiss informed me that, when the appellant was detained  having  been
    found working illegally, he gave the address at which Ms  KP  says  she
    lives. He was also later bailed to that address. Ms Kiss initially said
    that she accepted that the appellant had lived at  that  address  since
    January 2018 and then retracted this, saying that she was only prepared
    to say that he had been bailed to  that  address.  Accordingly,  it  is
    clear that Ms Kiss did not concede or accept that the  appellant  lived
    at Ms KP's address. Ms Kiss submitted that, in any event, the  evidence
    did not establish that the appellant has been living with Ms  KP  since
    November 2014.

56. Ms Kiss submitted that the appellant's explanation for the letter  from
    the dentist in Sheerness was not credible. She questioned  why  someone
    would travel by public transport from Canterbury to Sheerness  to  have
    their teeth flossed.

57. Ms Kiss reminded me that the appellant only made his asylum claim  when
    he was arrested. The appellant's chronology (page  10  of  the  bundle)
    refers to Ms KP and Z  having  made  one  visit  to  the  appellant  in
    detention, i.e. on 2 February 2018. Ms  KP  also  refers  to  that  one
    visit. However, in evidence, the  appellant  had  said  that  they  had
    visited him "a few times", and then "a couple of times". This does  not
    indicate that they were as close to him and as reliant upon him  as  he
    asserts.

58. At the hearing before the judge, there was no evidence from Z's school.
    There is now some evidence which has been produced at the suggestion of
    the appellant's solicitors. As from September 2018, he is named in  the
    school records as a contact for Z. This is recent evidence. There is no
    evidence from the school to say that he picks Z up from school or drops
    her off or that he has been involved in any meetings with the teachers.



59. Ms  Kiss  submitted  that  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  address
    comprised by the Tesco card and Nectar  card  is  also  recent.  Whilst
    there is some evidence that he has been living at Ms KP's address  this
    year, there is only his oral and written  evidence  that  he  has  been
    living there since November 2014. Ms KP says  the  same  thing  in  her
    witness statement but she has not attended  the  hearing  to  have  her
    evidence tested. She has had two opportunities to attend a hearing  and
    have her assertions examined. Ms Kiss reminded me that Ms KP had  given
    evidence to me that she did not want her mother to look after Z so that
    she could attend the hearing before the judge whereas Mr [B]  had  said
    that Z was looked after by her grandmother on one occasion when he went
    out with Ms KP and the appellant.

60. Ms Kiss submitted that the evidence given by Mr [B] indicates  that  he
    has a strong relationship with the appellant. However, he did not  seem
    to know very much about Ms KP and has only been  to  her  home  on  one
    occasion in four years. He had not met any of her friends beyond saying
    "hello" when the friends came up to say "hello" when he was out with Ms
    KP and the appellant.

61. Ms Kiss submitted that Mr [B] did not seem to know very  much  about  Z
    and had no clear idea why Ms KP could not attend the resumed hearing.

62. Ms Kiss accepted that Z does not see her biological father, given  that
    the order dated 4 January 2012 of the Family Court at page F19  of  the
    respondent's bundle shows that the Child Support Agency was  unable  to
    trace him. Nonetheless, the mere  fact  that  the  appellant  has  some
    involvement in Z's life does not mean that  he  is  in  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with her.

63. Ms Kiss submitted that the appellant had produced insufficient evidence
    to establish that he was in a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
    Ms KP. There were only recent documents to show that  he  lived  at  Ms
    KP's address. Ms KP has not attended court on two occasions so that her
    assertions could be tested. Ms Kiss relied upon her earlier submissions
    concerning the shortcomings in the evidence of the appellant, Ms KP and
    Mr [B].

64. Mr Lams submitted that Ms Kiss had made a number of  concessions,  i.e.
    that Z's biological father has not had contact with Z since 2009;  that
    the appellant gave Ms KP's address when  he  was  arrested  in  January
    2018; that the appellant was bailed to Ms KP's address; and that he may
    have been living at Ms KP's address since January 2018  (however,  this
    was clarified at the hearing, see para 55 above, and Ms Kiss  confirmed
    that she would only accept that he was  bailed  to  Ms  KP's  address).
    Nonetheless, Mr Lams submitted that he gave Ms KP's address when he was
    arrested. Ms KP was his surety when he was granted bail.

65. Mr Lams reminded me that I had had the benefit of hearing evidence from
    Ms KP at the Error of law hearing. In addition, she attended  the  bail
    hearing. She visited him in detention in February  2018.  On  28  March
    2018, Ms KP submitted her passport, original birth  certificate,  hand-
    written witness statement from herself, Z's original birth certificate,
    a hand-written letter from Z and her mother and a drawing by Z  of  the
    members of her family in which drawing she had included the  appellant.
    He accepted that it may have been better if  Ms  KP  had  attended  the
    resumed hearing and stood by her written evidence. He submitted that  I
    could nevertheless place  some  weight  on  her  evidence.  Her  recent
    witness statement was very detailed and she had also submitted a  hand-
    written statement in the appeal before the  judge.  Ms  KP  had  talked
    about suffering from depression, that  the  appellant  has  helped  her
    through these low periods in her life and that, in time, she  was  able
    to come off medication. This  evidence  ties  in  with  his  answer  to
    question 128 of his asylum interview where he mentioned that Ms KP  was
    on "happy tablets". In his asylum claim, the appellant had said that he
    met Ms KP in 2013 and moved in with her in 2014, which  was  consistent
    with her evidence.

66. Mr Lams submitted that the picture thus created was consistent with the
    appellant being Ms KP's partner and that he lives with Ms KP and Z.  Mr
    Lams questioned why Ms KP would go out of her way to such an extent  if
    she is not in a relationship  with  the  appellant.  It  has  not  been
    suggested that the handwritten letter from  Z  was  not  from  her.  He
    questioned why Z would draw a picture of her family which included  the
    appellant. Z plainly sees her family as  including  the  appellant.  Mr
    Lams submitted that Z's hand-written statement was important.

67. I asked Mr Lams whether the photograph of Z at  pages  27  and  28  are
    photographs of an 11-year old child. Mr  Lams  submitted  that  it  was
    difficult  to  tell  and  that  not  a  huge  amount  turned  upon  the
    photographs. Her date of birth was not disputed. All  of  the  evidence
    points to a family group which compromised of the appellant, Ms KP  and
    Z.

68. Mr Lams asked me to bear in mind that, as the appellant does  not  have
    his passport, his "footprint" would necessarily be light.  He  accepted
    that it may look as if Ms KP is claiming a single  occupant's  discount
    for her Council tax when she should not be.  However, he submitted that
    the fact that she may not  have  declared  another  occupant  does  not
    detract so much from her character  that  the  appellant's  immigration
    case should fail.

69. Mr Lams reminded me that the appellant had explained  that  the  reason
    why Ms KP's witness statement only mentioned one visit by her and Z  to
    him in detention was that this was the occasion when Z  was  upset.  He
    submitted that it could not be read into Ms KP's  statement  that  that
    was the only occasion when she and  Z  had  visited  the  appellant  in
    detention.

70. Mr Lams reminded me that the issue is not the quality of  the  parental
    relationship between  the  appellant  and  Z  but  whether  a  parental
    relationship existed as a matter of fact between the two.

71. Mr Lams distinguished Ortega (remittal:  bias:  parental  relationship)
    [2018] UKUT 00298 (IAC) on  the  basis  that  both  of  the  biological
    parents were involved with the child, whereas Z has not had any contact
    with her biological father since 2009. Whilst  actual  declarations  of
    parental responsibility may  assist  in  reaching  a  finding  that  an
    individual has a parental relationship with a child, the absence of any
    such evidence is not determinative.

72. Mr Lams submitted that Mr  [B]'s  evidence  supported  the  appellant's
    case. He said he knew Z and was aware of the relationship  between  the
    appellant and Z. He was able to say that it was daunting for a child to
    start a new school and  that  the  appellant  had  helped  Z.  Mr  Lams
    submitted that Mr [B]'s  evidence  was  not  significantly  undermined,
    although he may only have been to Ms KP's house on one occasion.

73. Mr Lams submitted that, if the relationship between the  appellant  and
    Ms KP was genuine, this made it more likely that the  appellant  had  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with  Z.  Mr  Lams  relied
    upon his earlier submissions in  relation  to  the  issue  whether  the
    appellant had a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms KP.

74. I reserved my decision.

Assessment

75. I have set out at para 4 above the two factual issues that  I  have  to
    decide. In view of  what  I  have  said  at  para  5.i)  above,  it  is
    unnecessary to refer to the recent judgment of the Supreme Court in  KO
    (Nigeria) and others v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 in any detail.

76. It is for the appellant to establish, on the balance of  probabilities,
    that he has a genuine  and  subsisting  parental  relationship  with  Z
    and/or that he has a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms KP, in
    order to succeed in his appeal. I agree  with  Mr  Lams  that,  if  the
    appellant enjoys a genuine and subsisting relationship with Ms KP, this
    may be relevant in deciding whether he has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with Z. However, it is not determinative.

77. I stress that I have considered all of the  evidence,  whether  or  not
    mentioned in my decision,  and  that  I  have  considered  all  of  the
    evidence in the round and  as  a  whole,  giving  each  aspect  of  the
    evidence such weight as I consider appropriate.

78. In R (RK) v SSHD (s.117B(6); "parental relationship") IJR  [2016]  UKUT
    00031 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal (Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb)  said  in
    the head-note that it is  not  necessary  for  an  individual  to  have
    "parental  responsibility"  in  law  for  there  to  exist  a  parental
    relationship and that the question  whether  a  person  who  is  not  a
    biological parent is in a "parental relationship" with a child for  the
    purposes of s.117B(6)  of  the  2002  Act  depends  on  the  individual
    circumstances  and  whether  the  role  that   the   individual   plays
    establishes that he or she has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent. At
    paras 42 and 43, the Upper Tribunal said:

         "42.     Whether a person is in a "parental  relationship"  with  a
             child   must,   necessarily,   depend   on   the    individual
             circumstances.  Those circumstances  will  include  what  role
             they actually play in  caring  for  and  making  decisions  in
             relation  to  the  child.   That  is  likely  to  be  a   most
             significant factor.  However, it  will  also  include  whether
             that relationship arises because of their legal obligations as
             a parent or in lieu of a parent under a court order  or  other
             legal obligation.  I accept that it is not  necessary  for  an
             individual to have "parental responsibility" in law for  there
             to exist a "parental relationship," although  whether  or  not
             that is the case will be a relevant factor.  What is important
             is that the individual can establish that they have  taken  on
             the role that a "parent" usually plays in the  life  of  their
             child.


         43.      I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation that, in effect, an
             individual must "step into the shoes of a parent" in order  to
             establish a "parental relationship".   If the role they  play,
             whether as a relative or friend of the family, is as a  caring
             relative or friend but not so as to take  on  the  role  of  a
             parent then it cannot be  said  that  they  have  a  "parental
             relationship" with the child.  It is perhaps obvious to  state
             that "carers" are not per se  "parents."   A  child  may  have
             carers who do not step into the shoes  of  their  parents  but
             look after the child for specific periods of time (for example
             whilst the parents are at  work)  or  even  longer  term  (for
             example where the parents are travelling abroad for a  holiday
             or  family  visit).   Those  carers  may   be   professionally
             employed; they may be relatives; or they may be  friends.   In
             all those cases, it may properly be  said  that  there  is  an
             element of dependency between the child and his or her carers.
              However, that alone would not, in my judgment, give rise to a
             "parental relationship."


79. As I said in the Error of law decision, the judge roundly rejected  the
    appellant's credibility in assessing his evidence about  the  basis  of
    his asylum claim. His adverse credibility assessment on the appellant's
    asylum claim is relevant in  the  re-making  of  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal. I  have  guarded  myself  against  using  it  as  a
    starting point. Plainly, it is not a starting point as the guidance  in
    Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 702 does not apply. Devaseelan does  not
    apply because the judge's assessment of credibility was not made  in  a
    previous  appeal.  It  was  made  in  the  same  appeal   against   the
    respondent's decision.

80. A striking feature of the appellant's evidence was  the  fact  that  he
    failed to descend into any specific details about his relationship with
    Z when questioned. He  referred  to  the  fact  that  he  was  not  the
    biological parent of Z and that he was the male role model  and  played
    the role of father in Z's life but when questioned,  singularly  failed
    to give any specific  details  beyond  some  basic  examples.  He  only
    mentioned picking Z up from school and dropping her off; that he and  Z
    played in the garden, went to the park together with the dog  and  went
    shopping. He gave no explanation of anything that he may have done that
    a parent, as opposed to a friend or family acquaintance might do,  save
    that it was mentioned  that  he  had  helped  Z  when  she  experienced
    bullying at school. However, even in that regard, there was  no  detail
    of the circumstances that gave rise to the  bullying  so  that  it  was
    possible to appreciate why the very basic advice he  allegedly  gave  Z
    (i.e. that he told her not to listen to people who  are  bullying  her,
    not to be close to people who bully her and  just  to  say  'hello'  to
    them) was sufficient to deal with the situation. He gave no explanation
    of any care for Z that he has provided.

81. Indeed, such was the lack of  detail  in  content  in  the  appellant's
    evidence that, even if all of his evidence is accepted  at  face  value
    (and I stress that I do not accept his evidence as I found him  totally
    incredible), it simply cannot be said that he  had  "stepped  into  the
    shoes of a parent".

82. I have noted that no documentary evidence was provided from Z's  school
    in the appeal before the judge. I do have a document from  Z's  current
    school. This is dated 13  September  2018  (pages  19  and  20  of  the
    bundle). This refers to the appellant being a second contact. There  is
    no evidence from the school to confirm that he does at times pick up  Z
    from school and drops her off, nor  is  there  any  evidence  from  the
    school or any doctor to show that he  has  ever  been  present  at  any
    school meetings or any appointments with her doctor.

83. There were two or three occasions at the  hearing  when  the  appellant
    gave answers which at first did not  make  sense  but  on  being  asked
    again, he formulated an answer. For example, when asked why Z  had  not
    provided up-to-date evidence,  he  gave  an  answer  which  was  simply
    unintelligible such that I was simply unable to record in my notes what
    his answer was notwithstanding the experience I have had  in  recording
    oral evidence. When the question was repeated,  he  said  that  it  was
    because they did not know that they had to  make  a  witness  statement
    again. I formed the distinct impression that he was playing for time in
    order to formulate an answer to the question. I reject the  explanation
    he gave as incredible, given that he is legally represented and  it  is
    inconsistent with the fact that Ms KP gave a second statement.

84. I found the appellant's evidence about the reasons for Ms KP's  absence
    from the resumed hearing  contradictory.  It  is  very  clear  that  he
    initially said that he and Ms KP received a call to say that the friend
    had a "family issue problem" and that he and Ms KP found  this  out  at
    about 18:30 hours on 1 November 2018.   On  further  questioning,  this
    changed to "we received the text from Sarah's daughter" at 18:00 hours.
    He was given an opportunity to explain why he had said earlier that  he
    and Ms KP received a phone call at 18:30 hours. He acknowledged that he
    had said that they received a call but then said that they had received
    a text at 18:00 hours. Accordingly, his evidence  changed  from  saying
    there was a phone call at 18:00  hours  to  saying  there  was  a  text
    message at 18:30 hours to saying that there was a text message at 18:00
    hours. These inconsistencies, for which  no  explanation  was  in  fact
    given, go against his credibility.

85. The appellant was specifically given an  opportunity  to  explain  what
    alternative arrangements had been made by Ms KP for Z's care.  He  said
    that Ms KP had two other friends but that it was too late to ask  their
    employers for the day off. This does not explain why Ms KP did not  put
    in place any back-up arrangements in case Sarah was unexpectedly unable
    to look after Z which I would have expected given that  she  was  fully
    aware that there would be no further adjournments.

86. In his evidence before the judge, the appellant's case was that he  had
    no contact with his family and did  not  have  their  support.  At  the
    hearing before me, he initially said that he talked to  his  "parents".
    He is fluent in the English language and  would  have  known  that  the
    Court would infer that he was referring to both parents  when  he  used
    the term "parents". When it was put to him that  he  had  said  at  the
    hearing before the judge that he was in fear of his family  whereas  he
    had said before me that he was in contact with  his  parents,  he  said
    that he does not want to tell people  that  he  only  speaks  with  his
    mother and he therefore says that he speaks  to  his  parents  when  he
    means that he only speaks to his mother. I reject  his  explanation  as
    wholly incredible. He is fully aware  that  he  was  not  "speaking  to
    people" but giving evidence in Court. He would have  been  fully  aware
    that he had been found lacking in credibility by the judge and  that  I
    would need to consider his credibility  further.  He  would  have  been
    fully aware of the importance of ensuring that  his  evidence  was  not
    only accurate but truthful.

87. I have to say that I found it very telling that the appellant has  only
    produced a few photographs and that the photographs he  has  chosen  to
    produce are, in the main, blur. This is someone who claims to have been
    in a relationship with Ms KP since November 2014.  He  claims  to  have
    been living with Ms KP and Z since  November  2014.  Yet,  all  he  has
    managed to submit in this appeal are ten photographs as follows:

    i)     Two photographs of the same occasion, at pages  27  and  28.  He
         said that he was the person on the left and Z  the  person  on  the
         right. They were playing cards.

    ii)    Two photographs of him in a park with a dog (pages 29 and 30).

    iii)   One photograph of him with a female taken  outdoors  (page  31).
         This photograph is so blur I cannot tell who the female is. Indeed,
         I cannot even tell whether the man is the appellant.

    iv)    Two photographs of the same occasion, at pages  32  and  33.  He
         said that he is on the left, Z is in the middle and Ms KP is on the
         right. These photographs are (again) blur.

    v)     A photograph on page  34.  He  was  not  questioned  about  this
         photograph but it appears to have been taken on the  same  occasion
         as the photographs on pages 32 and 33.

    vi)    One photograph at page 35. This is very blur indeed. It  appears
         to be a photograph of the appellant and a dog but I cannot be sure.



    vii)   One photograph at page 36. This is so blur that I cannot even be
         sure how many people are in this photograph, who they are or  where
         it was taken.

88. I declined Mr Lams' suggestion that I should look at the photographs on
    the  appellant's  mobile  phone.  The  appellant  has  provided   these
    photographs as evidence of his relationships with Z and Ms KP. He chose
    to produce blur photographs when he knows that he was submitting  these
    photographs in order to establish his claimed relationship with  Ms  KP
    and Z. If he has been a relationship with Ms KP since November 2014 and
    lived with her and Z since then, he would have had  many  opportunities
    to take photographs.  It  is  telling  that  he  has  produced  so  few
    photographs and that the quality of the photographs is so poor  that  I
    do not even recognise the lady on the right at pages 32 and 33  as  the
    lady I saw at the Error of law hearing  and  from  whom  I  heard  oral
    evidence.

89. If there was any genuine relationship between the appellant and Z,  any
    relationship at all even if not a parental relationship, he  would  not
    need to resort to producing for the Tribunal photographs  that  are  so
    blur that I have difficulty being confident that I am  looking  at  the
    photographs of an 11-year old at pages 27 and 28 and of the same person
    but a year younger at pages 32 and 33. Indeed,  on  the  whole  of  the
    evidence and for all of the reasons given above and  below,  I  do  not
    accept that the person on the right at pages 27 and 28  is  an  11-year
    old child. I find that this is a female who is in  her  late  teens  or
    older. I further find that the person in the middle in the  photographs
    on pages 32 and 33 is not the same person as the female on the right at
    pages 28 and 29. I find that these are the reasons  why  the  appellant
    has deliberately produced such poor quality photographs. On  the  whole
    of the evidence, I find that  he  is  simply  unable  to  produce  more
    photographs and better quality ones because he  is  not  in  a  genuine
    relationship with either of Z or Ms KP.

90. The appellant was questioned before me on  his  evidence  that  he  was
    working illegally when he was arrested in January 2018. He said that he
    told the person who employed him that he  would  be  able  to  get  his
    paperwork in two days' time and so he started  work  and  that  he  was
    arrested on the day that he started work. In fact, it is clear from his
    immigration  history  that  he  could  not  have  truthfully  told  any
    prospective employer that he would obtain his paperwork  in  two  days'
    time. It is therefore clear that on his own evidence, he lied in  order
    to obtain employment. This is  evidence  that  he  is  someone  who  is
    prepared to lie and do whatever is necessary in order to live and  work
    in this country. I pause here to observe  that  my  experience  of  his
    credibility accords fully with the experience of the judge  who,  as  I
    have said, roundly rejected his credibility.

91. The appellant's evidence at the hearing was that the only occasion when
    he worked was when he was arrested, whereas Ms KP  said  in  her  first
    witness statement (page 92 of the bundle), describing how it came about
    that he stayed with her, that: "Soon after he stayed and went  to  work
    from the house all the time".

92. I take into account that the appellant gave a false name when arrested.
    When it was put to him that he had failed to  report  on  a  number  of
    occasions after he was given temporary  admission,  he  initially  said
    that he did not inform the immigration authorities that he had  changed
    his address  when  he  moved  to  Ms  KP's  address  but  then,  almost
    immediately, said that he had emailed the  change  of  address  to  the
    immigration authorities but did not receive any  further  letters  from
    the immigration  authorities.  There  is  no  documentary  evidence  to
    support his evidence that he had emailed the change of address  to  the
    immigration authorities. In any event, his explanation  does  not  make
    sense because he was granted temporary admission in March 2015 but  his
    evidence and that of Ms KP is that he was already living with her  from
    November 2014 onwards.

93. Furthermore, his  explanation  (that  he  had  emailed  his  change  of
    address) simply does not explain why  he  just  stopped  reporting.  He
    could reasonably be expected to have known that a formal change of  his
    reporting condition was required and that it was not  open  to  him  to
    simply stop reporting.

94. I found it wholly incredible that the appellant had  a  genuine  dental
    appointment at a dental surgery in Sheerness to have his teeth flossed.
    I found his evidence that he mentioned the problem that he had with his
    flossing to the doctor that he knew at the Sheppey Dental Care  surgery
    and that it was then the doctor who made the appointment for him wholly
    incredible.

95. I acknowledge that Ms KP's second witness statement is  very  detailed.
    However, she did not attend the resumed hearing so  that  her  evidence
    could be tested. I would have wanted to ask her why  she  was  claiming
    single occupancy discount for her Council  tax  if  the  appellant  was
    living with her. I would have wanted to ask her to confirm whether  the
    person on the right in the photographs  on  pages  27  and  28  was  Z,
    whether the person in the middle in the photographs on 32  and  33  was
    also Z and whether she (Ms KP) was the  person  on  the  right  in  the
    photographs at pages 32 and 33. I would have asked her why  there  were
    no photographs of the three of them at her home. As it is,  I  am  left
    with these difficulties in the evidence. Since her evidence  about  her
    relationship and Z's relationship  with  the  appellant  has  not  been
    tested, the weight I can give her evidence is  less  than  if  she  had
    withstood her evidence being tested orally at the hearing.

96. I have taken into account Z's hand-written letter and drawing.  I  have
    noted that she says, inter alia, in referring to the  appellant:  "When
    he comes round we all laugh together". This suggests that the appellant
    does not live in the same home. If Ms KP had attended  the  hearing,  I
    would have wanted to put this to her.

97. I did not find Mr [B] credible. At para 4 of his witness statement,  he
    said that he has been good friends with the appellant. At paras 8 and 9
    of his witness statement he said:

         "8.      I know the family is going through a difficult time at the
             moment due to [Ms KP's] mother passing away recently.


         9. I have seen the couple's Ups and Downs throughout  the  time.  I
             was also a financial surety in [GL]'s bail Application".


98. In keeping with his witness  statement,  Mr  [B]  sought  to  give  the
    impression at the hearing that he knows the  appellant,  Ms  KP  and  Z
    well. He said at the hearing that the appellant cares for  Z  like  her
    father even though he is not Z's biological  father.  However,  he  was
    unable to provide any detail. For example, when asked to give  examples
    of how the appellant cares for Z, he merely  spoke  in  general  terms,
    saying:

         "In relation to mental support, when you start a new school, it  is
         quite daunting for a child. Having the support  of  parents  helps.
         [The appellant] plays his part, he is like a male  role  model.  He
         builds a lot of confidence in her life as she is growing up".


99. He was given a further opportunity to provide detail when he was  asked
    how he knows this. He said he sees it and the appellant also  talks  to
    him about it.  When he was then asked to explain how he sees  this,  he
    said: "It's the way she talks  to  him  and  how  they  are  together".
    Plainly, he was given more than one opportunity to 'add  flesh  to  the
    bones' as it were, but failed to take the opportunity. I find that this
    is because he has not in fact  observed  anything.  He  has  no  actual
    examples to fall back on.

100. Another example is when Mr [B] was asked how it would  impact  upon  Ms
    KP and Z if the appellant were to leave the United  Kingdom.  He  said:
    "You have to take into consideration that [Z] has lost her  grandmother
    and she's never had a father figure in her life. [GL] plays a huge part
    in her life. Taking that away disrupts the child going through a growth
    period". Again, he spoke in general terms and he  failed  to  give  any
    detail of how it would impact on Ms KP and Z.

101. Mr [B] said that he did not know why Ms KP did not attend  the  resumed
    hearing. I am asked to believe, on the one hand, that the appellant and
    Mr [B] are good friends and, on the  other  hand,  that  they  did  not
    discuss why Ms KP was unable to attend the hearing whilst  waiting  for
    this case to be called on. It would have been only natural for them  to
    have discussed it. I do not believe that they did not  do  so.  I  find
    that Mr [B] gave the evidence he did in  order  to  avoid  any  further
    questioning lest discrepancies emerge  between  his  evidence  and  the
    appellant's.

102. Mr Lams provided me with a "Notice of Bail hearing" dated 21  May  2018
    for a bail hearing on 24 May 2018 at the First-tier Tribunal  (IAC)  at
    Hatton Cross hearing centre and the completed  bail  application  form.
    This has the details of Ms KP as the first surety and  Mr  [B]  as  the
    second surety. It is true that this shows an application for Mr [B]  to
    stand surety in the sum of �1,500.  However,  according  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal's database, bail was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  24
    May 2018. The appellant was granted bail by the Secretary of State and,
    as such, neither the Upper Tribunal nor the First-tier Tribunal has any
    record of the conditions of bail or the details of the sureties.

103. Thus, there is no evidence, as such, that the other surety was  Ms  KP.
    This is likely to be an  unfortunate  oversight  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant's representatives. If Mr Lams knew that bail was  granted  by
    the Secretary of State, I am sure he would not have provided me with  a
    copy of the Notice dated 21 May 2018 of the bail hearing on 24 May 2018
    or the application for bail. However, the narrow point I rely  upon  is
    that it is telling that Mr [B] professes, on the one hand, to  be  good
    friends with the appellant and Ms KP but does not know,  on  the  other
    hand, who the other surety was.

104. I have taken into account  the  hand-written  statement  from  Ms  KP's
    mother. As she has unfortunately passed away, her  evidence  cannot  be
    tested.

105. I have considered the contents of the  Christmas  and  other  cards  at
    pages 99-106. In view of the fact that it is claimed that the appellant
    and Ms KP have been  living  together  since  November  2014  and  been
    partners since then, it is striking to see  how  few  cards  have  been
    submitted. There was only one from Ms KP to the appellant. There were a
    very small number from the appellant to Ms KP and one from  him  to  Z.
    There were none from Z to the appellant. All the hand-written  messages
    from the appellant to Ms KP and from Ms KP to the appellant were wholly
    platonic in nature.

106. I noted that there are no witness statement from  Ms  KP's  friends  to
    confirm that she has a genuine relationship with him and Z.

107. I take into account that the appellant said at his asylum interview  on
    22 March 2018 that he met Ms KP in 2013 and moved in with her in  2014,
    that his evidence in this regard has been consistent  and  that  it  is
    also consistent with Ms KP's evidence in her witness statements. I take
    into account that he gave Ms KP's address when arrested and that he was
    bailed to her address. I have noted that he said at question 128 of his
    asylum interview that she was on "happy tablets"  which  is  consistent
    with her witness statement that she was on medication for depression. I
    take into account the letter and drawing said to  be  from  Z  and  the
    letter said to be from Ms KP's mother. As I said earlier, I have  taken
    into account all of the evidence whether or  not  I  have  specifically
    referred to it.

108. On the whole of the evidence and  giving  such  weight  as  I  consider
    appropriate to each aspect of the  evidence  before  me,  I  found  the
    appellant and Mr [B] wholly lacking in credibility. I reject the  claim
    that the appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with Z. I reject the  claim  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with Ms KP. I am not even  prepared  to  accept
    that he lives with Ms KP or that he has  lived  with  her  since  2014,
    notwithstanding that he gave her address when arrested in January  2018
    and that he was bailed to that address.

109. The evidence is, and I so find, that, notwithstanding that she  is  not
    in a genuine relationship with the  appellant,  Ms  KP  is  willing  to
    assist him in his immigration matter but only so far. She may have  her
    own reasons for her willingness to help him; for example,  she  may  be
    willing to help someone she knows who is in need. Whatever her reasons,
    I find that it is clear that she is only  willing  to  help  him  to  a
    limited extent. That is why she is willing to  provide  him  with  some
    documents but unwilling to do more; for example, by having her evidence
    about her alleged relationship with him tested on oral evidence. She is
    willing for him to be recorded as a contact for Z but unwilling for him
    to take a greater part in Z's life at school which explains  why  there
    is no further evidence from the school. She is willing to allow him  to
    use her address as a post-box which explains why he was  able  to  give
    her address when he was arrested. However, he does not live  with  her,
    which explains why she is claiming a single occupier's discount for her
    Council tax, why there are no photographs of the  three  of  them  (the
    appellant, Z and herself) in her home, why so few greeting  cards  have
    been submitted, why the greeting cards submitted are of such a platonic
    nature, why Mr [B] has only been to her home once and why none  of  her
    friends have given supporting evidence. I do not accept that the letter
    and drawing said to be by Z were genuinely written or drawn by Z.

110. Accordingly, s.117B(6) and EX.1(a), cannot assist the appellant.

111. For the same reasons, the appellant has not established that he  enjoys
    family life with Ms KP and/or Z.

112. Mr Lams  accepted  that  the  appellant's  private  life  claim  cannot
    succeed given the judge's dismissal of his  private  life  claim  under
    para 276ADE(vi) outside the Immigration Rules.

113.  I  therefore  re-make  the  decision  on  the  appellant's  appeal  by
    dismissing his appeal on human rights grounds. The judge's decision  to
    dismiss his  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds stands.

    Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Telford  involved  the
    making of errors on points of law sufficient for it to  be  set  aside.
    The decision was set aside. The Upper Tribunal re-made the decision  on
    the appellant's appeal against the respondent's decision as follows:

    The appellant's appeal is dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and human rights grounds.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date:   12 November 2018


                                    [pic]


|Upper Tribunal                        |                                     |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)      |Appeal number: PA/05420/2018         |
|                                      |                                     |
|                                      |                                     |
|the immigration Acts                                                        |
|                                                                            |
|Heard at:|Field House               |        |Decision promulgated         |
|On       |21 August 2018            |                   |                   |
|                                                                            |
|                                                                            |
|Before                                                                      |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Gill                                                   |
|                                                                            |
|Between                                                                     |
|           |[G L]                                             |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)                        |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr R K Rai, of Counsel, instructed by  Farani  Taylor
Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Presenting Officer.



                           Decision and Directions


 1. The appellant, a national of Nepal born on 1 November  1988,  has  been
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision
    of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Telford  (hereafter  the  "judge")
    who, in a determination promulgated 5 June 2018 following a hearing  on
    17 May 2018, dismissed his appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection
    and human rights grounds against a decision of  the  respondent  of  16
    April 2018 refusing to grant him asylum and humanitarian protection and
    refusing his human rights claim.

 2. The appellant's asylum claim was based on his fear  that  he  would  be
    persecuted by his own family and also by his ex-wife's family. He  said
    that his family would persecute him because he had taken out a loan  of
    �18,000 in 2013 secured against family property to fund his studies but
    did not repay his loan. His brother borrowed money from another bank to
    discharge the first loan.  He  has  not  repaid  his  brother.  He  has
    received death threats from his family. His ex-wife's family would harm
    him because the divorce from his wife led to  an  expectation  that  he
    would provide a house for her. As he had no money and was  in  debt  to
    his brother, he could not provide the  house.  He  has  received  death
    threats from his ex-wife's family. His  ex-wife's  father  and  brother
    were involved in politics.

 3. The appellant's Article 8 claim was based on his relationship  with  Ms
    [KP] and her daughter. Both are British citizens. I shall refer to  the
    daughter hereafter as "Z".  It was said that the appellant and  Ms  [P]
    began their relationship in 2013 and began living together in 2014.  It
    was said that the appellant was like a father to Z.

 4. At the hearing before the judge,  the  appellant  withdrew  his  asylum
    claim because it was accepted  that  there  was  no  Geneva  Convention
    reason. He relied upon his humanitarian protection claim and Articles 2
    and 3 of the ECHR.

 5. An application was made at the hearing before the judge to adjourn  the
    hearing. The application was made for two  separate  reasons.  Firstly,
    that Ms [P] was unable to attend the hearing because Z had  to  undergo
    SATS tests that day. Secondly, that the appellant needed more  time  to
    obtain further evidence to support his protection claim.

 6. The judge refused to adjourn the hearing. In relation  to  Ms  [P],  he
    said that there was no evidence from Ms [P] that she could  not  attend
    the hearing, the  evidence  was  simply  on  the  instructions  of  the
    appellant. Furthermore, Ms [P] could have made arrangements as she  had
    previously with her mother or anyone else responsible  enough  to  look
    after the child.

 7. It is only necessary to provide the following very brief summary of the
    judge's decision:

    (i)    The judge made a very  strong  adverse  credibility  assessment,
         rejecting roundly the entirety of the appellant's  account  of  the
         basis of his protection claim.

    (ii)   In relation to the appellant's Article 8 private life claim, the
         judge found that the appellant had not established that there would
         be very significant obstacles in Nepal and  therefore  he  did  not
         meet the requirements of  para  276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
         (hereafter the "Rules"). At paras 50 and  81,  the  judge  said  as
         follows:

         "50.     He failed to establish insurmountable or very  significant
             obstacles under paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi). As someone claiming
             as an unlawful overstayer, he cannot succeed here. He has  not
             shown he has integrated into UK society in  full  and  he  can
             return to his home country safely and reintegrate there. He is
             on his stated d.o.b. 1 November 1988 and aged 29 years and has
             lived the vast majority of his life in his  home  country.  He
             still retains the language of Nepal, has experienced work  and
             has command of  English.  He  has  academic  and  professional
             qualifications. He can use  his  English  language  skills  in
             Nepal. He has not shown he is not in contact with  his  family
             and I find has not shown he cannot expect their  support  upon
             his return.

         81.      There is no valid claim here. He  has  not  shown  he  has
             altered his life to such an extent that he cannot  return.  He
             obviously does have links to his wider  family  in  Nepal  and
             they supported him previously and would be delighted I find to
             have him back. His claim was not shown  to  fall  outside  the
             Rules on article 8 in any way. EX.1 does not avail him."

    (iii)  In relation to the  appellant's  family  life  claim  under  the
         Rules, the judge did not conduct an assessment under Appendix FM or
         EX.1(a) or (b), or s.117B(6) of the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002 (hereafter the "2002 Act"). This may  be  explained
         by his findings in relation to  the  appellant's  Article  8  claim
         outside the Rules, that family life with Ms [P] and Z had not  been
         established.

    (iv)   In relation to the  appellant's  Article  8  family  life  claim
         outside the Rules and as stated above, the  judge  did  not  accept
         that the appellant enjoyed family life with Ms [P]  and/or  Z.  The
         judge's reasons are set out at paras 51-58. It is only necessary to
         refer to para 56 where the judge, in referring to a letter  he  had
         before him from Z who was then 11 years old, said as follows:

             "I deprecate the practice of letter writing by  11  year  olds
             with pictures attached. Whilst it plays to the heart  strings,
             it does nothing to indicate a mother  with  her  child's  best
             interest at heart...."

    The judge made no further mention of Z's letter or its contents.

The grounds and the grant of permission:

 8. There were three grounds which may be summarised as follows:

    (i)    Ground 1  concerned  the  judge's  assessment  of  the  evidence
         concerning the appellant's relationship with Ms [P] and Z.

    (ii)   Ground 2 concerned the judge's failure to consider  Appendix  FM
         and EX.1 (a) and (b).

    (iii)  Ground 3  concerned  various  aspects  of  the  judge's  adverse
         credibility assessment in relation to the protection claim.  It  is
         unnecessary to provide greater detail,  for  the  reason  given  at
         paras 10-12 below.

 9. Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  EM  Simpson  essentially  granted
    permission to appeal on all the grounds. Although the grounds  did  not
    raise any issues as to a lack of fair process, Judge Simpson considered
    it arguable that there was a lack of fair process  on  account  of  the
    judge refusing to adjourn the hearing to enable Ms [P]  to  attend  the
    hearing and also in excluding from his consideration the letter from Z.



10. At the hearing before me, Mr Rai initially said that he  would  not  be
    withdrawing ground 3 but that he was also not asking me to  decide  it.
    When I asked him what he proposed I should do with  ground  3  in  that
    case, he asked for an opportunity to take instructions. Having done so,
    he informed me that ground 3 was withdrawn and that  he  would  not  be
    arguing ground 3 on that day. When I  informed  him  that  it  was  not
    certain that there would be another hearing and that the  hearing  then
    was when I would decide whether the judge had materially erred  in  law
    as contended in ground 3, he then said that he maintained ground 3  and
    that he would argue that the appellant  contends  that  his  return  to
    Nepal would be in breach of Articles 2 and  3  of  the  ECHR.   I  then
    reminded Mr  Rai  that  it  was  not  for  me  to  decide  whether  the
    appellant's removal to Nepal would be in breach  of  his  rights  under
    Articles 2 and 3 but whether the judge had materially erred in  law  in
    reaching his finding that removal would not be in breach of his  rights
    under Articles 2 and 3.

11. I then submissions on Article 8  first  because  Mr  Rai  preferred  to
    address me on Article 8 first as he said this was the main focus of the
    appellant's appeal. When the time came for me to hear  his  submissions
    on ground 3, Mr Rai said that he was not relying on Article 2  and,  in
    relation to Article 3, he said: "I do not seek  to  persuade  you  that
    there is a material error of law as contended in ground 3".

12. In other words, Mr Rai, in effect, withdrew reliance on ground 3.

13. Accordingly, the parties agreed that the issues before me are,  and  my
    approach to the issues should be, as follows:

    (i)    Whether the judge's refusal to adjourn the hearing in  order  to
         enable Ms [P] to attend the hearing and whether the  fact  that  he
         had excluded from his consideration the contents of Z's letter mean
         that there has been a lack of due process in the proceedings before
         the judge in relation to the  appellant's  Article  8  family  life
         claim;

    (ii)   If I decide the issue in (i) for the appellant, i.e. that  there
         was such lack of due process, then it  is  unnecessary  for  me  to
         decide the underlying merits of grounds 1 and 2.  This  is  because
         the decision on the appellant's family life claim would have to  be
         re-made.

    (iii)  If I decide the issue in (i)  against  the  appellant,  then  it
         would be necessary for  me  to  decide  the  underlying  merits  of
         grounds 1 and 2, i.e. whether the judge materially erred in law  in
         his assessment of the appellant's family life claim.

14. I have decided that, in relation to the appellant's  Article  8  family
    life claim  only,  there  has  been  a  lack  of  due  process  in  the
    proceedings before the judge, for reasons given below. Accordingly,  it
    is unnecessary for me to decide the underlying merits of grounds 1  and
    2.

15. My reasons for concluding that, in relation to the appellant's  Article
    8 family life claim only, there has been a lack of due process  in  the
    proceedings before the judge, are as follows:

    (i)    In reaching my decision as to whether  the  judge's  refusal  to
         adjourn the hearing in order to allow Ms [P] to attend the  hearing
         was unfair, I am not limited to the evidence that was  before  him.
         Issues as to whether there has been procedural  unfairness  do  not
         necessarily come within the usual limitation on  the  admissibility
         of fresh evidence to establish that a judge has materially erred in
         law in the assessment of the substantive case.

    (ii)   I heard oral evidence from Ms [P]. Ms [P] said that she was only
         told about the hearing on about 10 May 2018. She explained that she
         did not ask her mother to  look  after  her  daughter  because  her
         mother, who has now passed away, was small in size, old and  frail.
         She was 82 years old.  She  had  had  an  accident  previously  and
         fractured both sides of her pelvis. Ms [P] did not  wish  to  place
         the responsibility of looking after her daughter on her mother.  Ms
         [P] had two friends she could call upon but they were both working.
         In addition, her daughter wanted her to be with her.

    (iii)  I am satisfied, on the basis of the evidence I heard,  that,  at
         the relevant time, Ms [P] had a good reason for not requesting  her
         mother to look after her daughter and that her friends were  unable
         to do so because they were working.  I am therefore satisfied  that
         the judge's refusal to adjourn the hearing so  that  Ms  [P]  could
         attend the hearing and give evidence in relation to the appellant's
         family life claim has led to a lack of due process concerning  that
         aspect of the appellant's case.

    (iv)   I am  also  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  exclude  from  his
         consideration the evidence given by Z in her letter.  This  evident
         from the words in his para 56 quoted at my para 7(iv)  above  taken
         together with the fact that he did not otherwise mention or  assess
         the contents of Z's letter.  I am satisfied that Z's  evidence  was
         potentially relevant to the appellant's family life claim.

16. I am therefore  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  err  in  law  in  his
    assessment of the appellant's Article 8 claim. Ms  [P]'s  evidence  (if
    she  had  been  able  to  attend  the  hearing)  and  Z's  letter  were
    potentially capable of being  material  to  an  assessment  as  to  the
    existence of family life and the assessment of the issues in  EX.1  (a)
    and (b) and also the family life claim outside the Rules.

17. For the above reasons, I set aside the decision of the judge to dismiss
    the appellant's Article 8 family life  claim.  The  following  findings
    shall stand:

    (i)    The judge's decision to dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum
         grounds.

    (ii)   The judge's decision that the appellant's removal will not be in
         breach of his rights under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

    (iii)  Since the grounds did not challenge the  judge's  assessment  of
         the appellant's private life claim under para 276ADE and Mr Rai did
         not mention para 276ADE at  the  hearing  before  me,  the  judge's
         decision that the appellant does not meet the requirements of  para
         276ADE of the Rules stands. This includes the judge's  finding,  at
         para 50, that the appellant had not established that he is  not  in
         contact with his family and that he has not shown  that  he  cannot
         expect their support upon his return.

    (iv)   The judge's  adverse  credibility  assessment  and  findings  in
         relation to the appellant's protection claim stand.

18. The issues at the next hearing will be limited to the following:

    (i)    Whether Appendix FM and EX.1(a) and/or (b) are satisfied.

    (ii)   Whether s.117B(6) is satisfied.

    (iii)  The appellant's Article 8 family life claim outside  the  Rules.
         If I find that the appellant's relationship with Ms  [P]  and/or  Z
         does not amount to family life within Article 8(1) but that it does
         form part of his private life, then his private life claim will  be
         considered outside the  Rules.  If  I  find  that  the  appellant's
         relationship with Ms [P] and/or Z does not amount  to  family  life
         within Article 8(1) and also that it does  not  form  part  of  his
         private life  (i.e.  that  there  is  no  genuine  relationship  or
         connection), the parties will need to address  me  on  whether  the
         judge's decision in relation to para 276ADE has addressed fully his
         private life claim so  that  it  is  unnecessary  to  consider  his
         private life claim outside the Rules.

19. It follows that:

    (i)    the judge's assessment and findings are set aside as follows:

         a) paras 51-58;

         b) the words "there is no relationship here that would be  breached
             by his removal" in para 73;

         c) The last two sentences of para 81, which read:  "His  claim  was
             not shown to fall outside the Rules on article 8 in  any  way.
             EX.1 does not avail him."

         d) paras 82-86. The Upper Tribunal will re-assess these  issues  in
             the light of its findings following the resumed hearing.

    (ii)   the remainder of  the  judge's  assessment  and  findings  shall
         stand.

20. In the majority of cases, the Upper Tribunal  when  setting  aside  the
    decision will re-make the relevant decision itself.  However, para  7.2
    of the Practice Statements for the Immigration and Asylum  Chambers  of
    the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Upper  Tribunal   (the   "Practice
    Statements") recognises that it may  not  be  possible  for  the  Upper
    Tribunal to proceed to re-make the decision when it is satisfied that:

         "(a)     the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
             the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity
             for that party's case to be put to and considered by the First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)      the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the overriding objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-
             tier Tribunal."

21. Mr Rai submitted that, if I decide that the appellant did  not  have  a
    fair hearing before the judge, the Article 8 claim should  be  remitted
    to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  because  this  would  require  extensive
    findings of fact.

22. The fact that Ms [P] was unable to give evidence before the  judge  and
    the fact that the judge excluded from his consideration the letter from
    Z do, prima facie, come within para 7.2(a).  However,  para  7.2(a)  is
    discretionary.

23. I have considered the exercise of  my  discretion.  My  decision,  that
    there was a lack of due process in the proceedings before the judge, is
    limited to the Article  8  family  life  claim.  The  grounds  did  not
    challenge the refusal of the judge to adjourn the hearing in  order  to
    allow the appellant to have a further opportunity to  produce  evidence
    in support of his protection claim, nor was this raised at the  hearing
    before me. Indeed, ground 3 was effectively withdrawn  at  the  hearing
    before me. The issues to be decided at  the  next  hearing  are  not  a
    complicated. They are limited, as set out above.

24. I have therefore decided that  the  Upper  Tribunal  will  re-make  the
    decision on the appellant's appeal. The case is reserved to myself. The
    issues are limited as set out above.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Telford  involved  the
making of errors on points of law such that  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
Article 8 family life claim is  set  aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds, Articles 2 and  3
of the ECHR and in relation to para 276ADE of the Rules stand.

The Upper Tribunal will re-make the decision on  the  appeal.  The  case  is
reserved to myself.

    Directions to the parties

    (1)    The appellant shall notify the Upper Tribunal within  five  days
         of the date on which these Directions are despatched the following:

         (a)      if an interpreter is required at the hearing, the language
             in which an interpreter is required;

         (b)      the number of witnesses who will give evidence.

    (2)    Any evidence the appellant seeks  to  rely  on  must  be  served
         within 14 days of the date on which this "Decision and  Directions"
         is sent to the parties. The appellant's bundle must include:

         a. Witness statements of the evidence to be called at the hearing.

         b. A paginated and indexed bundle of all documents to be relied  on
             at the hearing. Essential passages must  be  identified  in  a
             schedule, or highlighted.

         c. A skeleton argument, identifying all relevant issues and  citing
             relevant authorities.

         d. A chronology of events



[pic]
Signed                                             Date: 23 August 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

