
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05611/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Bradford                        |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On: 26th September 2018                   |On: 16th November 2018           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     MM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms S. Khan of Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq born in  1993.   She  appeals  with
    permission the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  Malik)  to
    dismiss her protection and human rights appeal.







    Anonymity Order

 2. This case concerns a claim for  international  protection.  Having  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity  Orders  I
    therefore consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. The basis of the Appellant's linked protection and human rights  claims
    was that she faced a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in  Iraq  for
    reasons of her membership of a particular social group, viz women.  She
    claims to face a risk of forced marriage and/or 'honour' based violence
    at the hands of her father/brothers/other male relatives  because  they
    have discovered that she was embarking on a  relationship  with  a  boy
    that she met in a jewellery shop.  It broad brush the account  is  that
    the Appellant met this young man when out shopping for  gold  with  her
    cousins. He had kept looking at her and when she had  returned  to  the
    shop some months later, had given her a mobile telephone. This  enabled
    them to start speaking to each other and they subsequently met up. They
    had a relationship. It was discovered by  the  Appellant's  stepmother,
    who reported the matter to her father. The Appellant  was  detained  at
    the family home, subjected to days of beating and  admonishment  before
    being told that she was to be married to someone else. Fearing  further
    violence and forced marriage the Appellant fled, sneaking  out  of  the
    house in the middle of the night to meet her boyfriend.

 4. The Respondent had refused her claim in a letter dated the  20th  April
    2018. The letter appears to accept [at 22] that women fearing  'honour'
    crimes can constitute a particular social group within the  meaning  of
    Article 1A(2) of the Refugee Convention, and that such crimes do  occur
    in the  Appellant's  home  region  of  Iraqi  Kurdistan  [at  27].  The
    Respondent was not however satisfied that the Appellant was telling the
    truth, and found there to be no current risk.

 5. The First-tier Tribunal agreed with the Respondent  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.

 6. The onward grounds of appeal are as follows:

          i) The First-tier Tribunal erred in making unjustified criticisms
             of the Appellant's expert witness, and  irrationally  attached
             little weight to her  opinion,  which  demonstrated  that  the
             claim was plausible and  consistent  with  country  background
             information;

         ii) The First-tier Tribunal ultimately rejected the claim  because
             it did not accept that the Appellant - a young Kurdish woman -
             would have behaved in the way that she claims to have done. It
             is submitted that  this  is  irrational,  and  fails  to  take
             relevant evidence into  account.  Decision-makers  should  not
             base their assessments of plausibility on what they would have
             done in the same situation, or on what  they  think  might  be
             regarded as normal.  The  fact  that  young  people  in  Iraqi
             Kurdistan are capable of disobeying their families' wishes  is
             illustrated by the country  background  material  on  'honour'
             violence.

    Error of Law

 7. The expert witness in this case was Ms Sheri Laizer, a journalist  with
    a  long-standing  working  knowledge  of  Kurdistan.    She  has   been
    appearing before the Tribunal, and providing expert reports,  for  some
    30 years.  In this case she prepared a report which a)  said  that  the
    Appellant's account was plausible in that  it  was  consonant  with  Ms
    Laizer's knowledge of Kurdish society and b) that in  her  opinion  the
    Appellant faced a well-founded fear of serious harm.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal declined to place any  weight  on  Ms  Laizer's
    report. It gave several reasons for this, chief amongst these being  Ms
    Laizer's failure to mention, on  the  face  of  her  report,  that  her
    evidence had been subject to criticism by the  Upper  Tribunal  in  the
    country guidance case of SM and Ors (Kurds - Protection  -  Relocation)
    Iraq CG [2005] UKIAT 00111.  The Tribunal  found  this  failing  to  be
    inconsistent with the  guidance  given  SD  (expert  evidence)  Lebanon
    [2008] UKAIT 00078 that where  experts  cite  approval  by  the  higher
    courts they should also declare any disapprobation.

 9. The grounds take issue with this analysis, pointing out that  the  duty
    on experts set down in SD  only  applies  where  the  expert  seeks  to
    establish his or her credentials  by  reference  to  positive  judicial
    comment on his or her work. In this case Ms Laizer made no such claims.
    She was not therefore under any obligation to mention a case  in  which
    she was instructed in 2005. The grounds further note that the  case  of
    SD had to be approached with some caution, since the expert  instructed
    in that case, Dr Alan  George,  had  on  the  basis  of  that  decision
    successfully sued the Upper Tribunal for  libel  and  had  extracted  a
    public apology.

10. I accept, for the reasons mentioned above, that Ms Laizer is not  under
    an obligation to refer readers of her reports to the criticisms made in
    SM.   To that extent the grounds are made out. The First-tier  Tribunal
    was however entitled to have  regard  to  the  findings  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in that reported case, namely that Ms Laizer has a  good  deal
    of experience  and  first-hand  knowledge  of  Kurdistan  but  in  that
    instance her evidence  lacked  objectivity  and  betrayed  a  "partisan
    attitude".  The HOPO before the First-tier  Tribunal  had  specifically
    challenged Ms Laizer's objectivity and to that extent the comments made
    in SM were  plainly  relevant  to  the  Tribunal's  evaluation  of  her
    evidence.

11. I struggle to see the relevance of  any  of  this  today,  or  why  the
    Appellant's representatives considered an expert  report  necessary  at
    all. That is because  there  was  absolutely  nothing  in  the  factual
    background to this case that was in issue. It was accepted  that  young
    women in Kurdistan are subject to restrictive social norms rooted in  a
    heavily patriarchal and tribal culture.   These  norms  include  forced
    marriage and domestic violence. It was  accepted  that  'honour'  based
    violence is prevalent there, and that  because  of  the  aforementioned
    social norms, young women facing such violence will only face "limited"
    support  from  the  authorities  (paragraph  40  of  the  determination
    refers). These matters were accepted by the Respondent, and the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  As far as I can see the only information that Ms Laizer
    was able to add to that background picture  was  that  the  Appellant's
    tribe are  powerful  and  well-known  and  have  influence  "throughout
    Kurdistan".    As  far  as  I  can  tell  that  objectively  verifiable
    statement was not challenged by the Respondent; nor was it rejected  by
    the Tribunal.

12. The real issue in this appeal  is  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    credibility findings were sustainable. The First-tier  Tribunal  gives,
    at its paragraphs 41 (I)-(XII), a number of reasons why it rejects  the
    Appellant's account. All are concerned with  the  plausibility  of  the
    account. The Tribunal found, in light of the Appellant's evidence about
    her strict family, it to be implausible that  of  the  following  would
    have occurred:

          i) That the Appellant would accept a mobile  telephone  from  the
             boy if she had only seen him once before [at FTT reason I);

         ii) That she would have taken the risk of being  in  contact  with
             this boy, nor he with she (II);

        iii) That the two of them would take the  risk  of  meeting  up  on
             Fridays when the Appellant's family were at mosque (III);

         iv) That they would have done  so  in  a  public  place  (a  local
             graveyard) when there was a risk that either or both  of  them
             would have been recognised if seen (IV);

          v) That they would have engaged in sexual relations, particularly
             since the Appellant can have  had  no  legitimate  expectation
             that they would be able to get married  within  a  short  time
             frame (V);

         vi) That the Appellant and the boy would risk being seen in a  car
             together (VII);

        vii) Or that her stepmother would  not  have  made  her  suspicions
             known to the Appellant's father as soon as  they  were  raised
             (VII);

       viii) That having uncovered the affair her father and brothers would
             subject her to days of imprisonment and beating but  not  kill
             her, instead telling her that she would be married to  someone
             else (VIII);

         ix) That the appellant would have been able  to  keep  the  mobile
             telephone once the affair had been discovered (IX);

          x) That the boy would not have immediately fled his  home  if  he
             believed that the Appellant had  been  caught  by  her  family
             (IX);

         xi) That the Appellant was  able  to  retrieve  her  passport  and
             identity card and leave her family home undetected  so  as  to
             meet with the boy (X);

        xii) That the Appellant and her lover would have been separated  in
             Turkey as claimed (she said  that  they  had  been  placed  in
             different lorries by  the  agents  organising  their  journey)
             (XII).

13. In sum, the Tribunal rejects as implausible the evidence that the young
    couple would take the risk of contacting each other,  meeting  up,  and
    having a relationship, that the stepmother might wish to  collect  more
    evidence before confronting the Appellant, or that she would be able to
    get away.

14. Before me Ms Khan accepted that decision-makers  must  take  a  common-
    sense approach to credibility, and  that  an  important  part  of  that
    assessment will be  whether  a  claim  is  'plausible'.  She  submitted
    however that plausibility is a matter to be assessed in  light  of  the
    background evidence  on  the  culture,  or  country  in  question.  She
    submitted that since - it is accepted - the  country  reports  on  Iraq
    give various examples of young women being killed for perceived slights
    on their family's 'honour' in circumstances  much  the  same  as  those
    narrated by the Appellant, it was wrong for the Tribunal to have  found
    this element of the claim to be implausible. There was, she  submitted,
    nothing implausible in  two  young  people  embarking  on  a  forbidden
    relationship  in  the  manner  claimed,   being   caught   and   facing
    retribution.

15. I would have to agree.   I accept that in its evaluation of whether  it
    was 'plausible' that these events occurred the Tribunal does not appear
    to have given due consideration to relevant background material. In the
    Respondent's own Country Policy  and  Information  Note  Iraq:  Kurdish
    'honour' crimes (Version 1.0 August 2017) the sources  cited  uniformly
    identify  illicit  relationships  as  a  trigger  for  'honour'   based
    violence:

         7.2.3 A post dated May 2014 in  Pass  Blue,  a  blog  which  styles
         itself as 'Independent coverage of the UN' and is a project of  the
         Ralph Bunche Institute, CUNY [City University of New York] Graduate
         Center, reflected the views of an anonymous man in  Kurdistan,  who
         previously worked for a women's empowerment centre:

         'Deviations from societal expectations regarding a girl's sexuality
         - like falling in love with a boy or a man -  are  so  unacceptable
         that the only way to redeem a family's honor is to kill the girl...
         'Should she step out of line or do anything that makes her  husband
         suspicious that she is being unfaithful, like talking with  another
         man in the street, it is his right to kill her.'

         7.2.4 The source added: 'In our first interviews with the heads  of
         several women's empowerment groups in this city...we were told that
         a woman could be killed by her own family just because she fell  in
         love or she wanted to go to school.'

         7.2.7 A joint report between Minority  Rights  Group  International
         and Ceasefire Centre for  Civilian  Rights,  dated  November  2015,
         stated:  '''Honour' crimes are grounded in the cultural belief that
         women's bodies are the site of honour and that their sexuality  and
         movement must be strictly controlled in  order  to  avoid  bringing
         dishonour upon the entire family... ''Honour' crimes are most often
         perpetrated  after  a  woman  has  committed  or  is  suspected  of
         committing any of the following: engaging in  friendships  or  pre-
         marital relationships with a member of the opposite  sex;  refusing
         to marry a man chosen by the family; marrying against the  family's
         wishes;  committing  adultery;  or  being  a  victim  of  rape   or
         kidnapping...

         7.3.4 In a post dated May  2014,  Pass  Blue  noted  that  'honour'
         killings and 'honour' suicides are 'continuing in Kurdistan if  not
         on the rise, some people say'. It continued: 'In Kurdistan, the  UN
         estimates that the number of honor killings might be as high as  50
         each month, and that most of the deaths go unreported.  One  reason
         that they continue to be a leading cause of death for women may  be
         the increasingly oppressed position of women in Iraqi society.'

16. The fact that these crimes are committed with such frequency would tend
    to indicate that some women (and young people generally)  do  take  the
    very risk regarded by the First-tier  Tribunal  as  implausible.  I  am
    therefore satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal erred  in  failing  to
    take relevant country background material  into  account  in  assessing
    whether this claim was, at its core, plausible.

17. Before me Mr Diwnycz accepted  that  the  Tribunal  had  not  made  its
    assessment against the background material. He agreed  that  there  was
    nothing inherently  incredible,  or  implausible,  in  the  Appellant's
    account. There was for instance, nothing particularly startling in  the
    Appellant's evidence that she had  been  able  to  secrete  the  mobile
    telephone in her room.

18. The error identified going to the central findings on risk, I must  set
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal aside.

    The Re-Made Decision

19. I have taken all of the Appellant's evidence into account. I  have  re-
    read  her  interviews,  her  witness  statement  and  the   record   of
    proceedings.

20. The Appellant failed to claim asylum in safe third countries  that  she
    passed through, including France. I note her evidence that she did have
    contact with the police in France, who gave her a  paper  stating  that
    she was to leave the country within seven days, but she does not  state
    in terms that she attempted to claim asylum there. She states  that  it
    was her belief, based on what she was told, that the French authorities
    do not like Iraqi asylum seekers.   That she  failed  to  claim  asylum
    there is a  matter  that  must  weigh  against  her  claim  to  have  a
    subjective fear of persecution: section 8 of  the  Asylum,  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants etc) Act 2004.

21.  I  find  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  events  in  Iraq   to   be
    straightforward  and  coherent.     The   only   internal   discrepancy
    identified by the Respondent is  in  respect  of  the  dates  when  the
    Appellant left Iraq and arrived in Calais  for  onward  travel  to  the
    United Kingdom. Whilst he did not resile from the  refusal  letter,  Mr
    Diwnycz accepted that on a long journey by  land  and  sea,  undertaken
    over several weeks, it is possible that people would become confused as
    to how much time had passed.   The refusal letter also takes issue with
    the Appellant's evidence that she was able to go  shopping  whilst  her
    family attended mosque on Fridays, and it was during these  trips  that
    she was able to see her boyfriend. I cannot see  where  the  difficulty
    lies with this evidence. The Appellant's father was an Imam and as such
    it was important that all the male members of the family attend  Friday
    prayer with him. It is the Appellant's evidence was  that  as  a  young
    unmarried woman it was not considered appropriate  for  her  to  attend
    mosque, even though ideally her father would have liked it if she  were
    able to come with him. I can find no contradiction in  that  statement.
    That the Appellant's evidence is internally consistent - when told over
    two asylum interviews, witness statement  and  live  evidence  -  is  a
    matter that weighs in her favour.

22. As set out above, I find that the Appellant's evidence is plausible, in
    the sense that it  is  an  account  that  resonates  with  the  country
    background  material.  Young  people   in   Kurdistan   operate   under
    restrictive social norms,  and  yet  they  do  on  occasion  manage  to
    circumvent those restrictions and form relationships outside  of  their
    family environment. That the Appellant's account is consistent with the
    available country background material is a matter that  weighs  in  her
    favour.

23. I have considered whether it is plausible that this young  woman  would
    have behaved in the way that she claims to have  done.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal placed particular emphasis on the fact that she was a daughter
    of a religious and tribal family, and considered  that  she  would,  in
    those circumstances, be unlikely to disobey her family. I have  weighed
    that in the balance, but again this logic does  not  appear  to  accord
    with the background evidence on human rights abuses against  women:  it
    can be assumed that those families who feature  in  the  statistics  on
    'honour' based violence are not liberals.   I further place  weight  on
    the fact that the Appellant is here at all: that this young  woman  has
    undertaken the perilous  journey  from  Iraq  to  the  United  Kingdom,
    including a stay in the Calais camps, speaks to  a  certain  degree  of
    recklessness.  That her claimed behaviour in Iraq  is  consistent  with
    her personality is a matter that weighs in her favour.

24. I find the Appellant's evidence to be cogent and to contain a level  of
    detail indicative of recollection rather than invention.  For  instance
    at her asylum interview she explained to the officer why the  impending
    marriage to the man chosen by her father compelled her  to  leave.  She
    explains that she knew this man because their families were  friends  -
    he was the son of another Imam. He had been married previously but  his
    wife had died. The Appellant was afraid and did not want to  marry  him
    because she had heard rumours from neighbours that this man had in fact
    killed his first wife, murdering her by setting her on fire.   That the
    account is detailed is a matter that weighs in the Appellant's favour.

25. Having weighed all of those matters in the balance I am  satisfied,  on
    the lower standard of proof, that the events described by the Appellant
    did take place.

26. There is no dispute that violence against women who  are  perceived  to
    have tainted the 'honour' of their family continues to be a significant
    problem in Iraq, and in the Kurdish region  in  particular.    Evidence
    relied upon by both parties indicates that 'honour' killings are taking
    place in the IKR at the rate of 50 per month (see UN estimates cited at
    7.3.4 of the CPIN).  The Appellant has already faced  serious  violence
    and threats from her family. I accept that her actions in leaving,  and
    on the face of it eloping with her boyfriend, will  have  significantly
    increased the risk to her person. Her family had hoped to deal with her
    behaviour by having her married to a man of their  choosing.  Now  that
    she has rejected that marriage I find that the risk of her being killed
    by her family has substantially increased.  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    Appellant cannot return to  her  home  area  Sulaymaniyah  because  she
    continues to face a well-founded fear of serious harm there.

27. I am satisfied that such harm would constitute persecution for  reasons
    of her 'membership of a particular social group'. That group could,  in
    the context of Iraqi Kurdish society, be defined as 'women' but for the
    purpose of this decision I adopt the Respondent's definition  at  2.2.1
    of the 2017 CPIN: "victims or potential victims of 'honour' crimes".

28. Mr Diwnycz  did  not  seek  to  persuade  me  that  there  would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant. The Respondent's  position
    is that  although  the  government  in  Erbil  recognises  gender-based
    violence to be a problem, and has implemented some measures  to  tackle
    it, at present it remains unwilling to address the issue  by  providing
    effective protection: see 2.4.2 CPIN. This conclusion accords with  the
    view expressed by human rights organisations and other governments. The
    US State Department, for instance, do not regard the since  government-
    operated shelter in the IKR as providing protection, since the goal  of
    staff is to facilitate  'reconciliation'  and  return  women  to  their
    families.

29. Nor did Mr Diwnycz submit that internal flight would  be  a  reasonable
    option for the Appellant.  The Respondent accepts  that  a  lone  woman
    without family support would not be able to lead a  'relatively  normal
    life' elsewhere in Iraq: see for instance paragraphs 49, 56, 65 and 129
    (a) of AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212.

30. It follows that the appeal must be  allowed  on  protection  and  human
    rights grounds.

    Decisions

31. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for error  of
    law.

32. I re-make the decision in the appeal by  allowing  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

33. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                   dated 28th September 2018
