
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05371/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13 July 2017                          |On 14 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AK
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Holt (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is  made.   Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
Court orders otherwise,  no  report  of  any  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

      1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers
         to his asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran.  He contends that he has a well-
         founded fear of persecution in Iran  for  reasons  because  of  his
         involvement in supporting the KDPI by distributing leaflets.

Procedural history

      3. In a decision  dated  4  January  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Swinnerton  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.   The   First-tier
         Tribunal  comprehensively   rejected   the   credibility   of   the
         appellant's account.

      4. In  a  decision  dated  4  April  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Gillespie granted  permission  to  appeal  observing  that  it  was
         arguable that the wrong standard of proof was applied.

Hearing

      5. At the beginning Mr Holt relied upon the three written  grounds  of
         appeal and invited me to allow the appeal.  Mr Bates submitted that
         the errors identified by Mr Bates elevated form over substance.  He
         asked me to find that when the decision is read  as  a  whole,  the
         First-tier Tribunal's credibility findings are not vitiated by  any
         material error of law.

      6. After hearing from both representatives I reserved my decision.

      7. Both representatives agreed that should I find an error of law, the
         decision shall need to be remade completely.

Error of law discussion

      8.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  correctly  directed   itself   to   the
         "reasonable degree standard of proof" at [33], [36]  and  [37]  and
         indicated that all the evidence was  considered  in  the  round  at
         [34].  I am nonetheless satisfied that when the decision is read as
         a whole that it contains fundamental errors,  in  relation  to  the
         approach to section 8 and the approach to the  application  of  the
         standard of proof.

      9. Mr Holt submitted that when commencing the  credibility  assessment
         at [39], the First-tier Tribunal did that which  it  is  prohibited
         from doing.  At [39] as a starting  point  and  before  making  any
         other findings or actually considering all the evidence, the First-
         tier Tribunal regarded the appellant's credibility  to  be  damaged
         solely by reason of a matters relevant to section 8 of  the  Asylum
         and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants  etc)  Act  2004.   In  SM
         (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116  the  Tribunal
         cautioned against section 8 considerations  being  treated  as  the
         starting point of the assessment of credibility.  However  it  must
         be acknowledged that credibility findings must start somewhere  and
         it is not an error of law to  merely  start  with  the  appellant's
         failure to  claim  asylum  en  route  to  the  UK.   The  error  of
         significance  is  the  finding  that   this   in   itself   damages
         credibility.

     10. In JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008]  EWCA  Civ  878   Laws  LJ  at  [24]
         recommended reading the  adverb  "potentially"  into  section  8(1)
         before "damaging".  The First-tier Tribunal has  not  adopted  this
         approach.  Right at the beginning and before  considering  all  the
         evidence in the  round  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  that  the
         appellant's failure to claim asylum in countries en route to the UK
         "has damaged his credibility".  There has been  no  acknowledgement
         that such behaviour is capable of damaging credibility but all  the
         evidence must be considered in the round.

     11. I have considered whether this error in approach is saved by  other
         parts of the decision, read as a whole.   I  acknowledge  that  the
         First-tier  Tribunal  considered  the  appellant's  claims  to   be
         implausible and lack  credibility  "overall"  at  [41]  but  it  is
         difficult to know what is meant by the use  of  "overall"  and  the
         extent to which the First-tier  Tribunal  regarded  credibility  as
         already damaged by reason of section 8.  It is  also  difficult  to
         understand why the "overall" finding at [40] comes after  [41]  and
         not before it.  When read  as  a  whole,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         appears to have found the requirements of section 8 to have damaged
         the  appellant's  credibility  before   addressed   its   mind   to
         considering all the evidence in the round.

     12. It is also difficult to  understand  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         regarded  it  as  appropriate  to   decide   "on   a   balance   of
         probabilities" that the appellant is an economic migrant  at  [54].
         Mr Bates invited me to find that this was "added on" and was in  no
         way relevant to the adverse credibility findings.   The  difficulty
         with this submission is that the statement "I decided, on a balance
         of probabilities he is an economic migrant" at [54] raises a number
         of uncertainties.  Why use the expression "decided"? At which point
         was this decision reached? The use of the past tense  implies  that
         the decision was made at an earlier point  in  the  decision.  What
         role did the finding regarding section 8  damage  play?   Was  this
         decided as a result of the failure to claim asylum en route?

     13. There is also some force in the submission at  ground  3  that  the
         appellant provided all the evidence he  possibly  could  about  his
         brother's limited role with the KDPI and the finding  that  he  was
         unclear about it is not reasoned and difficult to follow.

     14. The  First-tier  Tribunal  undoubtedly  made  wide-ranging  adverse
         credibility  findings  at  [42]-[54].   However,   the   First-tier
         Tribunal's approach to section 8 and credibility raises  issues  of
         concern that  when  viewed  together  indicate  that  an  error  of
         approach to credibility that constitutes  an  error  of  law.   The
         correct application of the  standard  of  proof  and  the  correct,
         holistic approach to credibility are  fundamental  requirements  in
         the determination of an asylum appeal.

Disposal

     15. It follows that the conclusion on credibility is vitiated by  error
         of law and unsafe.  The decision must be  remade  entirely  and  de
         novo.  I have had  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  relevant  Senior
         President's Practice Statement and the nature  and  extent  of  the
         factual findings required in remaking  the  decision,  and  I  have
         decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier
         Tribunal.

Decision

     16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.



     17. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
13 July 2017

