
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05474/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18th August 2017                      |On 21st August 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA

                                   Between

                                     BZ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. S Nowaparast,. NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    1. The First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") has made an anonymity order and  for
       the avoidance of any doubt, that order  continues.   BZ  is  granted
       anonymity  throughout  these  proceedings.  No   report   of   these
       proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  her.    This
       direction applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
       Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
       being brought for contempt of court.


    2. This is an appeal against a decision by FtT Judge  Page  promulgated
       on 18th November 2016, in which he allowed  the  appellant's  appeal
       against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department of 20th May 2016, to refuse the claim for asylum made  by
       BZ.


    3. The appellant before me, is the Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
       Department and the respondent to this appeal, is  BZ.  However,  for
       ease of reference in the course of this decision, I shall adopt  the
       parties' status as it was before the FtT.  I shall refer  to  BZ  as
       the appellant, and the Secretary of State, as the respondent.


    4. The appellant is a Pakistani national who first arrived in the UK on
       5th September 2014.  She claimed asylum on 28th January  2016.   Her
       immigration  history  and  the   background   to   her   claim   for
       international protection is set out at paragraphs [2] to [3] of  the
       decision of the FtT.


    5. The FtT Judge heard  evidence  from  the  appellant  and  her  elder
       sister. The Judge found the appellant to be a credible witness.  The
       evidence received by the Judge is set out at paragraphs [11] to [16]
       of his decision. At paragraph [17] of his decision,  the  FtT  Judge
       refers to the decision of SM (lone women -  ostracism)  [2016]  UKUT
       67, in which the Tribunal held that where a risk of  persecution  or
       serious harm exists in the applicant's home area for a single  woman
       or a female head of household, there may be an  internal  relocation
       option to one of Pakistan's larger cities, depending on the  family,
       social and educational situation of  the  woman  in  question.   The
       Judge noted, at [17], that it would not normally be unduly harsh  to
       expect a single woman  or  female  head  of  household  to  relocate
       internally within Pakistan if she can  access  support  from  family
       members or a male guardian in the place of relocation. He also noted
       that a single woman or female head of  household  who  has  no  male
       partner or social network, may be able to  use  the  state  domestic
       violence shelters for a short time, but the focus of  such  shelters
       is on reconciling people  with  their  family  networks,  and  these
       places are in short supply and time is limited.


    6. At paragraphs [18] and [19], the Judge sets out his  findings.   The
       Judge accepted, at [18], the  evidence  of  the  appellant  and  her
       sister that the appellant has been a  victim  of  domestic  violence
       from her husband.  He found that the appellant would be at  risk  in
       Pakistan from her husband's family.  The Judge notes, at  [18],  the
       hostility towards the appellant  from  her  own  family,  of  having
       married someone other than her cousin in an arranged marriage.   The
       Judge found, at [18], that the appellant could not return safely  to
       her home area.  At paragraph [19], the Judge sets  out  his  reasons
       for concluding that the appellant  could  not  reasonably  seek  the
       protection of the state, if she returned  to  her  home  area.   The
       Judge went on to allow the appeal.


    7. The respondent sought permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
       alleging the FtT Judge, whilst referring to the decision in SM (lone
       women - ostracism), failed  to  deal  with  the  issue  of  internal
       relocation, and whether it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant
       and her daughter to live elsewhere in Pakistan.


    8.  Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge  Grant-Hutchinson  on
       13th January 2017. The matter comes before me to consider whether or
       not the decision of FtT Judge Page involved the making of a material
       error of law.


    9. Before me, Mr Richards adopted the grounds of  appeal.   He  submits
       that the scope of the appeal is a narrow one. The respondent accepts
       that the finding of the FtT that  the  appellant  could  not  return
       safely to her home area, is one that was open to the  Judge  on  the
       evidence.  Although the FtT Judge correctly refers  himself  to  the
       guidance in SM, he does not make any finding as to whether it  would
       be reasonable to expect the appellant and her daughter to return  to
       Pakistan and live elsewhere. Mr Richards submits that the failure to
       adequately address the issue of  internal  relocation  is  material,
       because the appellant  is  plainly  a  well-educated  woman  who  is
       capable of  obtaining  good  paid  employment  in  Pakistan  and  of
       supporting herself.  He  submits  it  would  also  be  open  to  the
       appellant to take advantage of an application for assisted voluntary
       return. He submits that the Judge should have considered the  social
       and educational situation of the appellant but does not address  any
       of those matters in his decision.  In failing to do  so,  the  Judge
       erred in law and the error, is capable of affecting the  outcome  of
       the appeal.


   10.  In  reply,  Ms  Nowaparast  submits  that  the  issue  of  internal
       relocation  is,  although  muddled,  considered  by  the  Judge   at
       paragraph [17] of his decision. She submits that the Judge  properly
       recognised that it would not normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a
       single woman or female head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
       within Pakistan, if she can access support from family members or  a
       male guardian. The Judge noted that alternatively, a single woman or
       female head of household who has no male partner or social  network,
       may be able to use the state's  domestic  violence  shelters  for  a
       short time, but the focus of such shelters is on reconciling  people
       with their family networks. The judge found, at paragraph [17], that
       there appears little hope of  reconciliation  with  the  appellant's
       family.  She submits that the  Judge  effectively  accepts  that  as
       there is little hope of reconciliation with the appellant's  family,
       she would be  unable  to  turn  to  the  state's  domestic  violence
       shelters, and thus she could not live elsewhere in Pakistan.


   11. Ms Nowaparast accepts that in reaching his decision, the  FtT  judge
       makes no reference to the appellant's  education  or  the  resources
       that might be available to her and her daughter,  if  they  were  to
       live elsewhere in Pakistan.


 Discussion


   12. I have carefully read the decision of the FtT.  I  accept  that  the
       Judge correctly refers, at [17], to  the  relevant  decision  of  SM
       (lone women - ostracism).  I reject the submission by Ms  Nowaparast
       that the issue of internal relocation is  adequately  considered  by
       the Judge at paragraph [17] of  his  decision.   Importantly  in  my
       judgment, at paragraph [17] of his decision, the Judge states:


             ".... I approach this case on the footing that  the  appellant
             could theoretically return to Pakistan and seek the protection
             of the state if she has no family or social network to  return
             to that could support  her.  On  the  appellant's  case  there
             appears little hope of reconciliation with her family  so  the
             question is whether it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
             appellant to return to Pakistan and live like  this  with  her
             daughter."


   13. Having identified at paragraph [17] that "the question is whether it
       would be reasonable to expect the appellant to  return  to  Pakistan
       and live like this with her daughter", the Judge  does  not  address
       that question in his decision.  At paragraph [18], the  Judge  found
       that the appellant could not return safely to her home area, for the
       reasons that appear at paragraph [19].  However, the Judge does  not
       then address whether it would be unduly harsh for the appellant  and
       her daughter to live elsewhere in Pakistan.  He  does  not  consider
       whether the internal relocation option is open to the appellant.


   14. The failure to deal with the question of internal relocation does in
       my judgement disclose a material error of law in the decision of the
       FtT that is capable of affecting the outcome  of  the  appeal.   The
       parties are agreed that the nature and extent of any judicial  fact-
       finding necessary with regard to that issue will  be  extensive  and
       the matter should be remitted to the FtT.


   15. The decision needs to be re-made and  I  have  decided  that  it  is
       appropriate to remit this appeal back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
       having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of  the  Senior  President's
       Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.


   16. The following findings are preserved;


          a. The appellant been a  victim  of  domestic  violence  from  her
             husband; [18]


          b. The appellant could not return safely to her home area; [18]


 Notice of Decision


   17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


   18. The matter is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.


Signed                                  Date     18th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia








FEE AWARD


As I have set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  remitted
the matter for re-hearing I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Date     18th August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







