
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/05238/2018
     PA/05239/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th October 2018                           |On 23rd October 2018          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                      mrs farah sadiq - first appellant
                  Mr abdul bassit sadiq - second appellant
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr Moksud, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are Pakistani nationals.  The  first  Appellant  is  the
    mother of the second Appellant.  They came to  the  United  Kingdom  on
    18th October 2011 as dependants of their husband/father  who  had  been
    given leave to enter as a Tier 2 Migrant.   Their  immigration  history
    thereinafter is extensively set out at paragraphs 2 to 4 of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge's decision.   The  Appellants  had  claimed  asylum
    contending they had a well-founded fear of persecution in  Pakistan  on
    the basis of a non-Convention reason namely that of fear  of  a  family
    member, the second Appellant's uncle.  Those applications were  refused
    by Notice of Refusal dated 8th April 2018.

 2. The Appellants appealed and the appeals came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Alis sitting at  Manchester  on  22nd  May  2018.   In  a
    detailed  decision  and  reasons  extending  to   93   paragraphs   the
    Appellants' appeals for protection and under Article 3 were dismissed.

 3. On 6th June 2018 Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    On 25th June 2013 Judge I D Boyes granted permission to appeal.   Judge
    Boyes noted that the grounds assert that the judge erred in failing  to
    give sufficient reasons, by finding that the delay was significant, not
    referring to objective evidence, by  speculating  and  failing  in  the
    Article 8 assessment.  It is relevant to note that the only ground that
    permission  to  appeal  was  allowed  upon  was  Ground  5,  i.e.  that
    pertaining to speculation.  Judge Boyes noted this ground  referred  to
    paragraphs 68 and 69 of the decision and held  in  granting  permission
    that they were arguably unfair and incorrect but did note that  whether
    they were material to the overall decision would remain in the  balance
    but that that alone would not make them unarguable.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is any material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellants appear  by  their  legal
    representative, Mr Maksud.  Mr Maksud  is  familiar  with  this  matter
    having appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and is, I  believe,  the
    author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by her
    Home Office Presenting Officer, Mr Bates.

Permission/Discussion

 5. Mr Maksud acknowledges this appeal turned entirely on whether the judge
    has erred in paragraphs 68 and 69 of his decision.  He takes me through
    them and particularly seeks to rely on the finding set out in the final
    two sentences at paragraph 68 that:

         "However, when he was recalled by his employers it seems a decision
         was taken for the three  youngest  children  and  their  mother  to
         remain in the United Kingdom so that the  children  could  continue
         their education here and he continued to support his family."

    He submits that that was not the  intention  and  that  the  judge  has
    speculated as to reasons.  Further he contends that so far as the claim
    pursuant to Article 8 is concerned, the judge has not followed the step-
    by-step approach set out in Razgar and  consequently  has  fallen  into
    error.

 6. Mr Bates in response submits that the reasoning  of  Mr  Maksud  is  in
    itself in error because the contention that the Appellants'  claim  had
    been made because the family wanted to stay in the  United  Kingdom  so
    the children could continue their education and continue to  live  here
    had been brought to the Tribunal's attention by Miss Newton,  the  Home
    Office Presenting Officer when making her submissions on behalf of  the
    Secretary of State.  Consequently, it had already been flagged up  that
    it was "a live issue" in the appeal.

 7. Mr Bates submits that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had  given  cogent
    reasons for rejecting the Appellant's protection claim at paragraphs 52
    to 56 and that the judge's finding was  not  one  of  speculation.   He
    states that there is consequently no error of law.

 8. He then goes on to submit that Mr Maksud's only outstanding  submission
    relates to the position under Article 8 and he reminds me Article 8 had
    to be considered outside the Rules  and  that  the  children  were  not
    qualifying children and therefore the only issue extant was the  public
    interest and that the judge had dealt with this  perfectly  adequately.
    He submits there are no material errors of law and asked me to  dismiss
    the appeal.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. It is appropriate to start with the findings of Judge Boyes in granting
    permission.  The grant of permission is on a very narrow  basis  indeed
    namely a suggestion that there might have been speculation by the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge in his findings at paragraphs 68 and 69.  Mr Maksud
    acknowledged that everything therein is factually correct save for  the
    contention that the decision to leave the Appellant in the  UK  by  her
    husband with the three youngest children so that  they  could  continue
    their education.  It is not a matter of speculation by the judge in the
    way he has addressed it.  Firstly, he has made reference  to  the  fact
    that it was  evidenced  by  the  previous  decision  of  the  Tribunal,
    secondly as Mr Bates  points  out,  and  indeed  the  judge  refers  at
    paragraph 45, the basis upon which the Appellants remained  in  the  UK
    was one that had been raised by the Home Office Presenting Officer  and
    was a live issue before the judge upon which he made reasoned findings.

12. There is nothing whatsoever wrong with the analysis made by the  judge.
    He has made clear findings of fact and given  reasons.   To  a  certain
    extent it would be possible for me to end the decision here because the
    arguments that are made pursuant to Article 8 do not appear  ones  that
    have been the subject of a grant of permission to appeal.  However,  Mr
    Maksud raised them and Mr Bates does not object to them.   However,  Mr
    Bates is perfectly correct in his analysis in that the manner in  which
    the judge had to address Article 8 was outside the Rules and  that  the
    judge quite properly has addressed and had regard to  Section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.  The only issue extant was that of public interest and as
    has previously been stated in the Court of Appeal in  EV  (Philippines)
    it is not the responsibility of the UK to educate the  world  and  that
    the best interests of the children would be to be with  their  parents.
    The test  is  not  one  of  reasonableness.   These  issues  are  fully
    considered by the judge in paragraphs 84 to 91.  This is a decision  by
    an extremely  experienced  judge.   His  decision  throughout  is  well
    explained and his findings of fact are all based on  reasons  which  he
    was perfectly justified and entitled to make.  The  decision  discloses
    no material error of law and for all the above reasons the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    is maintained.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and is dismissed and the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
is maintained.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.

Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


