
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05245/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 January 2020                   |On 02 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     B E
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, Solicitor instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Background:

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. She was issued with a 3-year
    Tier 2 (Minister of Religion) visa on 27 October 2014 to carry out
    missionary work.  She claims to have entered the UK in February 2016
    but returned to Nigeria on the 15 October 2016. It is stated that she
    had a disagreement with her convent and returned to the UK using her
    visa although she was not working in the capacity of that visa on her
    return. On 26 May 2017 the appellant claimed asylum.

 2. On 9 April 2018 the respondent served a notice of immigration decision,
    together with the detailed reasons for refusal letter refusing her
    claim for international protection and on human rights grounds. An
    appeal was lodged, and the appeal came before the FtT on 11 July 2019.

 3. In a decision promulgated on the 18th July 2019   the FtTJ dismissed
    the protection claim but allowed the appeal on Article 3 (medical)
    grounds and in the alternative allowed the appeal for the same reasons
    on Article 8 grounds.

 4. The Secretary of State appealed against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Hands) ("FtTJ") promulgated on the 18th July 2019
    allowing her appeal against the decision to refuse her human rights
    claim. Permission to appeal was granted on the 20th August 2019.

 5. There was also a cross-appeal as the appellant also applied for
    permission to appeal to challenge the FtTJ's decision where the Judge
    dismissed her protection claim.

 6. The appeal came before the Upper Tribunal on the 30 October 2019. I had
    the advantage of hearing submissions from each of the advocates and
    reserved my decision at the conclusion of the hearing.

 7. In a decision promulgated on the 19 November 2019 I gave my decision on
    the appeal and the cross-appeal before me. There is a copy of that
    decision attached and marked "Appendix 1" and this decision should be
    read alongside that decision.

 8. In summary, I reached the conclusion that there was no error of law in
    the assessment made of the protection claim and the decision of the
    FtTJ to dismiss the appeal set out my reasons for this.

 9. As to the cross-appeal brought by the respondent I reached the
    conclusion that the FtTJ erred in law when reaching the decision that
    on the facts of this particular  case that it would reach the high
    threshold for a breach of Article 3.

10. As to the alternative finding made by the FtTJ whereby she allowed the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds (see paragraph [49]), in my judgement the
    FtTJ erred in law in her assessment of Article 8. By reference to the
    relevant case law cited in the error of law decision, it shows that
    absent a combination of other circumstances that might be relevant to
    an assessment under Article 8 of the European Convention the threshold
    is equally high. I could find no other elements identified by the FtTJ
    other than the issue of medical treatment or lack of it. Article 8
    could not prosper without some separate or additional factual element
    which brought the case within the Article 8 and none was identified
    here. The appellant's length of residence in the UK was relatively
    short having entered in 2016.  The FtTJ did not consider the Rules and
    whether she could meet them ( based on length of residence and whether
    were any very significant obstacles to her reintegration)  and it does
    not appear to have been submitted on the appellant's behalf that she
    could meet the rules as the FtTJ made reference to the claim made
    outside the Rules at [44].

11. I also reached the conclusion that whilst the FtTJ purported to apply
    the S117 public interest considerations, the FtTJ did not carry out any
    proper analysis as the respondent's grounds set out. There was no
    weighing in the balance of the appellant's inability to meet the Rules
    as to private life and that there were no very significant obstacles to
    her reintegration. The FtTJ did not place in the balance when assessing
    the issue of effective immigration control of the cost of the treatment
    and the continuing financial  burden nor did the FtTJ place in the
    balance the adverse findings made as set out at paragraphs [24] and
    [25].

12. Whilst I considered that it may be reasonable to assume that she has
    established some form of private life here since 2016, there was little
    evidence to suggest that she has established particularly strong
    connections. She had no family in the UK. The appellant's length of
    residence was not a compelling factor, even taken with her medical
    condition, which would elevate the circumstances to the threshold that
    might be required to show a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

13. I was therefore satisfied that the decision of the FtTJ involved the
    making of an error on a point of law and I set aside her decision to
    allow the appeal on Article 3 and on Article 8 grounds.

14. For the reasons given in my decision and on the factual basis of her
    claim, I found that it fell far short of establishing breach of Article
    3 and I therefore dismissed the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

15. I had also set out my reasons as to why the decision to dismiss her
    appeal on the protection claim involved no error and I therefore upheld
    the decision in this respect.

16. This left the only issue as to Article 8. It had not been made clear by
    Ms Brakaj whether there has been any change in the position of the
    appellant and for the reasons set out above, the FtTJ did not carry out
    a full proportionality balance. In the circumstances, the appeal was
    listed for the parties' advocates to give their submissions concerning
    Article 8.

The re-making of the decision:

The Submissions:

17. Miss Brakaj on behalf of the appellant confirmed that there had been no
    changes in the appellant's circumstances and there was no new medical
    evidence for the Tribunal to consider. She did not seek to call the
    appellant to give evidence and was content for the appeal to be remade
    based on the submissions of the advocates only.

18. She submitted that the central issue was the appellant's medical
    condition. She had been admitted to hospital in Nigeria 13 years ago
    and had two significant episodes in the UK leading to 2 admissions made
    under the MH Act both of which had involved expressing strong religious
    beliefs to 3rd parties. She was therefore diagnosed with schizophrenia
    (see letter July 2019 from the psychiatric nurse) and that without the
    required medication she would relapse.

19. Ms Brakaj submitted that she had gained a level of stability in the UK
    living a productive life. She had a faith which she wished to follow
    and that there is a safety net of assistance for her if she had a
    relapse. This will be significantly different in Nigeria where she was
    told that this was a "spiritual" matter and not given medication.

20. The appellant has now had a diagnosis and therefore the likely
    treatment she would receive on return is an issue. She submitted that
    there is a history of correctional psychiatry in Nigeria and there was
    a risk that offenders who have mental illness are now treated in prison
    even when found "not guilty by reason of insanity" (see p37). There is
    one psychiatrist in the Nigerian prison service. She therefore
    submitted that this evidence did not shown an ability to recognise that
    the appellant is not an offender or that the behaviour is as a result
    of a mental illness and therefore there is no effective way to ensure
    that she is not characterised as an offender. Therefore, there is a
    disproportionate breach of Article 8 on the basis that the appellant is
    very religious and would be prevented from being so and facing the
    stigma of being characterised as an offender when she is not.

21. When looking at the likelihood of accessing mental health treatment,
    she submitted that there was a lack of up-to-date medication, there was
    a lack of mental health facilities, there were inadequacies in the
    system and a lack of trained providers. There was widespread
    counterfeit medication (see page 44) and the appellant requires care in
    the community and there is no indication that that would be available
    to her. There is a high cost of treatment and Nigeria has an
    overstretched civil society. There are difficulties concerning NGO's
    and the prevalence of counterfeit drugs and thus the appellant will be
    in the same position.

22. At p.45 the material makes reference to the lack of family support and
    the difficulties of navigating the mental health care system would be
    far harder for an individual without family support and at page 46
    there is reference to people suffering from mental health disorders
    facing high levels of discrimination from healthcare professionals at a
    local level as well as in the wider community. The material makes
    reference to the intense stigma that surrounds mental health in Nigeria
    being rooted in spiritual and religious beliefs and that there is a
    risk that with a diagnosis it would be believed that it is a spiritual
    issue and would give rise to a risk in the future. At page 52 of the
    bundle there is reference to women being trafficked into prostitution.

23. In summary she submitted that there was a severe shortage mental health
    professionals and there would be difficulties in accessing care for the
    appellant. There is a prevalence of counterfeit drugs and there is a
    risk that if she had an episode, she would then fall into the criminal
    justice system without a safety net. There was evidence that this
    happened in Nigeria in the past where it was diagnosed as a spiritual
    issue. When looking at the previous two occasions when she had
    relapses, they were not anticipated. There is a risk that if they were
    not picked up in the UK then it is likely that that would happen in
    Nigeria and this would amount to a breach of her private life and a
    breach of her ability to care for herself and be a useful member of the
    community.

24. Ms Brakaj submitted that this was a private life case and that return
    to Nigeria presently would be a disproportionate breach of Article 8.
    There would be very significant obstacles to her reintegration to
    Nigeria as she would not be able to live independently and would live
    with the fear of potential prosecution as a result of a mental illness
    and would not be able to access effective treatment to enable her to
    enjoy any private life in Nigeria.

25. Ms Petterson on behalf of the respondent submitted that in relation to
    her mental health, the evidence set out in the document dated 10/7/19
    set out the history and that she had been discharged in March 2019 and
    had remained concordant with her medication since that date. She is
    looked after by the community mental health team and they continue to
    monitor her. There is no evidence that since that date there has been
    any further relapse and she has continued to take her medication.
    According to the character reference she has been able to perform
    voluntary work in the UK.

26. Whilst it was submitted that she would be unable to have access to
    medication due to counterfeit drugs and the risks of the criminal
    justice system, the medication which the appellant is taking is
    olanzapine which is available and there is no reason why she could not
    take a supply with her from the United Kingdom to assist her in
    ensuring she obtains her medication. The evidence set out in the
    decision letter demonstrate the medication that the appellant is taking
    is widely available in Nigeria and it is speculative to suggest that
    the appellant would not be able to take that medication and have a
    relapse.

27. The FtTJ did find that the appellant had family support and that was
    shown by the email from her brother which was included in part of the
    evidence. The judge also rejected the appellant's claim of being the
    subject of forced marriage and therefore it cannot be suggested that
    the family would not support her. The appellant has been in contact
    with her brother and other relatives and will have their support in
    Nigeria to access any medical needs, to access appropriate medication
    to help treat the condition.

28. Ms Petterson submitted that whilst it had been said the appellant had
    an episode whilst living in Nigeria, that was 13 years ago, and there
    had been a long spell in Nigeria where she was not taking medication
    but had no relapse since the admission in 2006. It is therefore
    speculative to say that she would have a relapse.

29. When looking at the material relied upon by the appellant at pages 51 -
    52 of the bundle, that has no relevance to this appellant; it is not
    the appellant's case that she has ever fell into a category of a
    trafficked woman nor does she believe that she is under any form of
    curse.

30. Ms Petterson submitted that the appellant's condition is not such that
    there would be very significant obstacles to her reintegration. She has
    spent 36 years of her life there and has only been in the United
    Kingdom since November 2016. Whilst it is accepted that she has an
    illness and is currently accessing medical treatment, there is little
    evidence that she has a strong private life to overcome the public
    interest in returning to Nigeria.

31. Whilst it was submitted on behalf of the appellant that there was a
    lack of a safety net in Nigeria, the appellant will have family support
    who will be able to provide her with support to live in the community.
    Therefore, despite the acknowledgement that the appellant does have a
    medical condition for which she received treatment; this is
    insufficient to demonstrate a breach of Article 8.

32. By way of reply Ms Brakaj submitted that this is a long-term illness
    and that even if the family were minded to source the medication there
    is a prevalence of counterfeit drugs. She submitted that there was no
    indication the family have any position with the authorities to obtain
    drugs and even if there was family support they were in no different
    position from general members of society and should be viewed in this
    way.

33. She submitted that there was evidence that when the appellant did not
    take a drug, she would have a relapse (as set out in the medical
    notes). The appellant has a denial of relapse and requires help to take
    medication. There is also the issue that her symptoms do not always
    provide it with the knowledge that there is to be a relapse, and this
    will be relevant to taking incorrect drugs which would lead to
    difficulties for the appellant on return.

34. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my decision.

The legal framework:

35. The only ground of appeal available to the appellant is that the
    respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of the Human Rights Act
    1998. As to the Article 8 claim, the burden of proof is upon the
    appellant to show, on the balance of probabilities, that she has
    established a family or private life and that her removal from the UK
    as a result of the respondent's decision, would interfere with that
    right. It is then for the respondent to justify any interference
    caused. The respondent's decision must be in accordance with the law
    and must be a proportionate response in all the circumstances. If
    Article 8 is engaged, the Tribunal may need to look at the extent to
    which an appellant is said to have failed to meet the requirements of
    the rules, because that may inform the proportionality balancing
    exercise that must follow.

36. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017] UKSC 11
    confirms that the fact that the immigration rules cannot be met, does
    not absolve decision makers from carrying out a full merits-based
    assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate issue
    is whether a fair balance has been struck between the individual and
    public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.
    17.

37. As to the human rights claim on Article 8 grounds, I adopt the approach
    set out by Lord Bingham in Razgar [2014] UKHL 27. I must first
    determine whether Article 8 of the ECHR is engaged at all. If Article 8
    is engaged, I should go on to consider the remaining four stages
    identified in Razgar.

38. Part 5A of the NIAA 2002 applies where a court or tribunal is required
    to determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts
    breaches a person's right to private or family life and as a result is
    unlawful under the Human Rights Act 1998. In considering the 'public
    interest question' a court or tribunal must have regard to the issues
    outlined in section 117B in non-deportation cases. The 'public interest
    question' means the question of whether interference with a person's
    right to respect for their private or family life is justified under
    Article 8(2) of the European Convention.

39.   Part 5A provides in relevant part as follows:

         "PART 5A

         ARTICLE 8 OF THE ECHR: PUBLIC INTEREST CONSIDERATIONS

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or tribunal is required to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right to respect for private and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result, would be unlawful under section 6 of the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public interest question, the court or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the considerations listed in section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest question" means the
         question of whether an interference with a person's right to
         respect for private and family life is justified under Article
         8(2).




         117B Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all
         cases

         (1)  The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.

         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-

             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-

             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and

             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.

         (4)  Little weight should be given to-

             (a)  a private life, or

             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.

         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-

             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom.

Discussion:

40. The appellant does not rely upon any family life established in the
    United Kingdom. Her claim is solely advanced on behalf of her private
    life established in the United Kingdom and on the submissions made on
    her behalf by Ms Brakaj the claim based on her private life relates
    solely to her medical condition.  Article 8 of the European Convention
    protects the right to 'physical and moral integrity', which can include
    a person's health: see Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10.

41. Therefore Article 8 is engaged.  I also find that the decision to
    refuse the appellant leave to remain may have consequences of such
    gravity as potentially to engage the operation of Article 8. I accept
    that the interference is in accordance with the law, and that the
    interference is necessary to protect the legitimate aim of immigration
    control and the economic well-being of the country. The issue in this
    appeal, as is often the case, is whether the interference is
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved.

42. The appellant's ability to satisfy the immigration rules is not the
    question to be determined by the Tribunal, but is capable of being a
    weighty, though not determinative factor, when deciding whether such
    refusal is proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration
    control.

43. The appellant cannot satisfy the requirements for leave to remain under
    paragraph 276ADE in relation to hr private life.  The appellant has
    lived in the UK since 2016  and as such, the appellant has not been
    resident in the UK for a period of 20 years, so she does not meet the
    private life requirement contained in paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the
    Immigration Rules.

44. It is submitted by Ms Brakaj is that her medical condition is a "very
    significant obstacle to her reintegration."

45. There is no dispute that the appellant became known to the mental
    health services in the UK in 2017 when she was detained under section 2
    of the Mental Health Act after having a psychotic episode where the
    medical records refer to her presenting as having fixed ideas about
    religion and politics. Following what appears to be a diagnosis of
    schizophrenia, she was discharged and prescribed medication. Since that
    discharge the appellant has had two relapses; the first in 2017 where
    she forcibly removed a woman's hijab and in January 2019 after she
    failed to take her medication for a period since June 2018. She was
    discharged in March 2019 (from January 2019) and has had no relapse
    since that time and has remained concordant with her medication and is
    monitored by the community health team (see letter dated 10/7/19). No
    further medical evidence has been provided and Ms Brakaj confirms that
    she has had no further relapses since that date.

46. Whilst it is submitted that she had an episode whilst living in
    Nigeria, the evidence in the reports make reference to that having
    taken place 13 years ago and after that time the appellant was able to
    function well in Nigeria to the extent that she was able to obtain
    further qualifications and underwent training in a convent which sent
    her to the United Kingdom to undertake missionary work for which she
    obtained visas in 2016.

47. It is submitted on behalf of the appellant that she would be unable to
    access treatment in Nigeria. Ms Brakaj relies upon country material set
    out in the appellant's bundle which she concedes also includes historic
    evidence from 2015. I have considered that evidence alongside the
    material relied upon the respondent set out in the CPIN Nigeria:
    medical and healthcare issues version 2.0 28 August 2018.

48. The Nigerian health system is organised into primary, secondary and
    tertiary healthcare levels. Primary health care consists of local
    healthcare such as local clinics and dispensaries and is the first
    point of contact for many people and the responsibility of the local
    government area. Secondary healthcare institutions such as general
    hospitals provide specialist healthcare and are the responsibility of
    the state government. The provision of mental health care consists of
    government services in large tertiary institutions such as psychiatric
    hospitals and universities in hospitals in large cities. The material
    in the appellant's bundle at (page 41) is consistent with the
    respondent's CPIN at paragraph 9.1.1 that there are eight
    neuropsychiatry hospitals throughout the country and each of the
    accredited medical schools and the attached teaching hospital as a
    psychiatric department. There are six state owned mental hospitals
    financed and managed by various state governments. According to the Med
    COI country contact, the treatment of mental illness as provided for in
    public hospitals. There is no form of mental illness for which
    treatment is not available in Nigeria.

49. At page 42, reference is made to the gradual practice of introducing
    mental healthcare into a broader range of institutions including
    community clinics, health centres and health posts although this
    integration has taken effect in only 10 - 15 of the 175 local
    government areas across the country (in 2017). There is also reference
    made to the neuropsychiatric hospitals being concentrated in the major
    cities. There is reference in the FtTJ's decision at [27) that the
    appellant has family members in Lagos. There is also reference to Enugu
    State which also has a psychiatric hospital.

50. However, the CPIN and the report set out in relation to mental health
    services in Nigeria report at page 41) refers to the large number of
    patients and that there is a shortage of specialists available to meet
    Psychosocial care (see page 44). Ms Brakaj has also referred Tribunal
    to page 44 with reference to the difficulties with counterfeit drugs
    and the lack of effective regulation of medication. There is also
    reference made to those who suffer from mental health disorders is
    facing high levels of discrimination from healthcare professionals and
    for the wider community (page 46) and that there is a stigma which
    surrounds mental health which is hosted in spiritual and religious
    beliefs (see page 46).

51. When making an assessment of country materials I take into account that
    whilst there are difficulties in accessing mental health care in
    Nigeria as demonstrated by the material, there are facilities which
    identify the availability of both inpatient and outpatient treatment by
    psychiatric and psychological public facilities and that
    psychological/psychiatric counselling in addition to psychiatric nurses
    and care in the home is available in Nigeria (some by way of private
    facilities).

52. The material also makes it plain that navigating the mental health
    system is far harder for someone without family support and that such
    engagement has proved to be critically important for the success of
    mental health treatment (see page 45 - 46).

53. On the facts of this appeal, the appellant has the advantage of support
    and assistance from close family members who reside in Nigeria. The
    FtTJ referred to her parents, and those siblings include her sister and
    brother (at [27]). The presenting officers note previously provided
    sets out the appellant's evidence that she had five siblings in Nigeria
    and on her own account, is in touch with her brother who provided
    evidence for the appeal itself. In light of the finding of fact made
    that the appellant was not at risk of forced marriage nor that there
    were problems relating to her parents, no protection needs were
    identified in Nigeria which would undermine any support or assistance
    family members could provide for the appellant.

54. Whilst Ms Brakaj submitted that family members the appellant has in
    Nigeria should be viewed as "general members of the population" that is
    not reflected in the evidence. The appellant has a sister who is a
    nurse and a reasonable inference raised from that is that she would
    have some knowledge of accessing medical care which could be utilised
    in establishing a care regime or providing support.

55. Ms Brakaj also referred to an article concerning "corrective psychiatry
    in Nigeria" (dated 19/3/2018 at p37AB). She submits that the evidence
    demonstrates that if she had a psychotic episode that she would be
    arrested and placed in prison and treated harshly. She relies upon the
    episode in the UK in 2017 where she forcibly removed a woman's hijab. I
    accept the submission made by Ms Petterson that such submission is
    speculative and is not based on the factual circumstances of the
    appellant. That incident and the later one took place against the
    background of the appellant living alone in the United Kingdom and as
    someone who did not have the close family support that she would have
    available in Nigeria. This also provides the "safety net" which the
    community team provide currently. Nor does it take into account the
    large gaps in her medical history where the appellant has been able to
    live and function without any relapses which suggest that her family
    had been able to supervise and closely monitor her behaviour and assist
    her with any mental health issues she had experienced.

56. The country materials also demonstrate that the medication prescribed
    is available in Nigeria (see appendix A of the CPIN).

57. In my assessment, I am not satisfied that it is been demonstrated that
    she would face 'very significant obstacles' to her integration there
    for the purpose of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi). The appellant was born in
    Nigeria and has spent most of her life there. It is likely that she
    will continue to have cultural, linguistic and other ties there,
    including her family members. The material that out above demonstrates
    also that there is medical treatment for mental health conditions
    available in Nigeria, although it is noted that there are difficulties
    in that regard and that her geographical location in either Enugu state
    or Lagos are in areas where treatment is accessible and available.

58.  Whilst Article 8 of the European Convention protects the right to
    'physical and moral integrity', which can include a person's health:
    see Bensaid v UK (2001) 33 EHRR 10,  unlike Article 3, Article 8 is not
    an absolute right.

59. I have previously set out the relevant decisions in this area of law. I
    have not been addressed upon them by either advocate at this hearing.

60. In her submissions Ms Brakaj has not been able to identify any
    additional factors that might engage Article 8 beyond her submissions
    based on the appellant's medical condition.

61. The relevant authorities demonstrate that the threshold for showing a
    breach of Article 8 solely on medical grounds is equally high: see GS
    (India) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 and MM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2012] EWCA
    Civ 279. The Court of Appeal in SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    1894 concluded that the decision in Paposhvili did not affect this
    principle ( at [27]):

         "27. ... I am entirely unpersuaded that Paposhvili has any impact
         on the approach to article 8 claims. As I have described, it
         concerns the threshold of severity for article 3 claims; and, at
         least to an extent, as accepted in AM (Zimbabwe), it appears to
         have altered the European test for such threshold. However, there
         is no reason in logic or practice why that should affect the
         threshold for, or otherwise the approach to, article 8 claims in
         which the relevant individual has a medical condition. As I have
         indicated and as GS (India) emphasises, article 8 claims have a
         different focus and are based upon entirely different criteria. In
         particular, article 8 is not article 3 with merely a lower
         threshold: it does not provide some sort of safety net where a
         medical case fails to satisfy the article 3 criteria. An absence of
         medical treatment in the country of return will not in itself
         engage article 8. The only relevance to article 8 of such an
         absence will be where that is an additional factor in the balance
         with other factors which themselves engage article 8 (see (MM
         (Zimbabwe) at [23] per Sales LJ). Where an individual has a medical
         condition for which he has the benefit of treatment in this
         country, but such treatment may not be available in the country to
         which he may be removed, where (as here) article 3 is not engaged,
         then the position is as it was before Paposhvili, i.e. the fact
         that a person is receiving treatment here which is not available in
         the country of return may be a factor in the proportionality
         balancing exercise but that factor cannot by itself give rise to a
         breach of article 8. Indeed, it has been said that, in striking
         that balance, only the most compelling humanitarian considerations
         are likely to prevail over legitimate aims of immigration control
         (see Razgar at [59] per Baroness Hale).

         28.  Therefore, in my firm view, the approach set out in MM
         (Zimbabwe) and GS (India) is unaltered by Paposhvili; and is still
         appropriate. I do not consider the contrary is arguable. "

62. In GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana) and KK
    (DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40 it was held that if the Article 3 claim
    failed, Article 8 could not prosper without some separate or additional
    factual element which brought the case within the Article 8 paradigm:
    the core value protected being the quality of life, not its
    continuance. That meant that a specific case must be made under Article
    8. The rigour of the D exception for the purpose of Article 3 in such
    cases as these applied with no less force when the claim was put under
    Article 8.

63. Although the UK courts have declined to state that Article 8 could
    never be engaged by the health consequences of removal from the UK, the
    circumstances would have to be truly exceptional before such a breach
    could be established (paras 45, 85 - 87 and 106 - 111). At paragraph
    111, Underhill LJ said this "First, the absence or inadequacy of
    medical treatment, even life-preserving treatment, in the country of
    return, cannot be relied on at all as a factor engaging Article 8: if
    that is all there is, the claim must fail. Secondly, where Article 8 is
    engaged by other factors, the fact that the claimant is receiving
    medical treatment in this country which may not be available in the
    country of return may be a factor in the proportionality exercise; but
    that factor cannot be treated as by itself giving rise to a breach
    since that would contravene the 'no obligation to treat' principle."

64. In SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 the Court of Appeal
    commented that the focus and structure of Article 8 is different from
    Article 3. They were unpersuaded that Paposhvili had any impact on the
    approach to Article 8 claims. An absence of medical treatment in the
    country of return would not of itself engage Article 8. The only
    relevance would be where that was an additional factor with other
    factors which themselves engaged Article 8. The decision in Razgar was
    referred to for the proposition that only the most compelling
    humanitarian considerations were likely to prevail over legitimate aims
    of immigration control. The approach set out in MM (Zimbabwe) and GS
    (India) was unaltered by Paposhvili.

65. On the material before the Tribunal there is the availability of
    medication and treatment in Nigeria whilst I accept that it may not be
    the same level of treatment available in the UK. On the facts of this
    appeal it is also the case that combined with the availability of
    treatment and medication is the family support available to the
    appellant in Nigeria from her close family members. The evidence before
    the FtTJ demonstrated that there was a wide extended family and that
    her sister was a nurse which contrasts with the position that she has
    in the United Kingdom where the support she has is from the community
    services.  That would provide the "safety net" which Ms Brakaj referred
    to and demonstrates that she would not be left wholly unsupported on
    return to Nigeria.

66. When considering the public interest considerations set out in Section
    117 A-D, the maintenance of effective immigration control is in the
    public interest, alongside the  point relied upon by Ms Petterson is
    that the courts have stated that signatory states to the European
    Convention do not have an obligation to treat non-nationals and that
    this is factor in favour of the public interest. The appellant can
    speak English but is not financially independent although a character
    reference was provided which referred to offering her employment. The
    short private life that she has established in the United Kingdom was
    at a time when her status was "precarious" therefore should be afforded
    little weight (see Rhuppiah v. Secretary of State for the Home
    Department [2018] UKSC 58). The private life that she has established
    by way of reliance upon medical treatment could be re-established in
    Nigeria.

67. When considering the applicable case law, it shows that absent a
    combination of other circumstances that might be relevant to an
    assessment under Article 8 of the European Convention the threshold is
    equally high when the issue is that of medical treatment, which is the
    only issue advanced on behalf of the appellant.

68. On the evidence before this Tribunal I can find no other elements
    beyond the appellant's medical condition and as set out earlier in the
    decision, Article 8 cannot not prosper without some separate or
    additional factual element which brought the case within the Article 8
    and none have been identified by Ms Brakaj. Therefore, taking into
    account the matters set out above and in light of the legal authorities
    I have had regard to,  I have reached the conclusion that it has not
    been demonstrated that return to Nigeria would be a disproportionate
    breach of Article 8 and that consequently the decision made would be
    unlawful under Section 6 of the HRA 1998.



Notice of Decision

69. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law and
    the decision to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds and Article 8
    grounds is set aside. I do not set aside the decision to dismiss the
    appeal on protection grounds as that part of the decision does not
    demonstrate the making of an error on a point of law.

70. I re-make the decision by dismissing the appellant's appeal on Article
    3 and Article 8 grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies both to the
Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Date 25/2/2020
