

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05940/2017
                                                               PA/05848/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 February 2018                          |On 23 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                       MR MURTADHA AMEEN ABDULHUSSEIN
                    MRS JENNA MOHAMMED HUSSAIN AL MUSAWI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ceesay of Immigration Advisory Services,
Manchester.
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellants are related as a mother and son. The first appellant
        was born on 18 May 1996 the second appellant on  2  February  1962.
        Both are citizens of Iraq. They appeal with permission against  the
        decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew Davies promulgated  on
        7 August 2017 in which the Judge  dismissed  the  appeals  on  both
        protection and human rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellants are  Shia  Arab  Muslims  from  Baghdad.  The  first
        appellant's father is an accountant. The  family  are  said  to  be
        affluent in Iraq. In 2014 the appellant applied for a visit visa to
        the United Kingdom although the applications  were  refused  by  an
        Entry Clearance Officer.  The appellants successfully appealed  the
        refusal to the Upper Tribunal. In November 2015 the first appellant
        began an undergraduate programme of  study  in  philosophy  at  the
        University of Baghdad. The first  appellant  claims  that  sometime
        around December 2015 he was heard criticising Iraqi militias  in  a
        conversation with another student as  a  result  of  which  he  was
        attacked and beaten up by two men, believed to be  members  of  the
        militia. The first appellant  claimed  that  when  the  attack  was
        stopped by other people present the two men threatened that if  the
        first appellant was ever seen at the  University  again  he  should
        "consider himself dead".
     3. The Judge records the respondent's case and evidence  given  before
        setting out findings of  fact  from  [21]  of  the  decision  under
        appeal. The Judge is critical of  the  evidence  given.  The  Judge
        considers the country guidance case of AA (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
        944 at [39] of the decision under challenge.
     4. At [40 - 41] the Judge finds:

             "40.     I am satisfied that the account  given  by  A1  lacks
                  credibility and plausibility for the reasons  I  have  set
                  out above. A2 was less than impressive witness who had  to
                  be reminded on occasion to deal with the questions put  to
                  her. I dismiss their appeals.


             41.  The issue  of  internal  relocation  and  sufficiency  of
                  protection does not arise. The Appellants are from Baghdad
                  City. They continue to have family there  and  the  family
                  home. They are from an affluent family by Iraqi standards.
                  They arrived in the UK using Iraq passports. On the  basis
                  of  AA  (Iraq)  there  are  no  grounds  for  a  grant  of
                  humanitarian protection under Article 15  (c).  I  do  not
                  accept the account of  A1  that  he  and  his  family  are
                  targeted by a militia group. I dismiss the appeals."

     5. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis that judge found it arguable there  may  have
        been material error of law which could have made  a  difference  to
        the outcome in relation to the apparent finding at [34]. The  judge
        granting permission states the Judge appears  to  accept  that  the
        militia had been to the first appellant's  father's  house  looking
        for him. It is not clear from the decision who the  "him"  was.  It
        also appears to undermine the general findings  that  there  is  no
        adverse interest in the family.



Error of law


     6. At [34] the Judge finds:

             "34.     I am not satisfied that  the  Appellants  have  shown
                  that any harm has come to  A1's  father/A2's  husband.  Mr
                  Ceesay in his submission pose the question as to why  A1's
                  father would not tell anyone where he  was  going  and  he
                  answered his own question  by  submitting  that  the  only
                  reason would be that something might have happened to him.
                  He was somewhat with a professional background with a good
                  income and his own house and not someone who did not  care
                  about  his  family.  The  implication  I  took  from   the
                  submission is that something had happened to  him  at  the
                  hands of the same  militias  who  had  attacked  his  son.
                  However, from his sister  statement  at  page  37  of  the
                  bundle, I can only draw the conclusion that  he  had  left
                  the country or certainly got out of the way since "several
                  Islamist's" came to her house looking for him."

     7. It is argued by the appellant that the Judge has made a  number  of
        errors. Inter alia, it is asserted the Judge made  no  findings  in
        relation to evidence provided by Suad Abdulussein, who claimed  her
        brother, the appellants father, received death threats against  him
        and his family by Islamic individuals belonging to one of the armed
        militia who put a wanted notice on the door of the family home.
     8. It was also submitted the Judge should have done more than  he  did
        at [34] in relation to this evidence.
     9.  In  relation  to  the  adverse  credibility  findings  Mr   Ceesay
        challenges  the  Judge's  finding  in  relation  to  the  key  core
        conversation involving the first appellant and his friend, that the
        evidence was contradictory, saying the two accounts are of the same
        discussion and that the Judge  made  findings  fundamental  to  the
        account. In this respect Mr Ceesay relied upon the pleaded grounds.
    10. Mr Ceesay also sought to  argue  that  the  appellant  is  from  an
        affluent family upon which  the  Judge  made  inadequate  findings;
        including the fact that as he was  from  an  affluent  family  this
        could give rise to a real risk on return. Mr Ceesay  submitted  the
        fact the appellant was from an affluent family heightens  his  case
        as otherwise why would he have left Baghdad to travel to the United
        Kingdom. It was submitted  the  Judge  failed  to  deal  with  this
        aspect.
    11. Mr Ceesay also referred to the issue of kidnapping but no  arguable
        error arises as this was not a matter that was  raised  before  the
        Judge and it was not made out  that  any  risk  of  kidnapping  was
        relied upon in relation to the protection claim or has been  shown,
        by reference to country material or decided authority, to create  a
        credible real risk warranting a grant of international protection.
    12.  Mr  Ceesay  referred  to  findings  made  by  the  Judge  granting
        permission but, as was reinforced on a number of  occasions  during
        the  hearing,  that  judge  made  no  findings.  A  judge  granting
        permission is doing no more than suggesting that the grounds relied
        on by the appellant seeking permission may be arguable.
    13. I do not find the appellant has made out legal  error  material  to
        the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient to warrant the  Upper
        Tribunal interfering with this determination. It is clear the Judge
        considered  the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of  anxious
        scrutiny and has given adequate reasons in support of the  findings
        made. There  is  no  arguable  ambiguity  in  the  conclusions  the
        conclusion of which are clearly set out in [40] as being that  both
        the appellant's lack credibility. The Judge considered the evidence
        concerning  the  alleged  conversation  undertaken  by  the   first
        appellant and his friends which is specifically mentioned that [24]
        and beyond in the decision under challenge. Accordingly  the  Judge
        was unable to place any weight upon their claim to face a real risk
        on return to  Iraq  for  the  reasons  stated  or  otherwise.  This
        conclusion is  within  the  range  of  those  reasonably  open  and
        available to the Judge on the evidence.
    14. In relation to [34], set out above, no arguable  ambiguity  arises.
        The  Judge  clearly  refers  to  the  letter  and  finds  that  the
        submissions made raise an implication that something  had  happened
        although this is not a clear finding that the appellants father had
        been threatened or  harmed  as  alleged.  The  Judge  was  arguably
        entitled to come to the conclusion set out in this paragraph on the
        evidence.
    15. In a reasons challenge, the question is whether  a  reader  of  the
        determination is able to understand why or how the Judge arrived at
        the conclusions he or she did. In this  appeal  it  is  clear  that
        adequate and clear reasons  have  been  given  in  support  of  the
        findings made. The weight to be given to the evidence was a  matter
        for the Judge. The Judge is not required to  set  out  findings  in
        relation to each and  every  aspect  of  the  evidence.  The  Judge
        clearly considered that evidence and a reading of the  decision  in
        the round clearly supports the recorded conclusions  and  dismissal
        of the appeals.
    16. Although Mr Ceesay sought to argue otherwise, it has not been  made
        out the Judge has erred in law in a manner material to the decision
        to dismiss the appeal. The appellant fails to establish  any  legal
        error that  warrants  the  Upper  Tribunal  interfering  with  this
        decision. It is found this is a decision within the range of  those
        reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence.


Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    18. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


        I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 20 February 2018

