
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  PA/05262/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Edinburgh                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|on 16 January 2020                   |on 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


                                   Between

                                ASSOUA NESTOR
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Ethnic
                    Minorities Law Centre, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr M Clark, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. FtT Judge J C Grant-Hutchison dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  by  a
    decision promulgated on 6 September 2019.

 2. The appellant has permission to appeal to the UT on grounds of  "errors
    of law in terms of sur place activity  in  the  UK",  set  out  in  his
    application dated 17 September 2019:

      i) inadequate assessment of a report by a country expert [items  24  -
         25, pp 175 - 217 of appellant's FtT bundle 1]; failure to  look  at
         the evidence in the round and the country situation  to  which  the
         appellant would return; 6 paragraphs of the expert report are  said
         to disclose real risk,  whether  or  not  the  appellant  continues
         political activities in Cameroon;

     ii) misunderstanding the evidence, in that the appellant did not  claim
         to have attended only two rallies [in the UK], and had  attended  a
         more recent rally, and, re [22] of the  decision,  the  appellant's
         evidence was that he was no longer  in  contact  with  family,  and
         contact with friends was a long time ago;

    iii) re [19 a], the finding of no evidence of attendance at rallies  was
         "not supported or adequately supported by the evidence";

     iv) "even if the FtT was correct in terms  of  the  evidence,  the  FtT
         misapplied the law as it is the view of  the  persecutor  which  is
         determinative, in light of the expert report,  notwithstanding  the
         objective unimportance of the appellant's activities";

      v) "the FtT has noted  that  the  appellant  could  not  maintain  his
         political activity for the  SCNC  as  it  is  banned  ...  the  FtT
         misapplied the law as the reason the appellant cannot continue  his
         political activity is for fear of being persecuted".

 3. Mr Winter explained that the appellant  (who  left  Cameroon  in  1997)
    advanced two heads of claim in the FtT, the first based on  involvement
    with the SDF in  Cameroon  1992,  and  the  second  on  his  sur  place
    involvement with the SCNC in the UK from around 2016 - 2019, as set out
    by the FtT at [18].  He took no issue with the resolution of the  first
    head of claim.  His submissions were based on the grounds cumulatively,
    and were directed against [19] and [21] of the decision, as follows:

      i) The judge said at [19 a] that the appellant  by  the  date  of  the
         substantive interview, 24 April 2019, had attended only  2  rallies
         in 3 years.  Evidence in his  bundle  at  [42-43]  showed  that  he
         attended a rally on 28 June 2019, so he had  been  to  at  least  3
         rallies in 3 years.

     ii) Also at [19 a], the judge said there was no evidence of  attendance
         at rallies, but there was not only the  appellant's  evidence,  but
         the statements of his  supporting  witnesses,  [38  -  39]  of  his
         bundle, that he had attended rallies.

    iii) Again at [19 a], the judge said there was no evidence of  targeting
         in Cameroon as a result of attending rallies in the  UK,  but  that
         overlooked the expert report, which was to that effect.

     iv) The judge referred at [22] and [28] to  the  report,  but  did  not
         engage with what it said about sur place activities.

      v) The relevant paragraphs (misnumbered in the report)  were  at  page
         195, 42-43; 200, 29-30; 202, 34; and 205, 43.   These  referred  to
         the appellant's presence on social media, to the results that might
         have, and to suspicion being enough to give rise to risk.

     vi) At 19 (d), the judge overlooked that the appellant  said  not  only
         that he attended rallies, but that he raised awareness,  and  erred
         in finding his evidence to be at  odds  with  his  witnesses.   The
         judge said he did not give evidence of distributing flyers,  but  a
         copy flyer was in his bundle as item  43,  pp.  314-55,  marked  as
         "distributed by appellant".  The attachment of "no weight"  to  the
         evidence of the witnesses was undermined by those errors.

    vii) The report, properly considered, might have been found to show that
         the appellant's political activities, including his expressions  on
         social media, amounted to a real risk.

   viii) The case should be remitted to the FtT.

 4. Mr Clark submitted:

      i) The expert report was adequately considered, at [22] and elsewhere.
          It was based on accepting all the  appellant's  claims,  including
         detention and the existence of an arrest warrant for activities  in
         1992, which the FtT rejected; a finding not challenged.

     ii) The judge directed herself correctly at [8 a]  on  considering  the
         evidence in the round, and her decision  showed  that  she  applied
         that direction.

    iii) The report at 194, 40, 203, 40 - 43 and elsewhere gave examples  of
         SDF associations  at  home  and  abroad  giving  rise  to  risk  in
         Cameroon, but these were individuals of much  higher  profile  than
         the appellant, even taking his case at highest.

     iv) The report's examples were all of individuals  returning  from  the
         USA.  There was no example of anyone returning from the UK.

      v) The report held at 185, 10 and elsewhere that all  Anglophones  and
         all citizens of Southern Cameroon were at risk  of  persecution  by
         the authorities.  That was not supported by the evidence cited,  or
         by country guidance.

     vi) The report could not take the appellant any further than  as  found
         by the FtT.

    vii) The judge's observation about attending two  rallies  was  correct,
         being specifically directed to the pre-interview period.  There was
         no misapprehension.

   viii) In any event, attendance at  three  rather  than  two  rallies  was
         immaterial.

 5. Mr Winter replied:

      i) The report was not entirely conditioned on taking  the  account  at
         face value.  It provided justification  based  on  the  appellant's
         social media activity.

     ii) There was nothing wrong with the judge's  self-direction,  but  the
         issue was whether she applied it.

    iii) The presenting officer stressed that the appellant has been out  of
         Cameroon for 22 years, but that strengthened his case,  making  him
         more likely to be suspected on return.

     iv) The final example of an expatriate Anglophone arrested  on  return,
         at 205, 42, appeared to be a person of no higher profile  than  the
         appellant.

 6. I reserved my decision.

 7. I agree that the sur  place  case  is  not  diminished,  and  might  be
    strengthened, by having been a long time away from Cameroon.

 8. The report's examples are all of  return  from  the  USA,  where  there
    appears to be a much larger population of expatriate  Anglophones  from
    Cameroon than in the UK; but I see no reason why a risk of that  nature
    might not apply equally to return from the UK.

 9. There does not have to be country guidance to support a finding of risk
    to all Cameroonian anglophones;  the  question  is  whether  there  was
    evidence which might realistically have supported that.

10. The judge's comment of "no evidence" of attending rallies is  not  well
    worded, because there was his own evidence; but she knew that.

11. Assertions were made in submissions and in the report of persons  being
    targeted because of social  media  activity,  but  there  has  been  no
    reference, as far as I can see, either in the FtT or in the UT, to  any
    evidence of such a link.  The monitoring referred  to  in  the  report,
    even  of  online  articles,  is  of  public  sources,  newspapers   and
    magazines, not individual social media accounts.

12. There has been no reference to evidence of the Cameroonian  authorities
    searching for opponents amongst the vast mass of personal social media.



13. I was not referred directly to the evidence of the  appellant's  social
    media activity.  It appears to be documented  by  copy  printouts  from
    "twitter", item 46, pp 310 - 326, which are in terms highly critical of
    the government; but the appellant has not referred to evidence, in  the
    report or elsewhere, linking "tweets" of that nature to  detection  and
    ill-treatment if he were to arrive back in Cameroon.

14. (It is readily ascertainable, and in the public domain, that there  are
    6000 "tweets" per second, 500 million per day, on "twitter".)

15. For all that is said at 205, 42, the example there may be a  person  of
    no higher profile than the appellant; but the surrounding circumstances
    are unknown.   This  vague  example  is  not  a  sufficient  basis  for
    attaching real risk to every returning Anglophone.

16. The judge is criticised for not noting  that  a  flyer  copied  in  the
    appellant's bundle is annotated as having been distributed by him,  and
    for not noting his attendance at a  third  rally.   Those  matters  are
    given no particular prominence in a bundle of 48 items over 328  pages.
    It is not said that in submissions the  judge  was  directed  to  those
    points or asked to make specific findings on them. A decision does  not
    have to comment on the evidence page by page and line by  line.   There
    is no error of omission.

17. The judge's observation about attendance  at  rallies  was  tied  to  a
    specific period, and was accurate.

18. Attendance at a third rally, and the note on the copy flyer,  were  not
    aspects of the evidence which might have changed the overall decision.

19. The statements of the appellant's witnesses did  lend  support  to  his
    attendance at rallies.  However, even  if  that  had  been  given  more
    credit, there has been no reference to evidence (rather than  assertion
    and opinion) that attendance in a  minor  role  at  rallies  abroad  is
    reasonably likely to  lead  to  identification  and  targeting  by  the
    authorities on return to Cameroon.

20. The report  says  at  185,  10  that  it  "will  demonstrate  that  all
    Anglophones and Cameroonian citizens from  Southern  Cameroon  ...  are
    considered to be potential risks to state security and are being placed
    under surveillance, harassed,  arrested,  and  /  or  tortured  by  the
    security forces in the current  moment".   Despite  that,  it  was  not
    advanced for the appellant, either in the FtT or in the UT, that  being
    an Anglophone from Southern Cameroon  is  enough  to  qualify  him  for
    protection,  or  that  the  report  succeeds   in   demonstrating   its
    proposition.

21. On general risk to Anglophone returnees, and on risk from social  media
    activity, the report does not cite evidence which justifies its  rather
    sweeping conclusions.

22. Grounds (i) - (iii) do not show that the report and  the  rest  of  the
    evidence disclosed any better a sur place case than was detected by the
    FtT.

23. Grounds (iv) and (v), in so far as they state the  law,  are  accurate;
    but they do not illustrate any legal error perpetrated in the decision.

24. The grounds and submissions for the appellant together do not establish
    that the FtT's decision involved the making of any error on a point  of
    law, such that it ought to be set aside.  That decision shall stand.

25. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      22 January 2020
      UT Judge Macleman




