
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05955/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4th July 2017                              |On 10th July 2017             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between


                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     AB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr G Franco, Counsel instructed by Schneider
Goldstein Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 19th May  2016
    to refuse her application for asylum.  First-tier Tribunal Judge  Beach
    allowed the appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals with permission
    to this Tribunal.

The Background

 3. The Appellant entered the UK on 20th March 2013 with leave to enter  as
    a visitor accompanied by her two children.  She claims that her husband
    in Bangladesh was violent towards her and that she was in fear of  him.
    She claims that after she entered the UK as a visitor she  was  staying
    with relatives and she entered into a  relationship  with  another  man
    within two weeks of arriving in the UK.  She says  that  she  ran  away
    with this man from her cousin's house leaving her two daughters behind.
     She says that she became pregnant and had a son born in the UK on 21st
    March 2014.  Her relationship  with  her  boyfriend  broke  down.   The
    Appellant  says  that  she  fears  returning  to  Bangladesh  with   an
    illegitimate child. She claimed asylum on 31 October 2015.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge  expressed  concern  about  some  of  the
    Appellant's evidence.  The judge noted that there were discrepancies in
    relation to the Appellant's evidence about how she obtained  her  visit
    visa application and the judge treated the  Appellant's  evidence  with
    some caution because she had "not hesitated to use dishonest conduct in
    the past" [51].  The judge noted discrepancies between the  Appellant's
    evidence as to the abuse she said she suffered  from  her  husband  and
    found that the  Appellant's  account  of  her  husband's  behaviour  in
    Bangladesh was not  credible  [54].   However  the  judge  went  on  to
    consider the Appellant's claim as to the relationship she entered  into
    in the UK and the birth of her child  in  the  UK  in  March  2014  and
    concluded that, although the Appellant's  account  of  meeting  someone
    within a few days of arrival in the UK and almost  immediately  running
    away with him and beginning a relationship seems incredible,:

         "... I am left with little option but to accept that it must  be  a
         true account.  The facts speak for themselves.  The appellant has a
         young son who was born in March 2014 and who could  not,  therefore
         (given the  timeline),  be  the  child  of  her  husband.   I  must
         therefore assess the risk to the Appellant returning to  Bangladesh
         as (in effect) a single woman with an illegitimate child"[55].

 5. The judge went on to find  that  it  is  likely  that  the  Appellant's
    husband will have found out about her relationship and  possibly  about
    the birth of her child.  The judge found that  there  is  a  reasonable
    likelihood that the  Appellant's  husband  "may  have  threatened"  the
    Appellant when he found out about her  relationship  [56].   The  judge
    found that it is unlikely that the Appellant's husband  will  take  her
    back given that she now has an illegitimate child from an  extramarital
    relationship.  The judge found that the Appellant would face "ostracism
    and possibly worse" from her community if she returned there. The judge
    found that the Appellant's husband may well seek to "avenge himself  on
    the Appellant for the dishonour which he may view her  as  bringing  on
    him".  In light of the background evidence, the judge found that  there
    would be a real risk to the Appellant if she returned to her home  area
    as a woman estranged from her husband with an illegitimate child  [57].



 6. The judge went on to find that the Appellant's husband did not have any
    influence outside of the home area and she  went  on  to  consider  the
    reasonableness of internal relocation at paragraph 59.  The judge found
    the Appellant would be returning to Bangladesh as a single  woman  with
    no apparent family support.  She found that  the  Appellant  would  not
    have the funds to re-establish herself in business and  would  have  to
    try to seek employment and as a single  woman  with  a  young  son  and
    limited education and concluded that it is likely that  this  would  be
    extremely difficult for her.  The judge found that the Appellant  would
    face some societal discrimination and would  struggle  to  provide  for
    herself and her son with no male protector  or  kinship  support.   The
    judge concluded that the Appellant could not reasonably be expected  to
    relocate within Bangladesh.

The Submissions

 7. The Secretary of State's  Grounds  of  Appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    contend that the judge made  a  material  misdirection  in  failing  to
    adequately apply the guidance issued by the Upper Tribunal in the  case
    of SA (divorced woman - illegitimate child) Bangladesh CG  [2011]  UKUT
    00254.  It is contended that the judge made no  clear  finding  or  had
    given  inadequate  reasons  in  support  of  any  conclusion  that  the
    Appellant would be at real risk of persecution.  It is  contended  that
    the judge has given no adequate reasons  for  finding  the  core  claim
    credible in light of the findings that the Appellant is not credible in
    relation to significant aspects of her claim.  It is contended that  no
    adequate reasons have been given for finding that the  Appellant  could
    not reasonably be expected to internally relocate  and  has  failed  in
    concluding that relocation is not available to apply  the  guidance  in
    SA.

 8.  At  the  hearing  before  me  Mr  Tufan  expanded  upon  the   grounds
    highlighting that the judge made a  plethora  of  negative  credibility
    findings as to how the Appellant's husband treated  her  in  Bangladesh
    and her involvement in the husband's work  there.  He  pointed  to  the
    judge's concerns  about  the  Appellant's  evidence  in  light  of  her
    dishonesty in the past.  He accepted that the  judge  made  a  positive
    finding in relation to the paternity of the child in light of the  lack
    of evidence that the husband was in the UK at the time  of  conception.
    He noted that the  judge  had  also  found  against  the  Appellant  in
    relation to the husband's ability to find her if she were to return  to
    Bangladesh.  He  submitted  that,  despite  the  findings  against  the
    Appellant in terms of credibility, from paragraph 59 onwards the  judge
    found that it was not reasonable  for  the  Appellant  to  relocate  in
    Bangladesh and he submitted that this does  not  take  account  of  the
    guidance in SA.

 9.  Mr  Franco  submitted  that  this  Appellant  would  be  returning  to
    Bangladesh with a  3  year  old  child  and  as  a  result  would  have
    significant difficulties in relocating.  It is not realistic  that  she
    would find employment in the garment industry as indicated  as  in  the
    case of SA.  She  would  be  returning  as  a  married  woman  with  an
    illegitimate child, not a single or divorced woman.  He submitted  that
    it is clear from the decision that the guidance in SA was very much  to
    the forefront of the judge's mind.  He noted that SA was relied upon in
    the submissions by the Presenting  Officer  [34]  and  the  Appellant's
    representative [37] and by the judge at paragraph 49 where she set  out
    the head note of SA.  He submitted that at paragraph 55 the  judge  had
    noted that the Appellant would be returning as a single woman  with  an
    illegitimate child whereas in fact the Appellant would be returning  as
    a separated married woman and would, in his submission, face a  greater
    risk.  He submitted that it is clear that the judge accepted  that  the
    Appellant's husband may have threatened her and set out  the  risks  at
    paragraphs 56 and 57.   He  submitted  that  although  the  judge  made
    negative credibility findings she made positive findings on key  issues
    and  that  she  therefore  exercised  her  judicial  function  properly
    balancing and testing the evidence.  It was open to the  judge  in  his
    submission to conclude as she did.  Although  she  made  a  finding  in
    relation to dishonesty in relation to the Appellant and in relation  to
    delay she found that this was not fatal [61].  The judge made  findings
    in his submission on each issue.  He  submitted  that  there  was  some
    suggestion  that  people  think  that  the   Appellant   has   learning
    difficulties but the Appellant had not relied on this  aspect  and  had
    not tried to exaggerate her case as she could have done.

10. Mr Franco relied  on  the  Home  Office  instructions  in  relation  to
    relocation.   He  relied  on   'Bangladesh:   background   information,
    including actors of protection and internal relocation'  November  2014
    at paragraphs 1.26 and 1.27 which states:

         "Careful  consideration  must  be  given  to  the   relevance   and
         reasonableness of internal relocation  on  a  case  by  case  basis
         taking  full  account  of  the  individual  circumstances  of   the
         particular person.  Case workers need to consider  the  ability  of
         the persecutor to  pursue  the  person  in  the  proposed  site  of
         relocation, and whether effective protection is available  in  that
         area.  Decision makers will also need to consider the age,  gender,
         health, ethnicity, religion, financial  circumstances  and  support
         network of the person, as well as the security,  human  rights  and
         socio-economic conditions  in  the  proposed  area  of  relocation,
         including their ability to sustain themselves."

11. Mr Franco submitted that the judge had regard to all of  these  issues.
    The judge also looked at the country evidence in detail at  page  8  of
    the decision.  He  submitted  that  this  case  does  fall  within  the
    guidance in SA and the judge has sufficiently dealt  with  all  of  the
    issues.

12. In response Mr Tufan highlighted that  when  the  Appellant  made  this
    application it was made by her and  her  then  partner  as  a  combined
    application but when the application  was  refused  he  left  her.   He
    questioned the exact factual scenario in this case.

Discussion
13. The conclusions of the Tribunal in the case of SA are summarised in the
    head note as follows:
    1) There is a high level of domestic violence in  Bangladesh.   Despite
       the efforts of the government to improve the situation, due  to  the
       disinclination of the police to act upon complaints, women subjected
       to domestic violence may not be able to obtain an effective  measure
       of state protection by reason of the fact that they  are  women  and
       may be able to show a risk of serious harm for a Refugee  Convention
       reason.  Each case, however, must be determined on its own facts.
    (2) Under Muslim law, as applicable in Bangladesh, the  mother,  or  in
       her absence her own family members, has the right to custody  of  an
       illegitimate child.

    3) In custody and contact disputes the decisions of the superior courts
       in Bangladesh indicate a  fairly  consistent  trend  to  invoke  the
       principle of the welfare of  the  child  as  an  overriding  factor,
       permitting departure from the applicable personal law but  a  mother
       may  be  disqualified  from  custody  or  contact   by   established
       allegations of immorality.

    4) The mother of an illegitimate child may face  social  prejudice  and
       discrimination if her circumstances and the fact of her  having  had
       an illegitimate child become known but she is not likely to be at  a
       real risk of serious  harm in urban centres by reason of  that  fact
       alone.

    5) The divorced mother of an illegitimate child without family  support
       on return to  Bangladesh  would  be  likely  to  have  to  endure  a
       significant degree of hardship but she may well be  able  to  obtain
       employment  in  the  garment  trade  and   obtain   some   sort   of
       accommodation, albeit of a low standard.  Some degree of rudimentary
       state aid would be available to her and she would be able  to  enrol
       her child in a state school.  If in need of  urgent  assistance  she
       would be able to seek temporary accommodation in a woman's  shelter.
       The conditions which she would have  to  endure  in  re-establishing
       herself in Bangladesh would  not  as  a  general  matter  amount  to
       persecution or a breach of her rights under article 3 of  the  ECHR.
       Each case, however, must be decided its own facts having  regard  to
       the particular circumstances and disabilities, if any, of the  woman
       and the child concerned. Of course if  such  a  woman  were  fleeing
       persecution in her own home area the test  for  internal  relocation
       would be that of undue harshness and not a breach of her  article  3
       rights."


14. In the body of the decision in SA  the  Tribunal  makes  a  distinction
    between a woman with an illegitimate child who is married and  one  who
    is divorced at paragraph 82 which states as follows:

         "82. It is important in our view to make a distinction between a
         woman with an illegitimate child who is married  and  one,  like
         the appellant, who is divorced.  The report by the United States
         Bureau of Citizenship and Immigration Services on the  situation
         of women who have children who were born out of  wedlock,  dated
         25th June 2001, referred to in the  Refworld  report  which  was
         relied on before the  immigration  judge  but  not  referred  to
         before us,  quoted  a  research  fellow  at  Harvard  University
         stating that the safety of a woman in Bangladesh who had a child
         out of wedlock depended primarily on the  woman's  religion  and
         secondarily on her economic status.  If the woman was Muslim the
         very existence of the child proved the  mother's  adultery.   In
         contrast to other countries, such as Saudi Arabia and  Pakistan,
         where such a  woman  would  be  imprisoned  and  ostracised,  in
         Bangladesh the  situation  depended  on  the  woman's  immediate
         family and on her class background.  In the case  of  a  married
         woman who bore a child out of wedlock there was the  possibility
         of sanctuary for herself and her child if  her  own  family  was
         supportive and able to offer her protection against  the  danger
         of reprisal by  her  husband  and  her  husband's  family.   The
         opinions expressed in that report were postulated on  the  basis
         that the woman had  a  husband  rather  than  the  woman  having
         already been divorced.  An ASK  representative  is  reported  as
         saying that a woman in Bangladesh who had an illegitimate  child
         would most probably be treated as a social outcast depending  on
         her social status or monetary condition.  She would be worse off
         if she came from a middle or lower middle income group  as  they
         were the most vulnerable to societal pressure and bore the brunt
         of failing to keep up a social fa�ade."

15. This information appears to distinguish between  a  married  woman  who
    bore  a  child  out  of  wedlock  and  one  who  is  divorced  with  an
    illegitimate child.  It also highlights the prospect of the  danger  of
    reprisal by the woman's husband and her husband's family.

16. In  this  case  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  accept  the
    Appellant's account of previous domestic violence in Bangladesh but she
    did accept that the Appellant had had a child with another man  in  the
    UK.  There is no evidence that  the  Appellant  is  divorced  from  her
    husband in Bangladesh.  The judge found that the husband had threatened
    the Appellant [56] and that he may well seek to avenge himself  on  the
    Appellant for the dishonour which he may view her as  bringing  on  him
    [57].  The judge found that the Appellant would be at real risk if  she
    returned to her home area as a woman estranged from her husband with an
    illegitimate child [57].  I find that these  are  clear  findings  with
    adequate reasons which were open to the judge on  the  evidence.  These
    are reasons for the  conclusion  at  paragraphs  57  and  60  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk in her home area. The guidance in SA is that
    there  may  not  be  a  sufficiency  of  state  protection   in   these
    circumstances.

17.  The  judge  went  on  to  consider  the  reasonableness  of   internal
    relocation.  She took into account the factors set out at paragraph  59
    of the decision.  The Secretary  of  State  complains  that  the  judge
    failed to apply the guidance in SA. However the guidance at paragraph 5
    of the head note of SA is clarified  in  the  last  sentence  as  being
    guidance in relation to  whether  or  not  there  is  a  breach  of  an
    Appellant's Article 3 rights in her home area.  It is clear  that  this
    does not apply to an assessment of undue harshness in terms of internal
    relocation, this requires an assessment of the particular facts of  the
    case. In assessing internal relocation it was up to the judge to decide
    on the facts whether it would be unreasonable to expect this  Appellant
    to relocate within Bangladesh.  I am  satisfied  that  the  conclusions
    reached by the judge in paragraph 59 were open to her on the  basis  of
    the evidence before her.

18. In conclusion I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  properly  applied  the
    guidance in the case of SA.  The judge reached conclusions open to  her
    on the basis of the evidence in relation to risk on return to her  home
    area in Bangladesh and the reasonableness of internal relocation within
    Bangladesh.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does  not  contain  a  material
    error of law.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date: 8th July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date: 8th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
