
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal numbers: PA/05744/2019


                            the immigration Acts


|At Field House                       |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated       |
|3 March 2020                         |On 23 March 2020                      |


                                   Before

                          Upper Tribunal Judge Gill


                                   Between

                                    [S I]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent



DECISION TO SET ASIDE


1.    By way of my decision granting permission signed on 15  February  2020
    and sent to the parties under cover of a notice dated 25 February 2020,
    the Upper Tribunal notified the parties of its proposal  to  set  aside
    the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas in its  entirety
    and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  Judge  of  that
    Tribunal other  than  Judge  Lucas  to  re-make  the  decision  on  the
    appellant's appeal. The reasons for the proposal were set  out  in  the
    decision granting permission.

2.    In my decision granting permission, the  parties  were  informed  that
    the Upper Tribunal will proceed to issue a decision to give  effect  to
    its proposal unless the parties objected, with reasons, by 4 pm on  the
    14th calendar day after the date of the Tribunal's notice.

3.    To date, no response has been received from the appellant or from  the
    respondent.

4.    In the circumstances, I am satisfied that the decision of Judge  Lucas
    involved the making of an error on a point of law such that it falls to
    be set aside in its entirety. I set  it  aside  in  its  entirety.  The
    reasons for my decision are given in the decision  granting  permission
    to appeal. For the reasons given in  the  same  notice,  this  case  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a Judge of that Tribunal  other
    than Judge Lucas to re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  errors  on
points of law such that the decision is set  aside  in  its  entirety.  This
case is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the  decision  on  the
appellant's appeal to be re-made on the merits on  all  issues  by  a  judge
other than Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lucas.


[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill    Date: 16 March 2020
