
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05160/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 15 February and 25 April 2019              |On 30 April 2019             |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                FANG FANG LIN
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:  Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Rutherford
Sheridan, Solicitors


                          DETRMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this decision refers to  them  as
    they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD was granted permission to appeal against  a  decision  by  FtT
    Judge Kempton, dated 25 June 2018, allowing the appellant's appeal  "on
    human rights grounds only for a period of twelve months  to  allow  the
    [SSHD] to make further enquiries", as prescribed at 44 (1) - (2) of her
    decision.

 3. The FtT Judge misconceived the role and jurisdiction of the FtT.

 4. The judge directed herself at 2 that  the  appellant  had  a  right  of
    appeal  "against  the  decision  to  issue  removal  directions".  That
    direction dates back to repealed statutory provisions.   There  are  no
    removal directions in this case.

 5. The appellant's right of appeal was under section 82(1)(a) of the  2002
    Act against refusal of her protection claim, and under section 82(1)(b)
    against refusal of her human rights claim.

 6. The judge has not stated any conclusion on the protection claim.

 7. In terms of section 84(1)(c), the ground of appeal on the human  rights
    claim was that "removal of the appellant from the UK would be  unlawful
    under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998 (public authority  not  to
    act contrary to Human Rights Convention)".

 8. The FtT's duty under section 86(2) was to determine any  matter  raised
    as a ground of appeal, i.e., to  determine  whether  removal  would  be
    unlawful.

 9. It was for the appellant to make  out  her  grounds  of  appeal.   That
    included establishing the primary facts on which her human rights claim
    was  based;  see,  by  way  of  illustration,  paragraph  339L  of  the
    immigration rules.  An appellant who does  not  establish  the  primary
    facts will not succeed in her appeal.

10. The respondent was under a duty  to  assist  the  FtT  on  the  general
    country background; see, for example,  paragraph  339J  of  the  rules.
    That duty was shared by the appellant, particularly as  she  had  legal
    representation.

11. There was also a shared duty to refer to relevant country guidance.

12. Both parties did refer to background material.

13. The judge had to decide whether the evidence showed that removal of the
    appellant would breach her human rights, or those of anyone else.   The
    judge had to decide whether, and to what extent, the interests  of  the
    appellant's children might be affected; and if there was any breach  of
    human rights, whether that would  be  disproportionate  to  the  public
    interest in maintaining effective immigration controls,  applying  part
    5A of the 2002 Act.

14. At that final stage, the facts have been identified, and the outcome is
    a judicial assessment, not dependent  on  the  burden  or  standard  of
    proof.

15. Neither party in the FtT suggested that more  evidence  was  needed  to
    establish the facts.

16. If the judge, on reflection, thought the parties  should  be  asked  to
    improve their evidence, she might, exceptionally, have listed the  case
    for further hearing; but there was no scope for her to allow the appeal
    in the terms she purported to do.  There is no human right to remain in
    the UK during a period of obligation, imposed by the  tribunal  on  the
    SSHD, to make further enquiries on an appellant's behalf.

17. The FtT erred in law by failing to make findings on the  facts  and  by
    failing to determine the grounds of appeal.

18. The decision having been set aside  at  the  hearing  on  15  February,
    parties agreed that the decision should be remade at a further  hearing
    in the UT, which was fixed for 25 April.

19. In a letter dated 24 April 2019, the respondent raises no objection  to
    admission of new evidence for the appellant, and takes account also  of
    expert reports, and of a skeleton  argument  for  the  appellant.   The
    oldest of the appellant's 3 children is now aged 8, and  has  become  a
    qualifying child in terms of section 117B(vi) of the 2002  Act.   Under
    all the circumstances, the respondent  invites  the  UT  to  allow  the
    appeal on article 8 private life grounds only, and  to  dismiss  it  on
    protection and on article 3 grounds.

20. Mr Winter stated that the appellant was content with that outcome,  and
    did not press the other grounds.

21. The decision of the FtT is set aside, and  the  following  decision  is
    substituted: the appeal is dismissed on protection grounds, and allowed
    on human rights grounds (article 8, private life).

22. The FtT  made  an  anonymity  direction,  although  the  case  was  not
    obviously one which required  departure  from  the  principle  of  open
    justice.  There is no reason to preserve anonymity, so  that  direction
    is discharged.

            [pic]

            25 April 2019
            UT Judge Macleman




