
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05709/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st September 2018                   |On 25th October 2018               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  said [d]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Vidyadharan (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondent:    Miss S Panagiotopoulou (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Sweet, promulgated on 22nd June 2018, following  a  hearing  at  Hatton
    Cross on 5th June 2018.  In the decision, the judge allowed the  appeal
    of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the  Respondent  Secretary  of   State,
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.  I will  refer  to
    the parties as they were referred to in the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Somalia, and  was  born  on  21st
    October 1985.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    21st April 2018 refusing his claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is  that  he  is  a  member  of  a
    minority group in Sudan, and has a perceived profile, in that he is the
    son of his mother, who worked for the Government and for an NGO,  as  a
    District Manager/Chairlady, as an Administrator for Mogadishu  Council.
    She was killed by Al Shabaab because of her position in the  Government
    (see AIR at Q. 111).  His claim is that, he is not an ordinary citizen.
     He is not able to avail himself, as  an  ordinary  citizen  would,  of
    being able to return to Mogadishu, even as a minority member, and  find
    safety.  He has no family in Somalia and has no financial resources.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge specifically noted the essence of the Appellant's  claim  (at
    paragraph 36) in a way that was designed to  distinguish  it  from  the
    country guidance case of MOJ (Return to Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG  [2014]
    UKUT 00442.  He observed that the continuing position, with respect  to
    the Appellant's family was that his brother was  receiving  threatening
    messages from Al Shabaab (paragraph 35).  As against  this,  the  judge
    observed that the Presenting Officer had also made it quite clear  that
    the Appellant's sister did return back to Somalia in 2016  and  had  no
    problems, even though she returned as a lone female (paragraph 30).  It
    was also stated by the Presenting Officer that the  Appellant's  mother
    had previously worked as a housewife and only worked for the Government
    for six years, such that she would not have been killed, as a result of
    working for the Government, in the  manner  alleged  by  the  Appellant
    (paragraph 27).

 5. The judge went on in his conclusions to observe  that  the  Appellant's
    case is based upon threats from Al  Shabaab.   Moreover,  in  2000  his
    father and older brother were killed when the house was bombed due to a
    conflict between clan and warlords.  In 2006 he fled to Kenya with  his
    mother, sister and other brother.  They stayed there in the  UN  Dadaab
    refugee camp.   His mother returned to Somalia in 2010 and took up  the
    role of Administrator/Chairlady with the local Government.  It was then
    that his mother was killed by Al Shabaab six years later in 2016.   His
    mother then received threats from Al Shabaab saying that if he were  to
    take up his mother's  position,  he  would  be  killed.   His  mother's
    position was then replaced by a man who was not a member of the  family
    (paragraphs 40 to 41).

 6. The judge held that, "I  have  found  the  Appellant's  account  to  be
    credible".  He stated that "The question then is whether he is at  risk
    on return to Somalia" (paragraph 45).

 7. In this respect, the judge properly led himself into  a  discussion  of
    the country guidance case of MOJ [2014] UKUT 000442.   He  specifically
    referred to paragraph 407 (at paragraph 46) and to  paragraph  408  (at
    paragraph 48) in coming to the  conclusion  that  the  Appellant  would
    indeed be at risk of  ill-treatment  if  he  were  to  be  returned  to
    Somalia.

 8. The appeal was allowed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The Respondent's grounds of application state that the  Appellant,  who
    had made a claim on the basis of imputed political opinion,  could  not
    succeed as a member of a minority clan because the Tribunal had  stated
    in MOJ [2014] UKUT 000442 that the Appellant could not be  at  risk  of
    ill-treatment.  He had no political profile.  He would  be  unknown  to
    persons there.  The judge had not identified any agents of persecution.
     It was not clear why anyone would  be  interested  in  the  Appellant.
    There would be no perceived link between the Appellant and his  mother.
    At most, the Appellant may be destitute if  returned  to  Somalia,  but
    destitution did not make him a refugee.  He had only been in the UK for
    some four years,  and  although  he  had  relied  upon  other  people's
    financial support, there was no reason why, as a fit  and  young  adult
    male, with no medical problems, he could not return back to Somalia.

10. On 25th July 2018 permission to appeal was granted by the Tribunal.  It
    was observed that the judge had failed to identify the risk  categories
    specified in MOJ, that the Appellant would fall into.  It was  observed
    that the judge did not appear to give reasons  for  why  the  Appellant
    would not be able to access the economic  opportunities  identified  in
    MOJ.  Nor are the judge's reasons evident for  departing  from  MOJ  in
    respect of the risk in Mogadishu.

Submissions

11. Appearing before me on 21st September 2018  was  Miss  Vidyadharan,  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, and she submitted that the
    judge fell into an  error  of  law.   He  had  misapplied  the  country
    guidance of MOJ.  This was clear from paragraph  20  of  the  decision,
    because it had been noted that the Appellant had never been involved in
    politics, and it is  two  years  since  his  mother's  death,  and  her
    position  has  been  replaced  by  a  man  who  was  supported  by  the
    Government, such that he would not be at risk upon  return.   Moreover,
    his sister had visited Somalia in 2016 and had not faced any  problems.



12. In addition, the Appellant had come to the UK on a spouse's visa, as  a
    husband, although it was the case that he was currently  divorcing  his
    wife (paragraph 38).  The judge had specifically  recognised  that  the
    Appellant's mother's position had been replaced by a man who was not  a
    member of the family (at paragraph 41), such that there was  no  reason
    why the Appellant would be targeted.

13. The Appellant's mother had only been an employee of  Mogadishu  Council
    for six years (see paragraph 42), as opposed to what was being said  in
    the death certificate, such that the evidence was not reliable in  this
    respect.  The Appellant may well return to a condition  of  destitution
    and poverty, but that was not the test, under the MOJ guidance, and the
    judge had failed to apply that guidance.  Miss Vidyadharan then went on
    to say that if one looks at the preamble of the country  guidance  case
    of MOJ, it is clear that the preamble states (at paragraph  2)  that  a
    person who is a general civilian will not  upon  return  to  Mogadishu,
    after a period of absence, be at risk,  simply  on  account  of  having
    lived abroad.

14. Furthermore, it is clear from paragraph 5 of  the  same  preamble  that
    there has been a reduction of the level of  civilian  causalities  over
    time.  In addition paragraph 9 of the same preamble makes it clear that
    there needs to be a careful assessment of the situation, and the  judge
    here had failed to do so.

15. For  her  part,  Miss  Panagiotopoulou,  appearing  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant submitted that the grounds were no more than  a  disagreement
    with the judge's decision.  They do not  challenge  the  core  findings
    that the judge made.  There is  no  challenge  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant had undergone past persecution  in  Mogadishu  where  he  had
    lived.  It was accepted he was a member of a  minority  clan.   He  had
    fled Mogadishu because his family had been persecuted.  He had gone  on
    to live with his family in Kenya.  He had been fingerprinted by the  UN
    and had sought refuge with the UN.  He  had  remained  in  Kenya  until
    2012.  He had no relatives left in Somalia.  His mother had  then  been
    killed by Al Shabaab.  There were documents proving the mother's death.
     There was also the original ID card confirming that the mother  worked
    for the Government and for the NGO (see paragraph 15).

16. Against this background, the judge had found that precisely because  of
    the Appellant's background  and  his  ethnicity,  implying  an  imputed
    political opinion because of his mother's position  in  Government,  he
    would be at risk,  whether  or  not  the  mother's  position  had  been
    replaced by a man who was not related to him, if he were to  return  to
    Somalia.  It was not the case that the judge had failed to undertake  a
    proper assessment of the facts.  As soon as the judge  stated  that  he
    found the Appellant's claim to be a credible one, he had embarked  upon
    an assessment of the situation (at paragraphs 45  onwards).   Moreover,
    the judge had then specifically referred to the relevant guidance given
    in MOJ that the judge was being presently criticised for.  There simply
    was no error of law and the decision of the judge should be upheld.

17. In reply, Miss Vidyadharan submitted that, even if there  were  reasons
    given, the fact was that there  was  insufficiency  of  reasoning  with
    respect to the country guidance case, and what it required.

No Error of Law

18. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007), such that I should set aside the decision.  My reasons  are
    as follows.  First, the judge makes the findings of fact in relation to
    core aspects of the claim, as he was entitled to do.  He finds that the
    Appellant is at risk on the basis alleged.  That basis is carefully set
    out under the heading "Submissions" by the judge, when he observes that
    the Appellant is not actually returning as an "ordinary  citizen".   He
    is a minority group member.  He is not an ordinary citizen.   Moreover,
    he has no family in  Somalia  and  has  no  financial  resources  there
    (paragraph 36).  Thereafter, in applying the country guidance  case  to
    this situation, the judge draws upon  the  evidence  given  by  various
    sources (see paragraphs 40 to 42).  The judge finds this evidence to be
    credible.

19. Second, the remaining issue then is  the  application  of  the  country
    guidance case.  This has been the thrust of the grounds of application,
    and the area where Miss  Vidyadharan  concentrated  her  efforts.   The
    challenge on this basis, however, is not well-founded.  This is because
    the judge states (at paragraph 46) that the reference to MOJ shows that
    a person returning to Mogadishu after a period of residence would  look
    to his nuclear family, if he has one living in the city for  assistance
    in establishing himself.

20. Although a returnee may seek assistance from clan members, who are  not
    close relatives, "such help is  only  likely  to  be  forthcoming  from
    majority clan members, as minority clans  may  have  little  to  offer"
    (paragraph 407).  Therefore, it is not simply a matter of  saying  that
    the Appellant  can,  just  as  an  ordinary  citizen,  return  back  to
    Mogadishu, because this depends upon the existence there of his nuclear
    family, in the first instance, and in this case the Appellant  did  not
    have such an assistance.

21. Furthermore, the judge also goes on to consider the  position  that  in
    the absence of there being no nuclear family or close relatives in  the
    city to assist the Appellant, he does indeed have to  take  account  of
    the fact that "there will need to be a careful assessment  of  all  the
    circumstances" (paragraph 47).  He is  very  specific  in  noting  that
    these considerations "are not limited  to  circumstances  in  Mogadishu
    before departure", or the "length of absence from Mogadishu" or "family
    or clan association".  Neither is it confined to "access  to  financial
    resources", or "prospects for securing a livelihood".

22. Indeed, the judge observes that it would be for the  Appellant,  facing
    return to Mogadishu to explain "why he would not be able to access  the
    economic opportunities that had been produced  by  the  economic  boom"
    (paragraph 48).  In this respect, the judge is  clear  that  MOJ  is  a
    party for the proposition that it will only be those with:-

         "no  clan  or  family  support  who  will  not  be  in  receipt  of
         remittances from abroad and who have no real prospects for securing
         access to a livelihood on return, and who will face the prospect of
         living in circumstances falling below that which is  acceptable  on
         humanitarian protection grounds"

    who would be able to demonstrate a successful claim  in  this  respect.
    The Appellant's circumstances were such that he could do so.  The judge
    had taken proper account of MOJ (particularly paragraph 408 from  which
    the latter proposition is drawn).

23. Finally, the judge had regard to the fact that Al Shabaab  continue  to
    kill prominent peace activists, and family members of  elected  people.
    There   was   objective   evidence    that    minority    groups    are
    disproportionately targeted and killed (at paragraph 50).

24. It is well-known that for an application to succeed on the basis of  an
    error of law the relevant test is that set out by LJ Brooke in R (Iran)
    [2005] EWCA Civ 982, where it was made clear  that  "perversity"  is  a
    test which "represents a very high hurdle" (at  paragraph  11).   I  am
    satisfied, that that very high hurdle has not been met in the challenge
    to the decision of Judge Sweet.

Notice of Decision

25. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The decision shall stand.

26. No anonymity direction is made.

27. The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.



Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 20th October 2018


