
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05706/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 22 January 2018                  |On: 31 January 2018                  |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                    [Y V]
                          anonymity direction made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Ms N Katambala, Finsbury Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify them or any member of their family. This direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Iran, born on [ ] 1996. He appeals with
      permission against the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal Judge  C  H
      O'Rourke, promulgated on 18 August 2017, dismissing his appeal against
      the respondent's decision dated 30  May  2017,  refusing  his  asylum,
      humanitarian protection and human rights claims.

   3. The appellant left Iran on 3 November 2016 and entered  the  UK  on  1
      December and claimed asylum immediately.

   4. His claim was made on the  basis  of  his  conversion  from  Islam  to
      Christianity. Judge O'Rourke stated that the issue before  the  First-
      tier Tribunal was "one purely of credibility" - [4].

   5. He found that the appellant was generally not a credible  witness.  He
      set out his findings from paragraph [24] onwards. He noted that  there
      was no medical evidence of any underlying condition. He found that the
      appellant's demeanour at the hearing was odd and that he was seemingly
      distracted and vague. He concluded that the appellant was  feigning  a
      medical condition to delay the hearing and explain his lack  of  grasp
      of details when giving evidence - [25(ii)].

   6. He rejected his account that he had left Iran in  2015  because  of  a
      forced "honour" marriage to an ex-girlfriend but was nevertheless able
      to return there without consequences simply because the girl's  family
      had moved away - [25(iii)]

   7. His Facebook entries in relation to Christianity are belated - May  to
      June 2017  - and seemingly entirely generic, without  any  input  from
      him. He posts pictures and Biblical  quotations  seemingly  downloaded
      from the Internet including one in Portuguese without comment from him
      or reaction from anybody who may see them. His name and date of  birth
      are wrongly recorded and his profile photo is taken from some distance
      away and it is not particularly clear that it is him (and that is when
      one knows who he is). His use of Facebook in this respect is purely to
      bolster his claim and to minimise the risk of his actually  coming  to
      the attention of the authorities as a consequence - [25(iv)].

   8. In the grounds of appeal set out in the application for permission  to
      appeal to the Upper Tribunal, it is contended that there were articles
      and other photographs of the appellant in the account including  clear
      photographs of him on his Facebook page. With regard to his name being
      misspelled at B2 of the respondent's  bundle,  the  appellant  clearly
      stated that his correct name is '[YV]', as  spelled  on  his  Facebook
      account. He can therefore be identified.

   9. Judge O'Rourke also had regard to the appellant's account of events in
      Iran. He did not find the appellant's account to be plausible. He  set
      out the basis for that conclusion  at  [26].  He  had  regard  to  his
      credibility generally. He also had regard to the unlikelihood that  he
      would have been able to give up the practice of Islam from the age  of
      15 despite living with his devout family. He did not believe  that  he
      would have been able to evade their attentions all the time  and  that
      therefore there would have been confrontations about his apparent lack
      of faith.

  10. He referred to the vagueness of his account of what encouraged him  to
      go to a house church and what  he  did  there,  simply  "praying"  and
      feeing "inner peace." It was  implausible  that  he  would  decide  to
      convert on his first visit to a house church, having, apart from  some
      conversations with [S], no knowledge of Christianity before.  He  also
      referred to the infrequency of house church meetings,  four  in  three
      months, which seemed unlikely for people enthused  by  their  religion
      [26(i-v)].

  11. He did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  to
      Christianity as evidenced by his activities in the UK - [27]. He again
      had regard to his findings on the basis of his credibility  generally.
      His inability to name his church at the substantive interview, Swindon
      Evangelical Church cannot have been a difficult title  to  recall.  He
      was living in Swindon at the time.

  12. He considered the guidance in R (on the application of SA) Iran v SSHD
      [2012] EWHC 2575 (Admin) as to the inadvisability of  peering  into  a
      man's soul, but nonetheless some assessment has  to  be  made  on  the
      basis of the available evidence, taking into account  the  appellant's
      credibility. Simply attending at the  church  cannot  be,  of  itself,
      sufficient - [27(iv)].

  13. He was conscious of the  guidance  in  the  earlier  AIT  decision  in
      Dorodian  (01-T8-01537)  in  which  the  relevant  test  required  the
      appellant being vouched for by a minister of the church, as to  church
      membership; that correspondence from the church should be available so
      its existence can be  established  and  the  oral  evidence  from  the
      minister and if necessary testing of religious knowledge - [28].

  14. He noted that there was correspondence from the church and Mr  Childs-
      Clarke, but not from the pastor. Nor did the  pastor  attend  to  give
      evidence. He did not doubt that Mr Childs-Clarke gave entirely sincere
      evidence as to his belief in the appellant's conversion but  he  noted
      the degree of the unquestioning nature of that belief and  that  to  a
      very large extent, his knowledge of what the appellant says  he  knows
      and believes is reliant on interpretation. In any event, in  the  face
      of his findings as to the appellant's credibility generally,  and  the
      motivation for his alleged conversion, he concluded  that  Mr  Childs-
      Clarke has, in this case, "been duped"- [28]

  15. He concluded that if the appellant were to be returned to Iran, the UK
      would not be in breach of the Human Rights Convention or  the  Refugee
      Convention.

  16. On 30 November 2017, First-Tier Tribunal Judge  Frankish  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal. Given that the  Facebook  picture  was
      said to be indistinct and a distant profile image  whereas  there  was
      one clear frontal picture of him, it was arguable that an error  arose
      in the assessment of the Facebook evidence.

      Error of law hearing

  17. Mr Katambala, who did not represent  the  appellant  at  the  hearing,
      relied on the grounds seeking permission.

  18. She contended that the Judge erred when considering  risk  on  return.
      The appellant posted evidence on Facebook showing he was in church and
      talked about  Christianity.  These  acts  are  illegal  in  Iran.  The
      Facebook account is  illegal  as  is  his  conversion  from  Islam  to
      Christianity.

  19. Further, his correct name is "[YV]". She referred to page 24 showing a
      copy of a photograph on his Facebook account. There are  also  various
      depictions showing Christian images. She submitted that the  appellant
      can be identified. There was a pastoral letter from the pastor in  the
      respondent's bundle. The Judge did not explain  how  Mr  Childs-Clarke
      had been duped.

  20. She referred to BA (Risk on Return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36. The  Judge
      failed to give proper consideration to Danian v SSHD [1999]  EWCA  Civ
      3000 regarding reliance on sur place activity, even in bad faith.

  21. The above acts are all 'un-Islamic': SB (Risk on return - illegal exit
      - Iran CG [2009] UKAIT 00053.

  22. Although Ground 3 refers to the failure to recognise the  difficulties
      that raped women face when having  to  talk  about  their  trauma,  Ms
      Katambala accepted that this is entirely irrelevant to this appeal.

  23. The Tribunal  also  referred  to  sur  place  activities  relating  to
      demonstrations. However it is not asserted that the appellant attended
      any demonstrations.

  24. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Jarvis submitted that the  grounds  of
      complaint (1-3) do not go far enough in explaining why  the  appellant
      would be at risk. The Judge was entitled to conclude that he would not
      be at risk.

  25. He  noted  that  the  appellant's  Facebook  entries  in  relation  to
      Christianity are belated, namely,  between  May  and  June  2017.  His
      profile is not clear. Whilst there is a clear photograph at [24] it is
      not clear that the person is the appellant or another. It was open  to
      the Judge to conclude that any entries were generic  and  without  any
      input from the  appellant.  He  simply  posts  pictures  and  Biblical
      quotations downloaded from the Internet including one in Portuguese.

  26. The Judge has found and stated at the commencement of each  paragraph,
      that the appellant has lied and is not a credible  witness.  Thus,  he
      would tell the Iranian authorities that he is a Muslim from  a  devout
      Muslim family and is not a Christian. He lied about events in Iran. He
      has not told the truth. He has accordingly failed  to  make  his  case
      out.

  27. He was found to be a Muslim person who has  not  genuinely  converted.
      It cannot be that the Islamic authorities  would  take  a  persecutory
      view of someone who had lied and not told the truth about  becoming  a
      genuine convert.  The  authorities  do  not  persecute  failed  asylum
      seekers and would not persecute this appellant  because  he  has  been
      found not to be truthful and credible.

  28. With regard to sur place activities in the UK,  even  if  the  Iranian
      authorities were aware of this, nothing has been shown as to  why  the
      appellant would be subject to a real risk, as his claim was predicated
      on a false premise.

  29. With regard to ground 3, he submitted that the complaint amounts to  a
      disagreement with the findings. There is no merit in  that  ground  at
      all. There has been no attempt  to  contend  that  the  findings  from
      paragraphs 25-28 were not sustainable, and in particular  he  findings
      at [25(iii)]; [26 (ii)], [27[ii)] and [28] - There is no evidence from
      the Pastor, who did not attend to give evidence.

  30. The fact that Mr Childs-Clarke  has  given  sincere  evidence  is  not
      enough to show that the  appellant  told  the  truth.  The  Judge  was
      obliged to consider the credibility of the appellant's evidence in the
      round.

  31. Ms Katambala referred in reply to the Home Office guidance set out  at
      A54 of the appellant's bundle relating  to  Christians  and  Christian
      converts dated December 2015 at 2.2.2. It was noted  that  Sharia  law
      does  not  allow  for  conversion  from  Islam  to  another  religion.
      Christian converts face physical  attacks,  harassment,  surveillance,
      arrests, detention as well as torture and ill treatment in  detention.
      She referred to  paragraph  6.1.5  and  6.1.7  noting  that  Christian
      converts may risk maltreatment at the hands of the State.

      Assessment

  32. In BA (Risk on Return) Iran CG [2011] UKUT 36, the Tribunal noted that
      given the large numbers of those who demonstrate in  the  UK  and  the
      publicity  which  demonstrators  receive,  for  example  on  Facebook,
      combined with the inability of the Iranian government to  monitor  all
      returnees who have been involved in demonstrations here,  regard  must
      be had to the level of involvement of the individual here as  well  as
      any political activity which the individual might have  been  involved
      in Iran before seeking asylum in Britain.

  33. It was  noted  that  there  is  no  evidence  of  the  use  of  facial
      recognition technology at the Imam Khomenini International Airport but
      there are a number of officials who may be able to recognise up to 200
      faces at any one time. The procedures used by security at the  airport
      are haphazard. It is therefore possible that  those  whom  the  regime
      might wish to question would not come to the attention of  the  regime
      on arrival. If, however, information is known about  their  activities
      abroad,  they  might  well  be  picked  up  for   questioning   and/or
      transferred to a special  court  near  the  airport  after  they  have
      returned home.

  34. It is important to consider the level of political involvement  before
      considering the likelihood of the individual coming to  the  attention
      of the authorities, and the priority that  the  Iranian  regime  would
      give to tracing him. It is only after considering those  factors  that
      the issue of whether or not there is a real risk of facing persecution
      on return can be assessed

  35. There is no contention that the appellant  engaged  in  any  political
      activities in the UK. He would thus not be liable to interrogation  as
      to any political activities in the UK.

  36. The Judge has given a detailed assessment of the appellant's claim. He
      has had regard to the appellant's documents, his evidence and Facebook
      entries.

  37. He has looked  at  the  evidence  in  the  round  when  assessing  his
      credibility. He found that he was an educated  person  having  studied
      accountancy but was unable to establish  a  coherent  record  of  what
      happened with at least  approximate  dates  that  he  could  stick  to
      [25(i)].

  38. The Judge noted that he had left Iran  in  2015  to  Greece  and  then
      returned. He entered the UK on 1 December 2016 and claimed  asylum  on
      the basis of his conversion to Christianity.

  39. The Judge noted at [26] that his accounts of events in Iran  were  not
      plausible. He set out the reasons for that conclusion, namely that  it
      was unlikely that he would have been able to give up the  practice  of
      Islam from the age of 15 despite living with a devout family. He would
      not have been able to evade their attentions all the time. There would
      have been confrontations about the apparent lapse in faith.

  40. Further, his account was vague as to what encouraged him to  go  to  a
      house church if all he did there was pray and feel inner peace. It was
      also implausible that he would decide to convert on his first visit to
      a house church where he had no knowledge of Christianity prior to that
      apart from having conversations with  a  friend,  [S].  There  was  no
      evidence  to  suggest  that  the  claimant  fell  under  the   Iranian
      government radar after converting to Christianity in Iran.

  41. With regard to his activities in the UK, the  Judge  again  found  his
      evidence to be generally lacking in credibility.  He  did  not  accept
      that he is a genuine convert as evidenced by his activities in the UK.
      He has fabricated his Facebook activity.

  42. At [27] he gave reasons for that finding. Whilst his Facebook  entries
      might have shown a picture of him at page 24, the  actual  content  of
      his Facebook contained depictions of Christianity. Apart from the fact
      that they were "belated", between May and June 2017, the  Judge  found
      that they seemed entirely generic  and  without  any  input  from  the
      appellant. Various pictures and Biblical quotations are  posted  which
      were presumably downloaded from the Internet. There is no comment from
      the appellant, nor any reaction from anyone who may  have  seen  them.
      Whilst his name  might  have  been  correctly  spelled,  there  is  no
      expression  of  his  asserted  religious  belief  or  identity  as   a
      Christian.

  43. The Judge has rejected the appellant's claim  that  he  is  a  genuine
      convert to Christianity. He has provided sustainable reasons  for  his
      findings.

  44. Accordingly, the appellant  will  be  returning  as  a  failed  asylum
      seeker. There is no evidence of  any  political  profile  activity  in
      which he was involved prior to seeking asylum in the UK.

  45. In the light of the  Judge's  findings  relating  to  the  appellant's
      credibility and his  lack  of  profile,  the  finding  that  that  the
      appellant would not be at risk on return is sustainable.

      Notice of Decision

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      an error on a point of law. The decision shall accordingly stand.

      Anonymity direction continued.





      Signed                             Date   29 January 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

