
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05705/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 23rd March 2018                     |On 02nd May 2018                  |
|                                           |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     y T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert (Counsel)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. YT is a citizen of Russia whose date of birth is recorded as 10th March
    1993.  She claimed international protection as a refugee on  the  basis
    of her sexual orientation.

 2. On 26th May 2017 a decision was made against which she  appealed.   The
    appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dineen sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on 6th October 2017.  He allowed the appeal.  He made  two
    significant findings, which one  might  expect  in  the  case  of  this
    nature, firstly that it was made out that YT was a lesbian and secondly
    that  she  together  with  her  child  may  be  seen  to  be  promoting
    homosexuality in Russia and therefore be at risk of persecution.

 3. Not content with that decision the Secretary of State by  Notice  dated
    18th December 2017 made application for permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds are rather lengthy but  in  substance  the
    complaint was made that: Judge Dineen had had  insufficient  regard  to
    the findings of Judge  Walters  in  an  earlier  decision;  had  failed
    properly or at all to apply the  principles  in  Devaseelan;  and  that
    there was no sufficient basis for the finding in  any  event  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk from return to Russia.

 4. On 17th January 2018 Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Andrews  granted
    permission thus the matter comes before me.  Although  Mr  Gilbert  did
    not concede the appeal he recognised the difficulties in  the  decision
    of Judge Dineen as identified the grounds.  Although Judge Dineen  does
    make reference to  the  previous  determination  of  Judge  Walters  at
    paragraph 43, and more particularly at paragraph 61, it  is  not  clear
    from reading the decision as a whole the extent to which,  if  at  all,
    Judge Dineen took  the  earlier  findings  as  the  starting  point  as
    required in the case of Devaseelan.  It is trite  law  to  say  that  a
    second judge is not bound ultimately by the  findings  of  the  earlier
    judge but he or she is required to take it as a starting point and give
    sufficient reasons as to why he or she has then departed from  it.   It
    may be that Judge Dineen was of the view that the evidence of  Mr  Lane
    was sufficient.  I do not know.  It is not sufficiently clear, but  any
    party to proceedings is entitled to know  why  they  have  lost.   That
    applies as much to the Secretary of State as it does to any  individual
    private person coming before a court or Tribunal.

 5. The second concern that I have with this decision,  and  error  of  law
    that I find, is that at paragraph 75 Judge Dineen says:

         "I find that there is a real risk that a  gay  woman  living  as  a
         single mother may find herself accused of promoting homosexuality."

    I simply do not understand how that link has been made  and  I  do  not
    understand the word "may" taken together with real risk,  either  there
    is a real risk or there is not one.

 6. Thirdly, there is no sufficient analysis of the guidance in the case of
    HJ (Iran) which helps a judge in his or her approach to issue  such  as
    discretion by persons who are gay.

 7. It follows that the decision of Judge Dineen  falls  to  be  set  aside
    because of the errors of law that I have  identified  pursuant  to  the
    grounds.  I can remake the case or remit depending on the circumstances
    but it seems to me that this is the case in which findings of fact need
    to be made again.  Both parties agree that that is the proper course.

 8. I am mindful of the requirements of Section 55 of the 2009 Act and  the
    fact  that  there  is  a  child  affected  by  the  outcome  in   these
    proceedings.  It is not clear from the evidence whether the child is in
    fact a British citizen.  That the father of the child is not  named  on
    the  birth  certificate  and  irrespective  of  the   merits   of   the
    international protection claim, the nationality of  the  British  child
    may give rise to derivative rights under European law.  I know not  but
    it needs to be looked at.  I have indicated that it would be helpful to
    the First-tier Tribunal to have DNA  evidence  of  the  child  and  the
    child's father if it is contended that the child's father is a  British
    citizen because if so the child would be a British citizen and if there
    are questions of funding then I make it clear  that  the  view  of  the
    Upper Tribunal is that funding should be provided in  order  to  obtain
    that DNA evidence.  I cannot direct it.

 9. I have also observed that it may be that the First-tier Tribunal  would
    wish to see rather more evidence in support of  the  contention  of  YT
    that she is gay.  The evidence of Mr Lin is of course capable of  being
    corroboration but applying the principles in TK (Burundi)  [2009]  EWCA
    Civ 40 to which the Secretary  of  State  has  made  reference  in  the
    grounds there may be some merit, I put it no higher, in the concerns of
    the Secretary of State as to the lack of  evidence  placed  before  the
    Tribunal.  That of course will be a matter for the judge that hears the
    case once it is remitted.

10. If the case in the First-tier Tribunal is to be based upon in part  the
    nationality of the child then it may be that that  is  a  "new  matter"
    within the post  2014  legislative  framework  and  would  require  the
    consent of the Secretary of State, in the First-tier Tribunal, if it is
    to be pursued.  It follows that any  DNA  evidence  being  relied  upon
    should be filed and served as soon as it reasonably practicable and the
    Secretary of State should take a view on that in advance of the hearing
    of the First-tier Tribunal. Provided that that evidence is provided  in
    sufficient time it may be that failure to consider it would be  grounds
    for the First-tier Tribunal to consider a wasted  costs  order  against
    the Secretary of State.  There is a  benefit  to  proper  consideration
    being given to all matters in advance of any hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains material errors of law  and
is set aside.  The matter is remitted to Hatton  Cross  to  be  heard  by  a
judge other than Judge Dineen.  For the avoidance  of  doubt  no  facts  are
preserved other than nationality and date of birth which are not in issue.

The anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.





Signed                              Date: 1 May 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
