
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05595/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                     |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 March 2020                     |        On 15 April 2020             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     AI
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 2 January 1987. He  has
      been given permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Cooper dismissing his appeal against  the  respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   2. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 14 February  2011  with
      leave to enter as a Tier 4 student valid until 29 February 2012. On 21
      January 2016 he was encountered working illegally and was served  with
      removal papers. He then claimed asylum on 2 February 2016.  His  claim
      was refused on 8 August 2016 and he did not appeal the decision. On 19
      February  2019  the  appellant  made  further  submissions  which  the
      respondent agreed to consider as a fresh asylum claim. That claim  was
      refused on 21 May 2019. His appeal against that decision gave rise  to
      these proceedings.

   3. The appellant's first asylum claim was  made  on  the  basis  that  he
      feared his local MP because of a land dispute between that person  and
      his own family which resulted in several fights and with the appellant
      being beaten,  kidnapped  and  ill-treated.  The  respondent  did  not
      consider that the appellant had demonstrated a genuine subjective fear
      or that any such fear was objectively  well-founded  and  refused  the
      claim.

   4.  The  appellant's  subsequent,  and  current  claim,  is  that  he  is
      homosexual and would be at risk on return to Pakistan  on  that  basis
      from his own family and from the wider society. The respondent did not
      consider that the documentary evidence relied upon by the appellant in
      the  form  of  letters  of  support,   photographs,   screenshots   of
      conversations,  a  ticket  confirmation  for  an  event  and  a   club
      membership card, could be accorded weight and did not accept  that  he
      was homosexual. The respondent did not accept that the  appellant  was
      at risk in Pakistan and considered that his removal would  not  breach
      his human rights.

   5. The appellant's appeal against that decision was heard on 12 July 2019
      before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cooper.  The  judge  recorded  the
      appellant's evidence, that he had first realised that he was gay  when
      he was about 15 and had a relationship with a boy, AR, for two  and  a
      half years until AR moved to  Dubai  with  his  family,  that  he  had
      another relationship in the UK with a Pakistani man, S,  from  January
      2012  until  December  2013  and  that  he  subsequently  had   casual
      relationships in the UK and was in an open relationship with  HA  whom
      he met at a club in London. The appellant claimed  that  he  had  been
      living as an openly gay man since 2012. He  claimed  that  in  October
      2018 his family in Pakistan had found out that he  was  gay  after  he
      refused to marry his cousin and his brother  had  threatened  to  kill
      him. The judge also heard from two further witnesses,  Mr  R  and  HA,
      both of whom had been granted refugee status on the grounds  of  their
      sexuality.

   6. The judge did not accord  weight  to  the  evidence  relied  upon  the
      appellant and considered there to be no  satisfactory  documentary  or
      other evidence indicating that he had been living openly as a gay  man
      since 2012. The judge did not believe the appellant's claim to be gay.
      The judge noted inconsistencies between the appellant's  evidence  and
      that  of  his  witnesses  as  well  as  inconsistencies   within   the
      appellant's own evidence and considered that he had made up his claim.
      She accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

   7. The appellant sought permission to appeal outside the time  limit  and
      the First-tier Tribunal rejected his explanation for the delay and did
      not admit his application. Permission was, however, granted  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge Finch on 28 January 2020 on different grounds to  those
      raised by the appellant.

   8. At the hearing the appellant appeared in person and confirmed that  he
      did not have a legal representative. As it was noted  that  UTJ  Finch
      had not dealt with the timeliness  issue  when  making  her  grant  of
      permission, Ms Fijiwala was content for time to be  extended  and  the
      application to be admitted, for the sake of  expedience.  I  therefore
      extended time and admitted the application.

   9. Ms Fijiwala made submissions addressing the grant of permission by UTJ
      Finch and the appellant was given an opportunity to respond.

  10. The first and second bases for the grant of permission were  that  the
      judge had arguably applied an incorrect standard of proof at [42]  and
      [43] by directing herself that she had to rely on evidence  which  was
      conclusive of the appellant's sexuality, and that she arguably  failed
      to take a holistic approach to the evidence. However, I am entirely in
      agreement with Ms Fijiwala that there was no error on the part of  the
      judge in either respect. The judge clearly applied the correct,  lower
      standard of proof to the evidence as she was required to do and  there
      is nothing in her findings in those paragraphs or  her  assessment  of
      any of the evidence which indicates that she applied a higher standard
      of proof. As Ms Fijiwala submitted, the judge was  not,  at  [42]  and
      [43], requiring evidence to be conclusive, but  was  simply  making  a
      finding that the photographs relied upon by the appellant were not  in
      themselves indicative  of  his  claimed  homosexuality.  She  provided
      cogent reasons for so concluding and was fully and  properly  entitled
      to conclude as she did.

  11. In those paragraphs  and  in  the  subsequent  paragraphs,  the  judge
      assessed the documentary  evidence  which  included  the  photographs,
      social media messages and Candygirls letter, in  accordance  with  her
      self-direction at [39] and [41], considering the evidence in the round
      together with the appellant's own evidence. The judge's assessment was
      a detailed and careful one and she provided clear and  cogent  reasons
      for according the evidence the limited weight that she did.  Likewise,
      the judge carefully assessed the evidence of the two witnesses, having
      full regard to the fact that they  had  been  granted  refugee  status
      themselves, a matter noted at [51]. The judge did not suggest that the
      witnesses had been paid to give evidence on  the  appellant's  behalf,
      but simply recorded their evidence that they denied having been  paid.
      The judge gave appropriate weight to the witnesses'  status  at  [52],
      but was also fully and properly entitled, in considering the weight to
      be accorded to their evidence, to take account of the  inconsistencies
      between their evidence and that of  the  appellant  and  to  make  the
      adverse credibility findings that she did. The judge  was  also  fully
      entitled to consider, as she did at [52] and [69], that the fact  that
      the  witnesses  had  been  granted  refugee  status   undermined   the
      appellant's claim that he was not aware that he could claim asylum  on
      grounds of sexuality, at a time when both witnesses were known to him.

  12.  Accordingly,  and  contrary  to  the  grounds  given   for   granting
      permission, the judge's assessment of all  the  evidence,  documentary
      and oral, from the appellant and from his witnesses, was  a  full  and
      careful one, which was undertaken holistically and with due regard  to
      the position and  status  of  the  witnesses.   The  judge  was  fully
      entitled to accord the weight that she did to  the  evidence  and  her
      conclusions  in  that  regard  were  supported  by  full  and   cogent
      reasoning.   Neither   the   appellant's   own   rather   vague    and
      unparticularised grounds seeking permission, nor his  response  to  Ms
      Fijiwala's submissions, added anything of value. The judge  gave  full
      consideration to all the evidence  before  her  and  to  all  relevant
      matters and she was fully and properly entitled to reach  the  adverse
      conclusions that she did. There is no merit in the  challenge  to  the
      judge's decision.

DECISION

  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve
      an error on a point of law. I do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
      decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


    Anonymity


    The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated:  13 March 2020
