
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05803/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 April 2019                           |On 30 April 2019              |
|                                           |                              |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     HS
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms F Clarke, instructed by Fadiga & Co
For the respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity  direction.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the appellant(s).

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lawrence promulgated  13.12.18,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,  dated  19.4.18,  to
    refuse his protection claim.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    8.1.19.  However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Finch granted permission  to  appeal  on
    8.3.19.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that it should be set aside.

 5. In granting permission, Judge Finch found it arguable that in assessing
    credibility the First-tier Tribunal Judge  failed  to  adequately  take
    into  account  the  appellant's  age  and  learning  difficulties.   In
    particular, the judge did not acknowledge that "a person with  learning
    difficulties  would  have  a  range  of  intellectual  and   conceptual
    difficulties which may militate against  them  giving  a  coherent  and
    consistent account of past events." Further, the judge "failed to  take
    into account any difficulties a child may have  in  properly  analysing
    events and repeating a clear account of an incident  which  had  caused
    him trauma." Judge Finch suggested that these failures  undermined  the
    conclusion at [24] that  the  appellant  had  fabricated  the  incident
    underpinning his protection claim.

 6. I have carefully considered the decision and  note  that  at  [10]  the
    judge accepted that the appellant, who was only 16 at the date  of  his
    asylum claim and still under the age of 18 at the date of  hearing  and
    promulgation of the decision, had learning difficulties,  and  possible
    mental health difficulties. The decision noted the submission that  the
    judge should view the claim through the prism  of  the  fact  that  the
    appellant had been so traumatised that he was suffering  mental  health
    issues, for which he would likely not receive treatment  on  return  to
    Afghanistan. The judge also bore in mind the Presidential Guidance Note
    2 of 2010 in relation to vulnerable witnesses. At [11] the judge  noted
    the evidence that  the  appellant  was  not  unfit  to  give  evidence.
    However,  despite  the  availability  of   the   various   arrangements
    (reasonable adjustments) and protections to better enable such a person
    to give evidence, as set out in the Guidance, the appellant  chose  not
    to give oral evidence at the appeal hearing. It follows that the  judge
    had only the other evidence and documents before the tribunal, and  the
    oral submissions, on which to decide the appeal.

 7. It is clear from a reading of the decision between [12] and  [23]  that
    the judge identified four differing versions  of  the  crucial  claimed
    confrontation between the  appellant's  father  and  his  uncle,  which
    allegedly led to the death of his uncle by shooting at the hands of the
    appellant. The judge made a very detailed  analysis  of  the  evidence,
    finding  what  was  concluded  to  be   irreconcilable   material   and
    significant  discrepancies  or  inconsistencies  between  the   various
    accounts, given at different times. The judge assessed the  appellant's
    ability to give a coherent account and noted at [22] that he  was  able
    to give a very detailed narrative of some parts of his account, such as
    his journey from Afghanistan to the UK,  an  account  which  the  judge
    described as having 'fluency.' In fact, each of the four  accounts  was
    found to have fluency in narration, each flowing  smoothly.  Implicitly
    making allowance for the appellant's youth and learning disability,  at
    [23] the judge considered the circumstances of the making  of  each  of
    the four accounts, one of  which  had  been  given  to  his  'friendly'
    solicitor, in other words not in a hostile environment. The judge  also
    considered the possibility that the appellant  might  have  viewed  the
    respondent as hostile, so that "in the intensity  of  formal  interview
    settings he could have become confused or confusion resulted." However,
    having considered the interview record, the judge did not  accept  that
    the interview was conducted in a hostile environment or one which might
    have intimidated the appellant from  giving  a  coherent  account.  For
    example, he was given breaks during the interview, throughout which  he
    was legally represented, and apparently the interpreter said  that  the
    appellant was speaking too fast so that he had to be  advised  to  slow
    down.

 8. Having considered these factors, the judge was satisfied at  [24]  that
    it was not the young age,  learning  difficulties,  or  claimed  mental
    health issues, which accounted for the different  versions  of  events,
    but concluded that they stemmed from the retelling at various times  of
    an incident which had been fabricated to support a false asylum  claim.
    At [29], after considering the medical evidence,  the  judge  concluded
    that had the appellant participated in the incident claimed there ought
    to be consistency in the core elements of the accounts. In this regard,
    the judge took into account that the appellant was  not  describing  an
    incident witnessed from a distance but at close quarters.

 9. In the subsequent paragraphs of the decision, [30] onwards,  the  judge
    also considered the other oral and documentary evidence, giving  cogent
    reasons for the credibility findings made.

10. In assessing the risk on return, taking into account AK and AS to  note
    that the security situation in Kabul is not  at  such  a  level  as  to
    render internal relocation unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh,  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant could relocate there, if he chose  not  to
    return to his home area. It is submitted that the judge failed to  take
    into  account  the  appellant's  age  and  learning  difficulties  when
    considering the risk on return. Ms  Clarke  drew  my  attention  to  AS
    (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018] UKUT -118 (IAC)  and  (iii)  of
    the headnote: "However, the particular circumstances of  an  individual
    applicant must be taken into account in the context  of  conditions  in
    the place of relocation, including a person's age, nature  and  quality
    of support network/connections with Kabul/Afghanistan,  their  physical
    and mental health, and their language, education and vocational  skills
    when determining whether a person falls within the general position set
    out above."

11. MS Clarke drew my attention in some detail to the Education,  Health  &
    Care Plan at A49 of the appellant's bundle, including passages such  as
    that at A54 to the effect that the appellant is slower than average  at
    processing information, and that he has difficulties concentrating.  At
    A55 is it said  that  he  has  PTSD  and  suffers  nightmares.  It  was
    submitted that the judge had ignored the care plan  and  other  similar
    evidence. Much of Ms Clarke's submissions appeared to be an attempt  to
    reargue the appeal, taking  me  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    difficulties, and little more than a disagreement with the decision.

12. It is clear from the decision that this evidence had been considered by
    the judge in the First-tier Tribunal and the care  plan  and  diagnosis
    are referenced. The judge had the relevant points made by Ms Clarke  in
    mind. However, after taking all the evidence  into  account  the  judge
    rejected the factual account,  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant's
    parents were dead, and concluded that he left Afghanistan  specifically
    to join his aunt in the UK as an economic migrant. At the date  of  the
    tribunal's decision the appellant was already an adult  having  reached
    18 years of age and was approaching 19, which he now is. He was fit  to
    give evidence but chose not to do so. It is difficult to see what  more
    the judge could have done to accommodate the appellant as a  vulnerable
    witness; the judge did not hold it against him that he failed  to  give
    evidence. However, the upshot of his failure to give evidence  is  that
    the inconsistencies in the accounts could not be explored with  him  in
    oral evidence. The  judge  also  considered  the  medical  evidence  in
    relation to risk on return, concluding at [44] that he had  no  medical
    impediment that would prevent his integration  in  Afghanistan.  It  is
    further noted that despite having learning difficulties the judge found
    that he had been able to undertake studies in the UK and could do so in
    Afghanistan.  In the circumstances, it was implicit from those findings
    that the appellant would have family support on return  to  Afghanistan
    and  will  not  be  at  any  particular  risk  as  a  lone  minor  with
    difficulties in Kabul.

13. The difficulty for Ms Clarke's arguments is that the  judge  took  into
    account the appellant's difficulties in assessing  the  credibility  of
    his account and specifically looked to see if those difficulties  could
    explain the  discrepancies  in  the  four  accounts,  as  well  as  the
    appellant's claimed circumstances on return. The judge did  not  accept
    that the appellant, even with the difficulties described in the reports
    and other evidence, would be at an enhanced risk on return, as he would
    have the support of family in his integration in Kabul.

14. I am also satisfied that the judge was entitled to assess the  evidence
    of the supporting witness and conclude that he was not credible.

15. I also reject the argument that the judge applied a  criminal  standard
    of proof by referring to the claim being prosecuted. That  is  no  more
    than a turn of phrase. There is no evidence that the wrong standard  of
    proof was applied.

16. In the circumstances, I find no material error of  law  in  failing  to
    take the appellant's vulnerability by age or learning  disability  into
    account. The remaining grounds are in the main minor criticisms of  the
    judge's findings and little more than a disagreement and an attempt  to
    reargue the  appeal  by  alleging  perverse  and  irrational  findings,
    neglecting to consider the evidence in full.

17. The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the  judge.  It  is
    not an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much
    weight to a relevant factor, unless the exercise is irrational. Nor  is
    it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every factual issue
    of argument. Disagreement  with  a  judge's  factual  conclusions,  the
    appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of  credibility,  or  the
    evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error of law.

Decision

18. For the reasons outlined above, I find that the making of the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error on  a
    point of law such as to require it to be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: The appeal has been dismissed and  there  was  no  fee  payment  so
there can be no fee award.


     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

