
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05264/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 30th January 2018                  |On 26th February 2018                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL

                                   Between

                                    D A S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Wilkins of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge McGinty of the First-
    tier Tribunal (the judge) promulgated on 3rd May 2017.

 2. The Appellant  is  an  Iraqi  citizen  of  Kurdish  ethnicity  born  in
    September 1992.  He arrived in the UK illegally on 16th  December  2015
    and claimed asylum.

 3. His asylum claim was based upon fear of persecution because his  father
    was a member of the Ba'ath Party in Iraq, and he also feared  ISIS  who
    had taken control of his home area of Jalawla in Diyala, Iraq.

 4. The asylum and human rights application was refused on 7th May 2016 and
    the appeal was heard on 18th April 2017.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant  and  did  not  accept  his
    account of his father having had any role with the Ba'ath  Party.   The
    judge accepted the Appellant's account that he had resided in the Iraqi
    Kurdish region (IKR) with his uncle, but did not  accept  that  he  had
    been the subject of threats while living  there.   The  judge  accepted
    that the Appellant's home area had in the past been taken over by ISIS,
    and found his account in that regard to be credible and consistent.

 6. The judge concluded that the Appellant could not  return  to  his  home
    area of Jalawla but that he  could  reasonably  relocate  and  live  in
    safety within the IKR.  The judge found that  the  Appellant  would  be
    returned to Baghdad, and could safely travel from Baghdad  to  the  IKR
    where his uncle could act as a Sponsor for him.  The judge  found  that
    the Appellant had lived safely in the IKR  for  a  period  of  eighteen
    months prior to travelling to the UK.  The appeal was dismissed on  all
    grounds.

 7. The Appellant had been legally represented at the  appeal  but  applied
    for permission to appeal without legal representation.   Permission  to
    appeal was granted by designated Judge Shaerf and I set out  below,  in
    part, the grant of permission;

         "The first three grounds of appeal are no more than  an  expression
         of disagreement with the conclusions reached by the judge for which
         he gave sustainable reasons.

         The fourth  and  last  ground  of  appeal  refers  to  the  judge's
         treatment of the background information about the risk  on  return.
         It is arguable that the judge's  treatment  of  the  issue  of  the
         Appellant's relocation to  the  Kurdish  Autonomous  Government  is
         brief and inadequately argued.  In  addition  it  is  arguable  the
         judge has not dealt with the likely circumstances of the  Appellant
         in Baghdad immediately on return.  Further, after  promulgation  of
         the judge's decision the Court of Appeal considered and revised the
         country guidance given by the Upper Tribunal on returns to  Baghdad
         in its judgment in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ  944  delivered
         on  22  June  2017.   For  the  reasons  given  in  this  paragraph
         permission to appeal is granted."

 8. Following the grant of permission  the  Respondent  lodged  a  response
    pursuant to rule 24 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008.  In summary it was contended that the judge had directed  himself
    appropriately, noting that the Appellant had previously  lived  in  the
    IKR for eighteen months, and that he had a relative with whom he  could
    live.

 9. Directions were issued that there should be a hearing before the  Upper
    Tribunal to ascertain whether the judge had erred in law such that  the
    decision should be set aside.

Submissions

10. Miss Wilkins relied upon her skeleton argument.   It  was  specifically
    argued before the First-tier Tribunal that the Appellant  would  be  at
    risk if he had to travel from Baghdad to  the  IKR,  and  reliance  was
    placed upon Foreign and Commonwealth Office evidence of road travel  in
    Iraq being highly dangerous.  The judge had stated at paragraph 36 that
    he did not accept that that evidence was in itself sufficient  to  show
    that the Appellant could not safely make one trip from Baghdad  to  the
    IKR.  It was submitted that this conclusion was unsustainable  in  that
    much of the area the Appellant would have to travel  through  to  reach
    the IKR, is an area of Article 15(c) risk.

11. It was submitted that the judge further erred  in  law  by  failing  to
    consider at all what the  situation  would  be  for  the  Appellant  on
    arrival in Baghdad, where he has no connections, and as a Kurdish Sunni
    Muslim would be very unlikely to  be  given  assistance  by  the  local
    community.

12. Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 response pointing out that  the  judge
    had not considered that the Appellant  would  settle  in  Baghdad,  but
    simply that he would transit through Baghdad on route to the  IKR.   It
    was submitted that  the  judge  had  not  erred  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant could live safely in the IKR and it would not be unduly harsh
    for him to live in that region given his previous  residence.   Counsel
    who had represented the Appellant before the First-tier  Tribunal  made
    submissions in relation to road travel within Iraq, but travel  to  the
    IKR from Baghdad would be by air.  It was for the  Appellant  to  prove
    that travel by air from Baghdad to the IKR would not be reasonable  and
    the Appellant had not made any submissions or presented evidence to the
    judge to indicate that  travel  by  air  was  unreasonable.   Mr  Bates
    pointed out that the Appellant would be eligible for Assisted Voluntary
    Return.

13. Miss Wilkins responded by submitting that the feasibility of air travel
    from Baghdad to the IKR had not been considered by the judge.

14. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

15. The judge did not consider the Appellant's circumstances in Baghdad  as
    the judge did not consider that the Appellant  would  be  remaining  or
    settling in Baghdad,  but  would  be  returned  to  Baghdad,  and  then
    travelling onward to the IKR.  I do not find that the judge  materially
    erred in not considering  the  circumstances  in  Baghdad.   The  judge
    recorded at paragraph 17 of his decision that the Appellant had a CSID.
     The relevant guidance is contained within the Annex to AA [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 944 at section E paragraph 20 which is reproduced below;

         "20. Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected
             to avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that  city  by
             travelling to the IKR, will be fact-sensitive; and  is  likely
             to involve an assessment of

             (a)  the practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR  (such
                  as to Irbil by air);

             (b)  the likelihood of K securing employment in the IKR; and

             (c)  the availability of assistance from family and friends in
                  the IKR."

16. The judge found that the Appellant would be able to travel from Baghdad
    to the IKR.  There is no indication that it was suggested to the  judge
    that it would be unreasonable for  the  Appellant  to  travel  by  air.
    Submissions were made that it will be dangerous to travel by  road.   I
    accept that if an individual of Kurdish ethnicity  is  to  travel  from
    Baghdad to the IKR, then travel would take place by air.

17. The judge noted that the Appellant had previously lived in the IKR  for
    approximately eighteen months.  The judge found that  he  had  done  so
    without any difficulty.  The judge found, as accepted by the Appellant,
    that he had lived with his uncle who is a resident of the IKR.

18. The country guidance at section E paragraph  18  confirms  the  IKR  is
    virtually violence free and there  is  no  Article  15(c)  risk  to  an
    ordinary civilian in the IKR.

19. The judge properly considered the country guidance.  It was noted  that
    because the Appellant did not originate from the IKR, he  could  obtain
    entry for ten days as a visitor, and then renew his  permission  for  a
    further ten days.  He would be  able  to  remain  longer  if  he  found
    employment,  and  there  was  no  evidence  that  the  IKR  authorities
    proactively removed Kurds from the IKR whose permits  had  come  to  an
    end.

20. The judge placed significant weight on the fact that the Appellant  had
    previously lived with his uncle in the IKR for a substantial period  of
    time.  In my view  the  judge  did  not  err  in  concluding  that  the
    Appellant would be returned to Baghdad and  from  there  could  transit
    safely to the IKR, and did not err in finding that he had a  reasonable
    internal relocation option in the IKR.

Notice of Decision

The decision does not disclose  a  material  error  of  law.   The  decision
stands and the appeal is dismissed.

Anonymity

I make an anonymity direction because the Appellant has  made  a  claim  for
international protection.  Unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise,  the  Appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of   these
proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Appellant  or  any
member of his family.  This direction applies both to the Appellant  and  to
the Respondent.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.  This direction is made pursuant to  rule  14
of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  There is no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
