
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05450/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 January 2021                    |On 15 February 2021                  |
|Extempore                            |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                    a K A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  Court
    directs otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant
    or members of his family. This direction applies  to,  amongst  others,
    all parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise
    to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel, Counsel, instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Mensah ("the judge"), promulgated on 22 November 2019, by
which she dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's refusal
of his protection claim.  The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, had previously
had an appeal rejected by the First-tier Tribunal in 2008, the judge then
having rejected all core elements of his account.

Before the judge, the Appellant effectively sought to re-argue his old
claim and asserted that he was no longer in contact with any family members
and could not return to his home area of Kirkuk.  He also claimed that he
would not be able to relocate to the IKR or indeed to Baghdad.  The judge
relied heavily on the previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal as
regards the untruthfulness of the Appellant's claim.  She specifically
rejected his assertion that he was no longer in contact with family
members.

At paragraph 19 the judge also stated that he had an original CSID document
with the Respondent and that this document had apparently expired.  Having
then cited large passages from the country guidance decision in AA (Article
15(c)) [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC), the judge continued at paragraphs 26 and 27
to find that the Appellant could not safely return to his home area of
Kirkuk because at that time it remained a contested area.  However, having
found that the Appellant had failed to show that he was undocumented, the
judge went on to conclude that he could reasonably internally relocate to
the IKR.

The grounds of appeal essentially assert that the judge failed to assess
the issue of the Appellant being re-documented with a CSID and also that
she had failed to carry out an adequate assessment in respect of internal
relocation.  Permission was granted on both grounds.

At the hearing before me and following a discussion between the
representatives Ms Everett stated what in my view was an entirely fair and
correct position, namely that the judge had materially erred in failing to
undertake a proper assessment of the internal relocation issue.  With
respect, the judge's consideration of this issue is all too brief.  There
are no reasons given and nothing that engages in any meaningful way with
the various factors which were clearly relevant to the assessment of
reasonableness and as set out in the country guidance case of AAH (Iraqi
Kurds - internal relocation) CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC), which, whilst extant
at the date of the judge's decision had not been cited to any extent within
her decision.  On this basis alone the judge has committed a material error
of law and her decision must be set aside.

I raised an additional matter with the parties, namely the question of what
document was in fact in the United Kingdom and in the possession of the
Respondent.  Whilst the judge stated that this was a CSID, the reasons for
refusal letter refers to a National Identity Card.  There is a distinct
possibility in my view that the judge had moved from an incorrect factual
premise when considering documentation and this must have had a material
bearing on her assessment of the Appellant's claim as a whole.

In respect of disposal I have concluded that in all the circumstances and
with reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement this matter must
be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing with no findings of
fact preserved from the judge's decision.  Having said that, the well-known
principles in Devaseelan will clearly be in play, given the previous
Tribunal decision from 2008.

In addition, the following matters will need to be addressed:

          a) the current country guidance set out in SMO and Others
             (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400
             (IAC);

          b)  any further country information contained either within the
             Respondent's latest CPIN dated June 2020 or adduced in due
             course by the Appellant;

          c) the question of documentation or re-documentation, as the case
             may be, and the precise identification of what document is in
             the possession of the Respondent;

          d) whether the Appellant can now safely return to his home area
             of Kirkuk or, if appropriate, whether he could internally
             relocate either to Baghdad or the IKR.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

      1) This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with no findings
         of fact preserved and with the issues identified  in  paragraph  8,
         above, to be addressed;

      2) The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
         L Mensah;

      3) The First-tier Tribunal shall issue  any  further  case  management
         directions it deems appropriate in due course.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                         Date: 15 January 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor

