
                                   .[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05348/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 February 2021                           |On 19 March 2021              |
|Extempore decision                            |                              |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION IN FORCE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Spurling, Counsel instructed by Hunter Stone
Law
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This an appeal against a decision of Judge S J Clarke of the First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated on 6 December 2019.  The judge allowed  an  appeal
    by the appellant against the decision of the Secretary of  State  dated
    24 May 2019 to refuse his asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claim.
    This appeal is brought by the Secretary of State.   For  convenience  I
    will refer to the parties as they were before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    where appropriate.

 2. The essential issue in these proceedings is the  extent  to  which  the
    Upper Tribunal may review a finding of fact reached by a Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Factual Background

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He arrived  on  a  visitor's
    visa issued on 31 August 2016.  He claimed asylum on 1 August  2017  on
    the basis that he faced being persecuted on account  of  his  political
    opinion due to his activities with  the  Bangladesh  Nationalist  Party
    ("the BNP"), having come from a politically-active family,  and  having
    engaged in sur place activities here.  At the core  of  his  claim  for
    asylum lies the appellant's account of having been arrested and  beaten
    by the Bangladeshi Rapid Action Battalion ("the RAB") on 10 July 2016.

 4. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's asylum  claim  to
    be  credible.   A  significant  plank  of  the  Secretary  of   State's
    credibility concerns arose from  stamps  in  the  appellant's  passport
    which appeared to suggest that he left Bangladesh for India on  8  July
    2016 returning on 11 July 2016.  Crucially, if accurate,  those  stamps
    would have placed the appellant in India at the very time he claimed to
    have been attacked in Bangladesh.

 5. The appellant had sought to respond to those concerns of the  Secretary
    of State in his case  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   He  did  not
    dispute having travelled to India, but contended that the return  stamp
    in his passport was  inaccurate.   He  returned  to  Bangladesh  a  day
    earlier than his  passport  stamp  indicated,  and  was  attacked  that
    evening.  The border crossing point between India and Bangladesh was in
    disarray, he  claimed.   It  was  notorious  locally  for  having  poor
    staffing and haphazard security arrangements.  It was Eid at  the  time
    of his return border crossing, on 10 July.  The usual border staff were
    not present.  It was even worse than normal.  There  was  a  local  man
    wearing a lunghi, a form  of  traditional  Bangladeshi  dress  stamping
    passports.  The judge recorded the lunghi, which was the term  used  by
    the appellant in his witness statement and the appellants witnesses  to
    whom I shall return in a moment, as a "loin cloth".  It may be that the
    judge's use of the term loin cloth has given rise to  some  concern  on
    the part of the Secretary of State and the judge granting permission in
    these proceedings.

 6. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  engages  with  the  passport
    stamps issue at the outset of its analysis.  The  judge  noted  at  [9]
    that the stamps in the passport were "on the face  of  it"  capable  of
    undermining the claim that he was taken by the RAB and beaten.

 7. The judge noted that the appellant had  provided  a  bus  ticket  which
    purported to show his travel from India to Bangladesh on 10 July.   She
    was clear that the bus ticket featured some spelling  mistakes  in  its
    English version.  She added that she had considered that in the  round.
    The appellant also relied on a number  of  photographs  of  the  border
    crossing point and a news article which criticised  the  poor  security
    arrangements and the difficulties encountered at  the  border  crossing
    point during the Eid festival.

 8. At [11] the judge noted that she had  considered  the  appellant's  own
    statement and those from his two friends in Bangladesh who had  claimed
    to have travelled with him on 10 July.  The  statements  say  that  the
    stamp that  had  been  applied  to  the  appellant's  passport  by  the
    unofficial individual at the border crossing point was  for  the  wrong
    date.  This, they said, was common in Bangladesh.

 9. The judge accepted the overall account of the appellant and found  that
    he had given a consistent and reliable account, when  assessed  to  the
    lower standard, of being attacked by the RAB in July 2016.  At [24] she
    found that the core  of  the  appellant's  account  was  credible,  she
    accepted that he had  been  detained  by  the  RAB,  and  released,  as
    claimed.  She accepted that a friend of the appellants had been  killed
    as claimed by the appellant.  She accepted  the  appellant's  claim  to
    have come from a political family, and that he had engaged in political
    activities himself.  The judge noted at [25]  that  the  assessment  of
    risk upon return to Bangladesh  is  case-specific  and  fact-sensitive.
    She made reference to the Country Policy and Information Note published
    by the respondent concerning Bangladesh in  January  2018  and,  having
    applied the policy  set  out  in  that  document,  concluded  that  the
    appellant faced a real risk  of  being  persecuted  on  his  return  on
    account of his political activities.  The judge allowed the  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

10. There are four grounds of appeal.  The  Secretary  of  State  contends,
    first that inadequate reasons were given by the judge relating  to  the
    conflicts of fact in the appellant's  evidence.   Secondly,  the  judge
    made a mistake of fact in relation to accepting  some  of  the  witness
    evidence over that of others when there were consistencies between some
    of the dates that the witnesses had relied upon.   Thirdly,  the  judge
    misdirected herself in law by failing to consider the evidence  in  the
    round from a holistic perspective.  This ground contends that the judge
    focused only upon those factors which were in favour of  the  appellant
    and neglected to consider matters which had been advanced on behalf  of
    the respondent.  As a result, the grounds contend the judge produced  a
    one-sided decision which failed adequately  to  consider  all  relevant
    issues.  The fourth ground of appeal  again  contends  that  the  judge
    provided inadequate reasons for her findings.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Sheridan  in
    these terms:

         "1.  It is arguable that the appellant's explanation as to why  his
             passport was stamped 11 July 2016 and not 10 July 2016 was  so
             implausible that it was irrational for the judge to accept it.

         2.   The judge also arguably erred by not addressing whether it  is
             plausible  that  a  genuine  ticket  would  contain   multiple
             spelling mistakes".

    Permission was granted on all grounds.





Discussion

12. At the outset of my analysis it is necessary to recall that  an  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal lies only upon an error of law  not  following  a
    disagreement of fact.  Of course, certain findings of fact are  capable
    of being infected by an error of law as notably summarised in R  (Iran)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ  982  at
    [9].  There are many judgments of the higher courts which underline the
    distinction between errors of fact and errors of law.  Perhaps  one  of
    the most well-known judgments addressing this distinction as it applies
    across all jurisdictions may be found in the  oft  quoted  judgment  of
    Lord Justice Lewison in Fage UK Ltd v Chobani UK  Limited  [2014]  EWCA
    Civ 5 at [114].  There, his lordship stated as follows:

         "Appellate courts have been repeatedly warned, by recent  cases  at
         the highest level, not to interfere with findings of fact by  trial
         judges, unless compelled  to  do  so.  This  applies  not  only  to
         findings of primary fact, but also to the evaluation of those facts
         and to inferences to be drawn from them".

    His lordship proceeded to  outline  some  of  the  leading  authorities
    concerning that approach and summarised the reasons for  the  deference
    owed by Appellate courts and Tribunals to trial judges as including the
    following:

         "(i) The expertise of a trial judge is in  determining  what  facts
         are relevant to the legal issues to  be  decided,  and  what  those
         facts are if they are disputed.

         (ii)     The trial is not a dress rehearsal.  It is the  first  and
         last night of the show".

    Then again:

         "(iv)    In making his decisions the trial judge will  have  regard
             to the whole sea of evidence  presented  to  him,  whereas  an
             Appellate court will only be island hopping".

    The judgment in Fage UK v Chobani Ltd is now seven  years  old  but  it
    continues to represent a useful summary of the law on the  approach  to
    findings of fact and the deference  owed  by  appellate  tribunals  and
    courts to first instance judges.  See also Perry  v  Raleys  Solicitors
    [2019]  UKSC  5  at  [52]  which  summarised  the  principles  on   the
    "constraints" on appellate courts and tribunals as follows.  Lady  Hale
    said that the principles:

         "may be summarised as requiring a conclusion either that there  was
         no evidence to support a challenged finding of fact,  or  that  the
         trial judge's finding was one that no reasonable judge  could  have
         reached".

    The most recent example of  these  principles  being  applied  in  this
    context may be found in the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  Lowe  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021] EWCA Civ 62  at,  for
    example, [29].

13. Against that background I turn to the grounds of appeal in the  present
    matter.  Mr Walker, who appeared for the Secretary of State, noted that
    the lengthy grounds of appeal conclude with these words:

         "The SSHD is not merely rearguing the case, as the  Tribunal  often
         finds, but contends that for the reasons above,  the  determination
         is  vitiated  by  material  errors  in  law,  rendering   this   an
         unsatisfactory, unclear, unreasoned  and  unsubstantiated  decision
         which should be set aside".

14. Mr Walker very fairly accepted in oral  argument  that  it  would  seem
    that, despite the above attempted  assurance  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal, what features throughout the lengthy grounds are,
    in fact, attempts to reargue the case.  For that reason, he focused his
    submissions on ground 3 of the grounds of appeal, namely that the judge
    misdirected herself  in  law  by  considering  only  one  side  of  the
    appellant's case.

15. I find that an examination of the judge's decision reveals that she did
    anything but consider only one side of the case.

16. At [6] the judge outlined the basis upon which the  respondent  refused
    the  application.   She  noted  expressly  that  the  concerns  of  the
    respondent related to the timings of the entry and exit stamps  in  the
    passport, and she also noted that  at  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004  had been raised by
    the respondent on account of the appellant's delay in claiming  asylum.
    It will be recalled that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on
    27 September 2016 on a visitor's visa, and it was not  until  1  August
    2017 that he claimed asylum.   The  judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the
    respondent's case.  Of course, mere awareness of a case is insufficient
    if the operative reasoning adopted by a judge fails properly to  engage
    with that case.

17. An examination of the judge's reasoning  reveals  that  she  was  fully
    aware and took full account of the respondent's case at  each  part  of
    her analysis.  At [9]  she  noted  that,  "on  the  face  of  it",  the
    passport's entry and exit stamps undermined the  appellant's  claim  to
    have been beaten on  10  July  2016.   She  noted  concerns  about  the
    language of the bus ticket relied upon by the appellant.  What  follows
    in her decision is a consideration of the evidence relied upon  by  the
    appellant, and the Secretary of State's position in relation to it.  It
    cannot be said that she failed to consider both sides of the case.

18. The appellant had written to the port authority  in  Bangladesh  on  18
    August 2016, apparently having realised that a mistake had been made in
    the stamp entered in his passport.  The judge noted that the  appellant
    had provided two witnesses supporting this aspect of his  account.   Of
    course, the two witnesses were in Bangladesh, and  were  only  able  to
    give  written  evidence,  but  they   nevertheless   corroborated   the
    appellant's account.

19. The judge then set out some of the  other  operative  features  in  her
    reasoning which led her to accept the appellant's  account,  noting  at
    [17] that an inconsistency  concerning  dates  (as  identified  by  the
    grounds of appeal) suggested poor memory rather than anything more  but
    noted that she had considered the evidence in the round.  At  [19]  the
    judge noted that  various  newspaper  articles  had  been  provided  in
    support of the appellant's claimed sur place  meetings  which  featured
    the appellant at various BNP meetings and other BNP figures.  The judge
    said that she was aware of the caution that  one  had  to  deploy  when
    assessing documents emanating from Bangladesh.  At [20] she  considered
    the letters that had been provided in support of the appellant  in  the
    round together with the appellant's application form to join the BNP in
    London.  This led to her overall conclusion at [22] that the  appellant
    had presented a consistent and credible account.  It was at this  stage
    in her decision that she said that she had considered "very  carefully"
    the appellant's delay in claiming asylum.  She accepted the explanation
    that she had been provided with by the appellant, namely the arrest  of
    his friends Z and M, which had been said by the appellant  to  catalyse
    his claim for asylum and lay behind his reasons for not claiming asylum
    previously.

20. This was a decision which looked at each strand of the appellant's case
    and considered the evidence advanced on behalf of  the  appellant,  and
    the objections of the Secretary of  State,  in  the  round.   It  is  a
    decision which is generous to this appellant;  another  judge  may  not
    have accepted the appellant's evidence relating to what took place, for
    example, at the border crossing point.   I  note  that  Judge  Sheridan
    granted permission  to  appeal  on  the  basis  that  it  was  arguably
    implausible, and therefore irrational, for the judge to  have  accepted
    the appellant's case in relation to  the  lunghi.   However,  when  one
    addresses the evidence that the appellant had provided, namely his  own
    detailed account, the bus  ticket  which  although  featuring  spelling
    mistakes had been considered in the round by the judge, and  the  other
    weaknesses that had been identified and specifically  set  out  by  the
    judge, it cannot be said that the judge adopted a  one-sided  approach.
    The judge had  the  benefit  of  hearing  the  appellant's  uncle  give
    evidence, in which he said that he had spoken to  the  appellant  while
    the appellant was in the shop  from  which  he  claimed  to  have  been
    abducted on the evening of 10 July 2016.  The appellant's case was  not
    based on assertions that were without foundation; there was evidence.

21. It may be that what lay behind Judge Sheridan's characterisation of the
    evidence as being arguably so implausible as to be irrational  was  the
    judge's use of the term "loin cloth" at [10].  That is not  the  phrase
    that was used by either of the two witnesses or the appellant in  their
    statements.  A lunghi is a far more plausible form of dress than a loin
    cloth.  Whilst significant credibility  concerns  could  understandably
    arise in the event that it was said that the border crossing point  was
    manned by someone in their underwear, that is  in  fact  not  what  the
    evidence was in the present matter.

22. Drawing the above analysis together, this decision  took  into  account
    all relevant factors.  It assessed the points advanced on behalf of the
    respondent.  It noted caution in relation to  certain  aspects  of  the
    evidence relied upon by the  appellant,  by  reference  to  both  case-
    specific features relating to the material the appellant  adduced,  and
    also broader concerns relating to documents from Bangladesh in general.
     Having conducted that analysis, the judge reached  a  conclusion  that
    was open to her on the evidence.

23. It is, as Mr Spurling accepts, not a conclusion that all  judges  would
    have reached.  Mr Spurling accepted that, had a different judge reached
    a different conclusion, he may have well been in  difficulties  seeking
    to challenge it by way of an appeal to this Tribunal.

24. I find that this judge reached a decision that was open to her, on  the
    whole sea of evidence she heard. It was supported by  adequate  reasons
    and was not irrational.

25. Accordingly, it cannot be said  that  this  was  a  decision  which  no
    reasonable judge could have reached.  The first and last night  of  the
    show in relation to this appeal took  place  in  the  judge's  decision
    promulgated on 6 December 2019.  It was not a  dress  rehearsal  and  I
    decline to order a further performance.

26. This appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of Judge Clarke did not  involve  the
making of an error of law.

An anonymity direction is in force.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith                                Date 11 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

