
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05891/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 27 February 2018                        |On 6 March 2018                |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [T O]
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties in the UT are as above,  but  the  rest  of  this  decision
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. The SSHD appeals against a decision by FtT Judge  McManus,  promulgated
    on 21 September 2017.  Paragraph 27 contains all the judge's reasoning,
    and is key:

         "The tribunal must apply section 8 of the 2004 act  when  assessing
         credibility ... The tribunal did  so.  The  tribunal  accepted  the
         appellant's  representative's  submissions  that  the   appellant's
         diagnosis of major depressive disorder is a factor to be taken into
         account when assessing ... credibility. Taking all the evidence  in
         the round, in accordance with ...  Tanveer  Ahmed  IAT  2002  UKIAT
         00439 *, the tribunal is satisfied to the  lower  burden  of  proof
         that the appellant  suffers  real  risk  of  harm  if  returned  to
         Nigeria. This is  because  the  tribunal  accepts  and  takes  into
         account the appellant's significant history  of  domestic  violence
         against her and her diagnosis  of  major  depressive  disorder  and
         accepts the submission that the inconsistencies in the  appellant's
         evidence before the tribunal  that  until  2016  she  believed  her
         husband had killed her son but she was told in 2016 that the agents
         had killed her son. The tribunal accepts that the appellant  has  a
         well-founded fear of these agents. The tribunal  accepts  that  the
         inconsistencies in the appellant's position can be explained by her
         diagnosis. In so doing, the tribunal takes into account the refusal
         letter of 26 May 2016, and in particular paragraphs 14  -  35.  The
         tribunal accepts that the appellant was under the control of agents
         when she entered the UK. In all  the  circumstances,  the  tribunal
         accepts  that  internal  relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh.  The
         tribunal accepts the appellant's representative's submissions."

The SSHD's grounds of appeal.

       . The FtT judge failed ... to give any reasoning why the  appellant's
         account has been accepted.  The  only  paragraph  where  the  judge
         considers the narrative is paragraph 27 and ... there is a lack  of
         reasoning why the account is accepted.

       . The judge does not explain ... what it is about  the  diagnosis  of
         PTSD which leads ... to concluding that the  account  is  credible.
         This is important given the significant change in  the  appellant's
         accounts and it was incumbent on the judge  to  determine  ...  the
         credibility of the appellant's account.

       . Furthermore, the judge failed ... to give any reason  why  internal
         relocation is not an option ...

       . ... the SSHD is not clear why the appeal has been allowed.

Submissions for SSHD

 3. The grounds erred in referring to PTSD.  The diagnosis in the report by
    a consultant clinical psychologist (p.11 of the appellant's bundle 2 in
    the FtT) was that the appellant suffered from  depression.   The  judge
    said that was "a factor  which  has  to  be  taken  into  account  when
    assessing the appellant's credibility" but there  was  nothing  in  the
    report to say that this enhanced her credibility.  The  judge  did  not
    explain how that could be so.

 4. There  was  no  comprehensible  reason  for  the  positive  credibility
    finding.

 5. The respondent relied upon a  report  by  the  competent  authority  on
    trafficking  dated  4  July  2017,  made  in  course  of   the   appeal
    proceedings.  The report found very significant inconsistencies in  the
    accounts given by the appellant and gave detailed reasons  for  finding
    that her credibility was damaged to the extent of rejecting  her  claim
    to have been trafficked.  That claim was the core of her  case  in  the
    FtT.  The  judge  in  reaching  her  conclusions  erred  by  making  no
    reference to the trafficking report.

 6. The error was plain by reference to MS (Trafficking - tribunal's powers
    - art 4. ECHR) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 226 (IAC).

 7. The judge gave no reason for accepting the  authenticity  of  documents
    from Nigeria.  If that was  based  on  accepting  the  representative's
    submission  (recorded  at  paragraph  24)  that  the   documents   were
    unchallenged, that was incorrect.  Authenticity was challenged.

 8. The judge gave no explanation for finding that internal relocation  was
    not available.

Submissions for appellant.

 9. The grounds were wrong to say that the decision contained no reasoning.
     It plainly did.

10. The grounds did  not  open  up  a  challenge  based  on  inadequacy  of
    reasoning.

11. In any event, the reasons given were adequate.  Mr Winter referred to R
    (Iran) & others v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 at paragraph  13;  MS  YZ  v
    SSHD [2017] CSIH 41 at paragraph 44; and Shizad [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)
    at headnote (1).

12. The report by the consultant clinical psychologist included  a  finding
    of "poor concentration".  The diagnostic criteria in appendix II of the
    report  (p.14  of  the  bundle)  included,  "Concentration:  diminished
    ability to think or concentrate, or more indecisiveness".   That  could
    be taken as an explanation for inconsistency, as had been submitted  to
    the FtT (recorded at paragraph 22).  The FtT's approach  was  supported
    by AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123 at H5 (d),  "medical  evidence
    could be critical in explaining why an account might be  incoherent  or
    inconsistent".

13. The judge's reference to Tanveer Ahmed was unclear, but  if  she  meant
    that she was taking all the evidence in the round,  the  case  was  one
    authority for that approach, and there was no error.

14. The judge did appear to have gone wrong by taking  the  documents  from
    Nigeria as unchallenged, but her other reasons outweighed that point.

15. It was not an error to give reasons by adopting a party's  submissions,
    and  the  decision  could  be  further  upheld  by  referring  to   the
    submissions for the appellant recorded therein.

16. The submissions based on MS went beyond the grounds.

17. MS left it open to a judge to take a different view from a  trafficking
    report.

18. There were reasons, supported by evidence,  and  although  brief,  they
    were legally adequate.

Reply for SSHD.

19. The FtT's decision did at earlier points refer to the existence of  the
    trafficking report and submissions upon it, but that could not cure the
    absence of analysis or even reference to such an  important  matter  in
    the decisive paragraph.  The failure to take it into account was plain.
     Alternatively,  the  SSHD  had  no  explanation  why  the  report  was
    rejected.

20. The psychological report was not of the nature referred to in AM at  H5
    (d).  It was a brief diagnosis.  It did  not  explain  incoherence  and
    major inconsistency in the appellant's evidence.

21. The grounds did complain at the outset of absence of reasons, but  they
    plainly went on to aver inadequacy of reasoning.   That  challenge  was
    broad enough to include failure to consider the trafficking report.

Discussion and conclusions.

22. The grounds do not simply assert that the decision  gives  no  reasons.
    Read in full, the challenge is that the reasons are inadequate.

23. The ground of inadequacy of reasoning  is  wide  enough  to  cover  the
    absence of consideration of the trafficking report.

24. MS should have been cited, by both  sides,  to  the  FtT,  and  in  the
    grounds of appeal to the UT; but the legal adequacy of the reasoning in
    the FtT's decision may be tested independently of that authority.

25. It is not generally ideal to give reasons  only  by  reference  to  one
    party's submissions, but to do so is not an error of law,  if  adequate
    reasons can be found in the setting out of those submissions.

26. The passage in paragraph 27 about the appellant's state of belief about
    the killing of her son is ungrammatical and unclear.  However, I  think
    it should be read as a finding that until 2016 she believed her husband
    had killed her son, and said so, but she was told in 2016  that  agents
    had killed her son, which explained why her account changed.  The judge
    thus held that one apparent major discrepancy was resolved.

27. A diagnosis of depression may be a reason for  accepting  some  genuine
    confusion in an honest account, but it  does  not  appear  much  of  an
    explanation for the judge's overall conclusion.

28. The decision does not say which version of events is accepted.

29. The other point of difficulty with the  reasoning  is  the  absence  of
    reference at the point of decision to  the  trafficking  report,  which
    should have been a major consideration.

30. It may be useful to set out the whole passage from R (Iran) on adequacy
    of reasoning:

          1. The second preliminary matter is this. Adjudicators were under
             an obligation to give reasons for their decisions (see reg  53
             of the Immigration and Asylum Appeals (Procedure)  Regulations
             2003), so that a breach of that obligation may  amount  to  an
             error of law. However, unjustified complaints by practitioners
             that are based on an  alleged  failure  to  give  reasons,  or
             adequate  reasons,  are  seen  far  too  often.  The   leading
             decisions of this court on this topic are now Eagil Trust  Co
             Ltd v Pigott-Brown[1985] 3 All ER  119  and English  v  Emery
             Reimbold & Strick Ltd [2002] EWCA Civ 605, [2002] 1 WLR 2409.
             We will adapt what  was  said  in  those  two  cases  for  the
             purposes  of  illustrating   the   relationship   between   an
             adjudicator and the IAT. In the former Griffiths LJ said at  p
             122:

                  "[An adjudicator] should give his  reasons  in  sufficient
                  detail to show the [IAT] the principles on  which  he  has
                  acted and the reasons that have led him to  his  decision.
                  They need not be elaborate. I cannot stress  too  strongly
                  that there is no duty on [an adjudicator], in  giving  his
                  reasons, to deal with  every  argument  presented  by  [an
                  advocate] in support of his case. It is sufficient if what
                  he says shows the parties and, if need be, the [IAT],  the
                  basis on which he  has  acted,  and  if  it  be  that  the
                  [adjudicator] has not dealt with some particular  argument
                  but it can be seen that there  are  grounds  on  which  he
                  would have been entitled to reject it,  [the  IAT]  should
                  assume that he acted on those grounds unless the appellant
                  can point to convincing  reasons  leading  to  a  contrary
                  conclusion."

          1. In English Lord Phillips MR said at para 19:

                  "[I]f the appellate process is to work satisfactorily, the
                  judgment must enable  the  [IAT]  to  understand  why  the
                  [adjudicator] reached his decision.  This  does  not  mean
                  that every factor which weighed with the [adjudicator]  in
                  his appraisal of the evidence has  to  be  identified  and
                  explained. But the issues the  resolution  of  which  were
                  vital  to  the  [adjudicator]'s   conclusion   should   be
                  identified and  the  manner  in  which  he  resolved  them
                  explained. It is not possible to provide  a  template  for
                  this process. It need not involve a lengthy  judgment.  It
                  does require the  [adjudicator]  to  identify  and  record
                  those matters which were critical to his decision. If  the
                  critical issue was one of fact, it may be  enough  to  say
                  that one witness was preferred to another because the  one
                  manifestly had a  clearer  recollection  of  the  material
                  facts or the other gave answers  which  demonstrated  that
                  his recollection could not be relied upon."

          1. It will be noticed that the Master of the Rolls used the words
             "vital" and "critical" as  synonyms  of  the  word  "material"
             which we have used above. The whole of his  judgment  warrants
             attention, because it reveals  the  anxiety  of  an  appellate
             court not to overturn a judgment at first instance  unless  it
             really  cannot  understand  the   original   judge's   thought
             processes when he/she was making material findings.

          1. What we have said does not absolve an adjudicator  of  his/her
             duty of devoting the intense scrutiny to the appellant's  case
             that is required of a decision of  such  importance.  What  we
             wish to make clear, however, is that the practice of  bringing
             appeals because the adjudicator or immigration judge  has  not
             made reasoned findings on  matters  of  peripheral  importance
             must now come to an end.

31. The SSHD is not asking here for unnecessarily elaborate reasons, or for
    reasons on a subsidiary argument.  There were clear,  multiple  reasons
    for rejecting credibility both in the decision  directly  under  appeal
    and in the trafficking decision.  The  latter  decision,  for  example,
    begins by pointing out that the appellant told the psychologist she had
    a normal childhood with both parents,  yet  she  said  in  her  witness
    statement that her mother died when she was very young, and  she  never
    knew her father.

32. It was open to the judge to take another view of credibility,  but  the
    SSHD was entitled to an explanation for rejection of  the  analyses  in
    the refusal letter and in the trafficking decision.

33. The appellant has no answer to the second ground of  appeal,  based  on
    internal relocation.

34. The respondent in the decision (paragraphs 36 - 42) and in  submissions
    made a reasoned case why the appellant's account, even if  true,  would
    not qualify her for protection.    The submissions  for  the  appellant
    recorded on that issue are vague, and appear to take the line that risk
    runs throughout Nigeria, rather than that relocation  would  be  unduly
    harsh on the appellant.

35. The decision does not explain why the SSHD's  position  on  alternative
    relocation, which was capable of being a complete answer to  the  case,
    has been rejected.

36. The decision of the FtT is set aside. It stands only  as  a  record  of
    what was said at the hearing.

37. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

38. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge McManus.

39. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.




           [pic]
           Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman


           28 February 2018


