

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05203/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 January 2020                               |On 16 January 2020             |
|                                                 |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between

                                     A V
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. I find that it is appropriate  to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Mr A. Chakmakjian, instructed by Leonard
Cannings LLP
For the respondent:          Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated 26  April  2019
    to refuse a fresh protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Zahed ("the judge") dismissed the appeal  in
    a decision promulgated on 21 October 2019.  The  judge  considered  the
    findings made in an earlier appeal in  2008  [16-21].  He  went  on  to
    identify a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  previous
    account and in the evidence given in relation to this application  [22-
    33]. At [34] the judge came to the following conclusion:

                     "34.    I find that the appellant attended a church  in
                 2008 in order to bolster his claim for his  pending  asylum
                 claim and subsequent appeal hearing in 2008.  I  find  that
                 the appellant started attending church  again  in  2015  in
                 order  to  obtain  evidence  for  his  further  submissions
                 application in 2017. I find that the appellant's attendance
                 at the church for a short period in 2012  and  subsequently
                 from 2015 is not as a genuine converted  Christian  but  in
                 order to be able to produce evidence to the respondent  and
                 for his asylum appeal. I find in  line  with  the  evidence
                 before the previous IJ and applying the case of  Devaseelan
                 that  the  appellant  did  not  convert   from   Islam   to
                 Christianity in Iran. I find that  he  has  fabricated  the
                 entire claim in order to obtain asylum in the UK so that he
                 may remain in the UK and that  he  is  purely  an  economic
                 migrant."

3.    Having made that finding the judge went on to  consider  the  evidence
    put forward in support of the appellant's  claim,  including  the  oral
    evidence given by  the  appellant's  brother  and  Mr  Deall  from  the
    Southampton Lighthouse International Church [35-38].  He  rejected  his
    brother's evidence because it was inconsistent.  Although  he  accepted
    that Mr Deall believed that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  Christian
    convert, he placed no weight on his opinion for the following reasons:

                      "38.   Although I am prepared to accept  the  evidence
                 of Malcolm John  Deall  who  genuinely  believes  that  the
                 appellant is a converted Christian, I have  looked  at  the
                 appellant's claim in the round applying the lower  standard
                 of evidence throughout and  find  for  the  reasons  stated
                 above that the appellant is not a genuine Christian convert
                 and although he may have convinced Mr Deall that he is; and
                 has attended church and meetings and reposted/shared  bible
                 verses on his Facebook page; I find that the appellant  has
                 done these things in order to bolster his asylum  claim  in
                 order to remain in the UK."

4.    The  judge  made  the  following  finding  relating  to  the  evidence
    relating to the appellant's claimed religious activity on Facebook:

                       "39.    The  appellant  has  submitted  a  number  of
                 screenshots of posts that he has put on his Facebook  page.
                 I note that these screenshot posts are simply sharing Bible
                 verses. There are not any comments, or blogs or things that
                 the appellant has written himself. I note the  oldest  post
                 is from May 2018. The appellant has posted  a  total  of  8
                 times in May, June, July, September and October 2018, twice
                 in August 2019 and once in September 2019. I find that this
                 was done in order to  bolster  his  asylum  claim  and  not
                 because he is a genuine Christian convert."

5.    The  appellant  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  on  the
following grounds:

       i) The judge failed adequately to consider the evidence  produce  by
          the appellant, and in particular, the evidence given by Mr Deall.
          At the hearing Mr Deall was cross-examined and explained in  some
          detail how and why he concluded that the appellant was a  genuine
          convert. He also made clear that he had  considered  whether  the
          appellant may not be genuine. The judge failed  to  consider  the
          detail of his evidence in order to assess what weight  should  be
          placed on  his  opinion.  The  judge  failed  to  consider  other
          material evidence, which  included  several  letters  from  other
          members of the church who testified to the appellant's attendance
          and their belief that he was a genuine convert.

      ii) The judge failed adequately to consider the evidence relating  to
          the appellant's activities on Facebook, which was not confined to
          the eight posts referred to. There was further  evidence  in  the
          respondent's bundle. Albeit the posts were not translated it  was
          clear that some of them were likely to  have  religious  content.
          The letters from members of the church also  testified  to  their
          knowledge of his postings on Facebook.

6.    In response, Mr Clarke made detailed  submissions  outlining  why  the
    evidence produced by  the  church  members  would  not  have  made  any
    difference to the outcome of the appeal given  the  credibility  issues
    already identified by the judge. It was open to  him  to  place  little
    weight on the evidence given by Mr Deall in the circumstances. None  of
    the Facebook evidence would make any difference to the outcome  of  the
    appeal and it was open to the judge to find that, if the appellant  was
    not a genuine convert, he could delete those posts before returning  to
    Iran.

Decision and reasons

7.     After  having  considered  the  grounds  of  appeal  and   the   oral
    submissions made by both parties, I am satisfied  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a point of law and
    must be set aside.

8.    It was open to the judge, indeed  he  was  obliged,  to  consider  the
    negative credibility findings made by a previous judge in 2008. It  was
    also open to the judge to consider a number  of  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence which undermined the credibility of his  claim  to
    be a genuine Christian convert.

9.    However, the appellant made a fresh  protection  claim  based  on  his
    continuing attendance at church, which over time, was at least  capable
    of showing a commitment to his claimed faith. In support of  the  fresh
    claim he produced a number of  letters  from  various  members  of  the
    church that he attends, who testified  to  their  belief  that  he  was
    committed to the faith. A member of the church who had  known  him  for
    several years also attended the hearing  to  give  evidence.  Counsel's
    note of the proceedings indicates that he  gave  detailed  evidence  to
    explain why he believed that the appellant was a genuine convert.  When
    cross-examined, Mr Deall made clear that he was conscious of  the  fact
    that some people who attend church might not be genuine. He  said  that
    there were some members of the church who he had doubts  about  in  the
    past who he wasn't prepared to attend court to support.

10.   Mr Clarke made detailed submissions as to why some of the  letters  of
    support might raise more difficulties in terms of  the  consistency  of
    the evidence. However, they formed part  of  the  overall  picture  and
    included information that was  relevant  to  some  of  the  credibility
    issues identified by the judge. For example, at [31]  the  judge  found
    that the appellant's explanation relating to lack of attendance  during
    certain periods incredible, but members of the church testified to  the
    fact that they were also aware of the fact that  the  appellant  had  a
    period when he had doubts about his faith. I find that there  is  force
    in Mr Chakmakjian's submission that I was now aware of the respondent's
    submissions as to why no weight should be placed on the  evidence,  but
    still had no better understanding of why the judge placed no weight  on
    the evidence because he failed to make any findings.

11.   The judge  made  a  clear  error  with  reference  to  the  principles
    outlined in Mibanga v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 367. At [34] he made a clear
    finding rejecting the entirety of the appellant's claim without  having
    considered any of the evidence that might support it. It was only after
    he rejected the appellant's  claim  that  he  turned  to  the  evidence
    produced by the appellant. He used his negative credibility findings to
    justify  placing  no  weight  on  Mr  Deall's  evidence.  No   adequate
    consideration was given to Mr Deall's reasons for  believing  that  the
    appellant was a genuine convert, nor was  his  evidence  considered  in
    light of a body of other letters of support from other members  of  the
    church. The judge's approach  to  the  assessment  of  the  appellant's
    credibility involved the making of an error  of  law.  The  judge  also
    erred in failing to take into account relevant evidence. The criticisms
    of the evidence put forward by  the  respondent  are  not  sufficiently
    compelling to say with any confidence that a judge would  be  bound  to
    reject the  evidence.  The  matters  that  went  for  and  against  the
    appellant should have been considered as part of a holistic  assessment
    before coming to a conclusion about the credibility of his claim to  be
    a Christian convert.

12.   Although the second ground is less compelling,  it  is  apparent  that
    there was evidence to indicate a greater  level  of  Facebook  activity
    than was considered by the judge. Little weight would have  been  given
    to untranslated copies of posts, even if they appeared to indicate some
    religious content. But material evidence from members of the church who
    testified to being aware of his Facebook posts was not  considered.  As
    such, the judge erred in failing to consider material evidence.

13.   I conclude that the First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making
    of errors on a point of law. Given that the errors identified go to the
    heart of the credibility assessment, it was agreed by both parties that
    the appropriate course of action would be for the matter to be remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing. I am satisfied that the
    extent of the findings of fact that need  to  be  remade  justify  this
    course of action.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing


Signed   [pic]   Date 14 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan









