
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05026/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 30 April 2018                       |On 14 May 2018                      |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                             MR MD SODRUL ISLAM
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bhutyani, Counsel instructed by Universal
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of  State  is  the  appellant.   She  appeals  against  a
    decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Obhi who,  in  a  decision
    that was either promulgated on 27 February or 2 March 2017 (it  is  not
    entirely  clear  from  the  documents  which  is  the  actual  date  of
    promulgation but it makes little difference), "allowed" the  appeal  of
    Mr Md Sodrul Islam.

2.   Mr Islam is a national of Bangladesh whose date of birth is  10  August
    1983. He entered the United Kingdom with entry clearance on  13  August
    2008. He overstayed.  He made various applications for leave to  remain
    in 2014 based on human rights considerations  but  these  were  refused
    without a right of appeal. On 17 September 2015 he applied for  asylum.
    His  asylum  application  was  based  on  his  involvement   with   the
    Bangladeshi National Party.  He claims that he was arrested in 2008  at
    a political gathering.  He was attacked by members of the Awami  League
    and arrested by the police. He was taken to hospital and claims he  was
    further ill-treated on his discharge. He was granted bail from a  court
    and told to report back in March 2008.  On advice, he  fled  Bangladesh
    and entered the United Kingdom.  He claims  he  was  sentenced  to  two
    years in his absence. The Secretary of State refused the  asylum  claim
    on 4 May 2016.  The respondent did not find the  applicant  a  credible
    witness and rejected his account of political activity and his  account
    of ill-treatment.

3.   At the appeal hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  on  21  February
    2017 the judge considered documentary evidence and oral  evidence  from
    the  appellant.   The  judge  considered,   in   particular,   document
    verification reports prepared by the Home Office  in  conjunction  with
    the Foreign Office in Bangladesh suggesting that FIRs provided  by  the
    applicant were not genuine and that court documents purportedly  issued
    in relation to the applicant were not genuine.   The  judge  considered
    the oral evidence from Mr Islam and  found  that  he  could  attach  no
    weight to the documents produced by him.  The  judge  held  against  Mr
    Islam the fact that he used forged documents.  The judge  held  against
    Mr Islam his apparent inability to provide anything  other  than  vague
    information about the BNP. The judge additionally held against Mr Islam
    his failure to claim asylum at an earlier opportunity.  It is  apparent
    from the decision at paragraphs 36 to 41 that the judge found Mr  Islam
    to be a dishonest witness who had fabricated his claim.   At  paragraph
    46 the judge stated, "For the reasons I have given I dismiss the appeal
    under the refugee convention and under human rights".   However,  under
    the heading 'Decision' the judge stated, "The appeal of  the  appellant
    is allowed under the refugee convention", the appellant of course being
    Mr Islam.

4.   When made aware of her inconsistent  conclusions  the  judge  issued  a
    'supplementary decision' in which she  explained  that  she  mistakenly
    allowed the appeal and indicated, for the avoidance of doubt,  that  Mr
    Islam's appeal had in fact been dismissed.  Mr Islam sought to  appeal,
    initially out of time, although time  was  extended,  the  initial  and
    supplementary decisions of Judge Obhi.

5.   Permission was initially refused on all grounds by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Shimmin on 31 October 2017.  The grounds contended that the judge
    had acted outside  of  her  power  and  that  the  second  supplemental
    decision was ultra vires.  The  grounds  also  challenged  the  judge's
    adverse credibility findings.  The grounds challenging the substance of
    Judge Obhi's decision were very general in nature and made a number  of
    unsupported assertions.

6.   Permission was however granted in a renewed application  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  On 15 December 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb found that it
    arguable, in light of the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  Katsonga  (slip
    rule; First-tier Tribunal's general powers) [2016] UKUT 288 (IAC), that
    the judge had no power to amend the decision or  make  a  supplementary
    decision after it had been promulgated. Judge Grubb however found there
    was absolutely no merit in the challenge  to  the  judge's  substantive
    assessment of Mr Islam's asylum claim.

7.   At an error of law hearing on 1  February  2018  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Finch concluded that the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  have  power  to
    amend her initial decision following the  Upper  Tribunal  decision  in
    Katsonga. As a consequence, the only decision that was still  in  place
    was that allowing Mr Islam's appeal.  Judge Finch  allowed  Mr  Islam's
    appeal on this limited basis and to the limited extent  only  that  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  had  no  jurisdiction  to  make  a  supplementary
    decision.

8.   In giving directions Judge Finch indicated that  if  the  Secretary  of
    State wished to appeal against Judge Obhi's decision she must  make  an
    application to extend  time  and  to  submit  appropriate  grounds.  An
    application to extend time supported by grounds  was  received  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal  on  27  February  2018.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    granted permission to appeal to the Secretary of State  in  a  decision
    dated 14 March 2018  and  extended  time  in  light  of  Judge  Finch's
    directions.

9.   I heard  very  brief  submissions  from  both  representatives  at  the
    hearing on 30 April 2018.  It  is  absolutely  clear  that  Judge  Obhi
    intended to dismiss Mr Islam's  appeal  and  that  she  simply  made  a
    mistake when stating that the appeal was allowed.  I am satisfied  this
    is a material error and I set aside the decision.  I proceed to  remake
    the decision.

10.  Permission was refused in respect of challenges  to  the  substance  of
    Judge Obhi's decision. Even if permission had not  been  refused  I  am
    entirely satisfied that the First-tier  Judge  took  into  account  all
    relevant evidence before her and reached decisions rationally  open  to
    her.  She was unarguably entitled, for the reasons given, to  find  the
    documentary evidence provided by the applicant to be unreliable.  There
    was no reason for her  to  go  behind  the  findings  of  the  document
    verification report and there was no risk that the applicant's  details
    or identity were disclosed to  the  Bangladeshi  authorities.  She  was
    fully entitled to take into  account  the  applicant's  vagueness  when
    asked questions about the BNP and she was entitled to hold against  him
    his immigration history, particularly  the  significant  delay  in  his
    claim for asylum given that he  had  previously  made  a  human  rights
    claim.  In these circumstances I find that the judge  gave  cogent  and
    legally sustainable reasons for her conclusion and I dismiss Mr Islam's
    appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set  aside.  I  remake  the
decision, dismissing Mr Islam's protection and human rights appeal.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]                               4 May 2018
Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
