
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05213/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 11 December 2018                  |On 18 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     E E
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Marian Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                       DECISION OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                        PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF
             THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    to refuse  him  international  protection  on  asylum  or  humanitarian
    protection grounds, or leave to remain in the United Kingdom  on  human
    rights grounds.  The appellant is  a  non-arab  Darfuri  of  the  Berti
    tribe, whose case is that while in  Sudan,  he  worked  with  students,
    putting him at increased risk of persecution or serious harm.

 2. At the hearing today, it was common ground that the First-tier Tribunal
    did materially err in law.   The  core  incident  of  past  persecution
    relied upon was the appellant's assertion that he had been  kicked  and
    beaten in the supermarket.  The Judge at [53] dismissed that account on
    the basis that he had already found the  appellant's  account  to  lack
    credibility.  That was a plain Mibanga error: the Judge failed to  take
    all of the evidence and assertions into  account  before  reaching  his
    conclusions on the credibility of the account overall.

 3. The parties agree that this is a case where the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal must be set  aside,  and  that  no  written  reasons  are
    required.  The requirements of sub-paragraphs 40(3)(a) and 40(3)(b)  of
    the Procedure Rules are met.  I am also satisfied that the decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal can properly be set aside  without  a  reasoned
    decision notice.

 4. I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, with  no
    findings of fact or credibility preserved. The appeal will now  proceed
    to the stage in which the First-tier Tribunal will remake the  decision
    to allow or dismiss the appeal on the basis described in the  grant  of
    permission.



Signed:  Judith A J C Gleeson                    Date:          11  December
2018
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson


