
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05313/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 October 2018                              |On 31 October 2018             |
|                                               |                               |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      RA
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Birk promulgated on 15 December 2017 in which she allowed the appeal of RA
on protection grounds against a decision of the Respondent dated 24 May
2017 refusing asylum in the UK.

2.   Although before me the Secretary of State for the Home Department is
the appellant and RA is the respondent, for the sake of consistency with
the proceedings before the First-tier Tribunal I shall hereafter refer to
the Secretary of State as the Respondent and RA as the Appellant.

3.   RA is a 24 year old national of Iraq.  She was born in Chamchamal,
which is currently in the Iraq Kurdish Region ('IKR').  It is her case that
at the age of 18 she entered into a marriage with a significantly older
man, H.  She says it was a forced marriage arranged by her father and
stepmother.  She went to live with H in Kirkuk.

4.   Kirkuk is not in the IKR.  It was common ground between the parties
before me that Kirkuk is approximately 50 kilometres from Chamchamal, and
that the two places are connected by a road upon which it is possible to
travel between them: e.g. see the 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL') at
footnote 11, and the reference to Google Maps therein.

5.   The Appellant was delivered of a son, Q, in August 2014.

6.   In September 2016 she claims to have been falsely accused of having an
adulterous relationship.  The accusation arose during the course of events
on 11 September 2016. The Appellant had opened the front door to see a man
with whom she had enjoyed a flirtatious relationship prior to her marriage.
 Although this was an unexpected visit it was nonetheless observed by her
husband, who jumped to a conclusion that there was something untoward in
this relationship.  In consequence the Appellant was beaten, stabbed, and
locked in her room whilst her husband went to inform her parents about the
situation.  It is the Appellant's case that she was then able to escape
from the locked room, and she fled to her sister who lived in Chamchamal.
Whilst at her sister's house, where she says she only stayed for a day, her
father and her husband arrived to make enquiries of her - they were told
that her sister did not know anything about her whereabouts.

7.   Thereafter, with the assistance of her sister's husband, arrangements
were made for the Appellant to leave Iraq. She left on 14 September 2016
for Turkey.  Approximately a month later she left Turkey for Greece, and
then gradually made her way to the United Kingdom via Bulgaria and France.
She entered the United Kingdom on 24 November 2016, on which day a
screening interview was also conducted.  A substantive asylum interview
took place on 5 April 2017, which was continued on 17 May 2017.

8.   The application for asylum was refused for reasons set out in the RFRL
of 24 May 2017.

9.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

10.  By the date of the appeal the Appellant was pregnant.  (In this
context it appears that there is an error at paragraph 5 of the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal Judge wherein it is stated that the child was due
to be born in May 2018; this is contradictive of the reference in paragraph
7 to the Appellant being 31 weeks pregnant.  I am told today that the
Appellant was delivered of a daughter in January 2018, which would be
consistent with the notion that she was approximately 31 weeks pregnant at
the date of the hearing.)  The pregnancy was said to have arisen during the
course of a brief relationship of some three weeks in May and June 2017
with a man with whom the Appellant was no longer in touch.

11.  The fact of the Appellant's pregnancy was introduced into her claim
for protection as an additional element at the appeal hearing.  The
following appear at paragraph 9 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
Judge:

         "On behalf of the Appellant it was submitted that she is a single
         lone woman who will have a child out of wedlock"; and

         "The crux of the claim is whether or not she is pregnant by her
         husband or not.  If it is another individual then she will seen
         [sic.] as breaching the family honour by her father and her
         husband".

For the avoidance of any doubt these passages appear to be part of the
Judge's summary of the submissions made on the Appellant's behalf.

12.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge essentially accepted the Appellant's
narrative account of the events that had preceded her departure from Iraq,
and also accepted the circumstances of her pregnancy in the UK.  The Judge
found that the Appellant was consequently at risk from members of her
family:

         "26. I find that she cannot return to her husband or her father and
         step-mother in Kirkuk as they have treated her poorly and abusively
         in the past and that the circumstances of her marriage to a person
         who has abused her by locking her inside the house means that they
         will not offer support to her.  The fact that she would arrive
         pregnant means that there is very strong possibility that they will
         reject her completely.  Further that they would all regard it as an
         insult to their honour.


         27.  I find that there is a high risk of her being persecuted by
         her family due to the dishonour that she has brought to the family
         ...".

13.  In this context the Judge also concluded that there would be no
adequacy or sufficiency of protection: see paragraph 27.

14.  The Judge then addressed the issue of internal relocation:

     "I find that she cannot show access to male support in the place of
         relocation.  I find that there is a level of vulnerability in her
         position due to her pregnant state and a child who is aged 3.  She
         is not an educated woman and has no financial support available to
         her.  I find that she would struggle to find a shelter and to be
         able to find employment and support herself.  She has previously
         not worked or lived alone in Iraq.  I find that it would be unduly
         harsh for her to relocate internally" (paragraph 29).

15.  In such circumstances the Judge considered that it was not necessary
to analyse the "situation as to the practicalities and feasibilities of
return to Iraq" (paragraph 30).  In this regard there was an issue as to
the availability or otherwise of documentation, and the assistance that
might be gleaned from family members - specifically the Appellant's sister
and brother-in-law - to ensure that proper documentation might be obtained
such that the Appellant could reach the IKR.

16.  The Secretary of State for the Home Department applied for permission
to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, which was granted by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Grant-Hutchison on 11 January 2018.  The grant of permission to
appeal is in the following terms:

     "It is an arguable error of law that the Judge has misdirected herself
         (a) in finding that the Appellant is from Kirkuk when she is from
         Chamchamal which is in the governate of Suleimanya which means she
         can internally relocate in the IKR and (b) by failing to deal
         specifically with the fact that the Appellant's sister and brother-
         in-law were able to assist her to leave the IKR without considering
         the possibility that they would be able to assist in being re-
         documented or being pre-cleared for entry with the IKR authorities
         on return.  As such this may have made a material difference to the
         outcome or to the fairness of the proceedings".

17.  The contended error in respect of the Appellant's origins is
identifiable at paragraph 5 of the Decision of the First-tier Tribunal.
The Judge states "The Appellant's account is that she is Kurdish and from
Chamchamal in Kirkuk".  As indicated above, Chamchamal and Kirkuk are quite
distinct places.  The former is not 'in' the latter.  There does indeed
appear to be some confusion in the mind of the Judge in respect of the
relationship between these two separate geographical locations.

18.  It is suggested that this error is taken forward when the Judge refers
at paragraph 26 - as quoted above - to the risk to the Appellant being in
Kirkuk: i.e. "I find that she cannot return to her husband or her father
and step-mother in Kirkuk ...".  It is submitted that by eliding Chamchamal
and Kirkuk into one entity the Judge failed to have regard to Chamchamal in
the IKR as a possible place of relocation; further, it is for this reason
that the Respondent in challenging the Judge's decision has also focused in
on the absence of any findings in respect of obtaining documentation such
as to enable the Appellant to return to the IKR.  In the premises of the
Respondent's challenge is that the Appellant can relocate to the IKR -
perhaps with the assistance of her sister and brother-in-law in the
documentation process - and thereby avoid the risk of persecution seemingly
identified to be in Kirkuk.

19.  I am not persuaded that that Judge's confusion in respect of Kirkuk
and Chamchamal constitutes a material error of law.

20.  I entirely accept that the Judge does indeed seem to have confused
matters geographically; but in my judgement this could not possibly have
made any difference to the outcome in this appeal.

21.  I note the following:

(i) The Judge appears to place the Appellant's father and stepmother in
Kirkuk. However, it is not evident that the father and stepmother ever
moved away from Chamchamal.  They had lived in Chamchamal at the time of
the Appellant's marriage to her husband, and it was the Appellant who
relocated to Kirkuk upon marriage.

(ii) In any event it was plainly the case - and no issue has been taken in
this regard - that it is possible to travel between Kirkuk and Chamchamal.
Such a journey was undertaken by some of the various 'players' during the
course of the relevant events.

(iii) Moreover, and perhaps most pertinently, it was also part of the
Appellant's narrative account that when she had fled from her husband to
her sister's house in Chamchamal, both her husband and her father turned up
at her sister's house to enquire as to her whereabouts.  See, for example,
the Appellant's witness statement of 10 February 2017 at paragraph 13, and
her response during her asylum interview at question 89.

22.  It seems adequately clear, notwithstanding the possible geographical
elision or confusion, that the First-tier Tribunal Judge in substance found
that the Appellant was at risk where her father lived. Further, in
accepting the narrative account that both her husband and father had been
able to look for her at her sister's home the Judge in substance found she
was not safe in Chamchamal. Accordingly the geographical confusion had no
impact on the core finding that there was a risk of persecution.

23.  Nor am I persuaded that the geographical confusion had any impact on
the issue of relocation.

24.  I have quoted the Judge's findings in respect of relocation above.  It
is to be noted that the factors relied upon, albeit measured against the
background situation in Iraq, were essentially matters that were personal
to the Appellant and therefore pertained irrespective of geography.  Whilst
there may be some vagueness in paragraph 29 in the Judge's reference to
"the place of relocation", there being no such place expressly mentioned, I
accept in substance the submission of Mr Sharif - if the Judge made a
finding of risk of persecution in the areas in which the Appellant's family
resided, then the Judge must reasonably be considered to have had in mind
as the place of relocation anywhere else in Iraq.

25.  There is no specific challenge to what is said about the Appellant's
vulnerabilities, and in those circumstances it seems to me there is no
particular challenge to the Judge's reasoning in respect of internal
relocation, beyond the distinction between Kirkuk and Chamchamal, and that
only one is in the IKR.

26.  The substance of the Judge's findings are that the Appellant is at
risk from her family members both in Kirkuk and Chamchamal; relocation to
Chamchamal is not therefore appropriate; relocation elsewhere in Iraq is
not a reasonable option because of the Appellant's specific
vulnerabilities.

27.  In those circumstances it does indeed seem to me to be immaterial that
the Judge failed to consider whether or not the Appellant could reach the
IKR by way of obtaining the proper documentation through family members.
Given the Judge's findings that the Appellant was entitled to international
surrogate protection, it was not necessary to consider the practicalities
of return.

Notice of Decision

28.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error of
law and accordingly stands.

29.  The Respondent's challenge is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 19 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
