
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/05481/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 22 March 2019                |On 1 April 2019                 |
|Prepared on 28 March 2019       |                                |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    K. M.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, entered the UK illegally and made
         a protection claim on 31 October 2017.   That  was  refused  on  15
         April 2018, and the Appellant's appeal against  that  decision  was
         then heard and dismissed by First Tier Tribunal Judge  Moran  in  a
         decision promulgated on 15 June 2018.
      2. The Appellant's application for permission to appeal was granted by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on 15 November 2018.
      3. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to  rely  upon  further  evidence.  Thus  the
         matter came before me.


    Adjournment
      4.  When  the  appeal  was  called  on  the  Appellant  requested   an
         adjournment in order to secure legal representation. He  said  that
         he was not familiar with the law, and  felt  unable  to  argue  his
         case. He accepted that he had been represented at  the  hearing  of
         his appeal in 2018, but told me that his lawyers had refused to act
         further on his behalf. He told me that he  was  unable  to  pay  an
         alternative lawyer, and that those he had approached  had  declined
         to assist him because  they  considered  his  appeal  to  be  weak.
         Nevertheless he wished to be given a further opportunity to find  a
         lawyer.
      5. The Appellant's appeal was heard on 31 May 2018, and  it  was  then
         dismissed by decision of 15 June 2018. The retainer for his  former
         solicitors must have terminated shortly thereafter, since  he  told
         me they had refused to act further, and  thus  he  lodged  his  own
         applications for permission  to  appeal  to  both  the  First  tier
         Tribunal ["FtT"], and  the  Upper  Tribunal.  I  am  satisfied  the
         Appellant had nine months to find new representation once  he  knew
         the outcome of his appeal to the FtT, and four months once he  knew
         he had secured permission to appeal that  decision.  There  was  no
         evidence that allowed me to infer that he has a reasonable prospect
         of securing  alternative  representation,  and  so  I  refused  the
         adjournment application.


    The challenge
      6. I invited the Appellant to explain to me what he believed to be the
         errors in the Judge's approach to the appeal, and confirmed to  him
         that I would consider that decision in the  light  of  the  current
         jurisprudence in relation to Iraq.
      7. The Appellant told me that he had a copy of his father's  ID  card.
         He accepted that this was a printout of the  same  image  that  the
         Judge had been told at the hearing existed on his mobile phone, and
         which he had claimed had been sent to him by his brother from Iraq.
         The Appellant also  accepted  that  the  Judge  had  known  of  the
         existence of this image, because he had told him of it, and because
         the Judge made specific reference to it's existence in his decision
         [16]. I pointed out to the Appellant that the Judge had noted  that
         his solicitor had made it clear that she did not seek to rely  upon
         this evidence. He had no response to that.
      8. In the circumstances I am not satisfied that the  Judge  failed  to
         take into account material evidence that was placed before  him.  I
         am satisfied that the reality was that this image  was  not  relied
         upon at the hearing. Even if the Appellant  had  intended  that  it
         should be, it is plain that his  solicitor  did  not  agree  -  for
         whatever reason. In any event, even if the image had been  advanced
         in evidence it is difficult to see  what  weight  could  have  been
         given by the Judge to its  mere  existence  in  the  light  of  his
         assessment of the weight that  could  be  given  generally  to  the
         Appellant's  evidence.  As  Ouseley  J  explained  in  CJ  (on  the
         application of R) v Cardiff  County  Council  [2011]  EWHC  23,  by
         reference to the importance of the approach in Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD
         [2002]  Imm  AR  318,  any  documentary  evidence  along  with  its
         provenance needs to be weighed in the light of all the evidence  in
         the  case.  Documentary  evidence  does  not  carry  with  it   any
         presumption of authenticity, which specific evidence must disprove,
         failing which its content must be accepted. What is required is its
         appraisal  in  the  light  of  the  evidence  about   its   nature,
         provenance, timing and background evidence and in the light of  all
         the other evidence in  the  case,  especially  that  given  by  the
         claimant. In the circumstances of this appeal it is in my judgement
         clear that the Judge could have attached no material weight to  the
         image.
      9. The Appellant then told me that he had  video  and  photographs  of
         demonstrations in Iraq. Initially I understood him to mean that  he
         had presented in evidence at the hearing photographs of himself  at
         one or more demonstrations in Iraq, but when I  sought  to  clarify
         this with him, he  confirmed  that  he  was  not  in  the  film  or
         photographs. He confirmed that  he  believed  that  copies  of  the
         photographs he had in his possession were shown to the Judge at the
         hearing, once I had noted that there was no such  material  in  the
         bundle of evidence filed in support of the appeal in advance of the
         hearing, or upon the Tribunal file. Nor was there any such material
         on the  Respondent's  file.  In  the  circumstances  it  is  highly
         unlikely that any such material  was  filed  or  served  either  in
         advance of, or at, the hearing.
     10. Even if such material had been relied upon by the Appellant, I note
         that there was no dispute that demonstrations took place from  time
         to time in  Iraq.  The  issues  for  the  Judge  were  whether  the
         Appellant had in fact been present at any demonstrations, and,  had
         thereby come to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  authorities.  In
         relation  to  those  issue,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  copy
         photographs of a demonstration, that do not show the  Appellant  as
         present, have any probative value.
     11. In the circumstances I am satisfied that there is no merit  in  the
         first limb of the grant of permission to appeal.
     12. The second limb  of  the  grant  of  permission  was  that  it  was
         "Robinson obvious" that it was arguable that the Judge had made  no
         reference to AA (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944,  and  had  made  no
         findings of fact in relation to return to Iraq; AAH (Iraqi Kurds  -
         internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212.
     13. There are two obvious difficulties with a grant  of  permission  in
         those terms.  First  there  is  the  wholescale  rejection  of  the
         Appellant's evidence concerning any real risk of harm faced by  him
         in the event of  his  return  to  the  KRG.  Second  there  is  the
         Appellant's own evidence about the location of his home  town,  the
         location of his documents, and his ability to contact his family in
         Iraq.
     14. The Appellant confirmed to me that his home town  was  Suleymanyeh,
         as described in the interview records, and in the Judge's decision.
         I  am  satisfied  that  an  internal  flight  could  be  taken   to
         Suleymanyeh from Baghdad (the point of return to Iraq); AA and AAH.
         Thus he could travel from Baghdad to Suleymanyeh by air in  safety,
         and as a returning resident he would face no difficulties in  being
         admitted for settlement by the Kurdish authorities. He could return
         to his family, and to the lifestyle, that he had left.
     15. The Appellant also confirmed to me that he was legitimately  issued
         with a genuine Iraqi passport. Since his family live in, and he was
         born in, Suleymanyeh, his family book records must be  held  there.
         His family are able to verify his identity, should that be needed.
     16. The Appellant denied being able to recall  when  his  passport  had
         been issued to him (although the evidence  disclosed  this  was  in
         2009), but he accepted that this passport, together with all of his
         ID cards, had been left in the care of his father,  at  the  family
         home. There is no proper evidential basis upon which  any  Tribunal
         could infer that the Appellant left Iraq illegally,  since  on  the
         Judge's adverse findings he had no reason to do so.  The  Appellant
         accepted before the Judge that he was in contact with  his  family,
         and so there is also no basis upon which the Tribunal  could  infer
         that his family were unable to send his passport and identity cards
         to him in the UK.
     17. In the circumstances the  Appellant  would  obviously  be  able  to
         travel from the UK to Iraq upon his own legitimate passport, if  he
         chose, whether that passport remained in date, or had expired; AAH.
         It would not be removed from him upon arrival, and he would also be
         able to use those documents to board an internal flight to the KRG.


     18. As a former resident of the KRG the Appellant would not be required
         to have a sponsor in the KRG, but rather he would  be  admitted  to
         return to permanent residence. He clearly has a CSID, and he  would
         also have the ability to obtain a grant under the Voluntary Returns
         Scheme, and could resume his occupation of his family  home.  There
         may be a decline in the  construction  industry  and  a  consequent
         increase in unemployment for unskilled IDPs, but the  Appellant  is
         not one of them. On his own account he is  a  University  graduate,
         and the  clear  inference  is  that  his  family  are  sufficiently
         affluent to have paid for that education, and to have paid for  his
         travel to the UK. There is no reason to suppose he will  return  to
         destitution. He also has the significant advantages over IDPs  that
         he would be able to show  that  he  is  a  former  resident,  fully
         documented, with family support.


    Conclusion
     19. Accordingly, notwithstanding  the  terms  in  which  permission  to
         appeal was granted, I confirm the Judge's decision to  dismiss  the
         asylum, Article 3, and humanitarian protection appeals. There is no
         material error of law in the approach taken by  the  Judge  to  the
         appeal that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.


    DECISION
    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  15
    June 2018 contained no material error of law in the decision to dismiss
    the Appellant's appeal which requires that decision to be set aside and
    remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 28 March 2019


