
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05720/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th September 2018                        |on 03 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   Mr t a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss S Anzani, Counsel, instructed by Goodfellows
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant, a citizen of Pakistan, appealed to the First-tier Tribunal
against a decision of the Secretary of State dated 20th April 2018 to
refuse his application for asylum in the UK.  First-tier Tribunal Judge
Hembrough dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 22nd June 2018.
 The Appellant now appeals with permission to this Tribunal, granted by
Judge Hollingworth on 1st August 2018.

The background to this appeal is that the Appellant claims to have entered
the UK clandestinely on 13th September 1993.  On 12th October 2013 he
applied for indefinite leave to remain in the UK on the basis of his long
residence.  However, that application was refused on 30th March 2014 as the
Respondent was not satisfied that the Appellant had entered the UK on the
date claimed or that he had been continuously resident for more than twenty
years, further, the provenance of documents submitted by the Appellant in
support of his application were not accepted.  The Appellant lodged an
appeal against that decision which he later withdrew on 29th October 2014.
On 8th November 2014 he applied for an EEA residence card as an extended
family member.  That application was refused on 17th November 2014.  On
23rd January 2015 he applied for leave to remain on human rights grounds of
appeal but that application was withdrawn on 30th March 2015.  On 16th
October 2015 he applied for an EEA derivative residence card and that
application was refused on 19th January 2016.  On 23rd October 2017 he
claimed asylum.

The basis of his claim for asylum is that, as a result of his opposition to
jihadist groups in Pakistan, he was threatened on several occasions and in
December 1991 he was beaten by members of a jihadist group and sustained
significant injuries.  He claims that he was detained, beaten and sexually
abused over a period of three days.  He claims that he was thrown from a
moving vehicle onto the road and suffered serious head injuries and stayed
in hospital for about thirteen months and recuperated at home for a further
six months before leaving Pakistan. He says that he has been left with
facial scarring as a result of his injuries.  He claims that since he left
jihadist elements had been making enquiries about his whereabouts and
issuing threats against him and that in 2017 they pinned a message to the
family home, stating that he should contact Jamat u Dawa Choburji Lahore
immediately or face serious consequences.  He claims that he fears
persecution at the hands of Jamat u Dawa or the Pakistani government if
returned to Pakistan.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered that the Appellant's account was
vague.  However, the judge accepted that the Appellant suffered very
serious and life-threatening injuries, in particular to his head and spine,
in December 1991 for which he was hospitalised for a substantial period
[57].  He accepted that the Appellant sustained the injuries in the manner
described by him as a result of a quarrel which may have had its genesis in
his opposition to the recruitment of young men to fight in Kashmir [61].
However, the judge considered that there was no reliable evidence that
would point towards the involvement of the Pakistani government in either
of his alleged kidnappings and did not accept that the Appellant is at risk
of persecution at the hands of the Pakistani government on account of his
political opinions or at all.  The judge was not satisfied either that the
Appellant would continue to be of interest to jihadist groups or Jamat u
Dawa after 25 years [62].  The judge specifically rejected the Appellant's
claim that Jihadists had been attending his father's home two or three
times a year.  The judge rejected the Appellant's evidence of a photograph
and message claiming to be from Jamat u Dawa pinned to his father's door
and found that it was a fabrication with the aim of bolstering his claim.
At any event, the judge considered that, even if the Appellant were at risk
in his home area, it was reasonable for him to internally relocate within
Pakistan [66].

The judge went on to consider the appeal on human rights grounds
considering the Appellant's length of residence in the UK.  The judge said
at paragraph 69 that he was unable to make any finding in relation to the
date upon which the Appellant entered the UK, noting that there were no
documents to establish his presence in the UK prior to October 2013.  The
judge assessed the evidence of the witnesses.  The judge considered that
the Appellant "has lived in the UK for a substantial period of time" [72]
but was not satisfied that he had been living here for twenty years so as
to meet the requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii).  The judge was not
satisfied that there were very substantial obstacles to the Appellant's
integration on return to Pakistan where his father, with whom he has
regular contact, continues to reside.  The judge dismissed the appeal on
asylum and humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds with
reference to Articles 2, 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

Error of law

The Grounds of Appeal put forward five grounds.  The first ground contends
that the judge erred in his assessment of the credibility of the Appellant
and the witnesses.  It is contended that the judge did not take into
account that the Appellant's memory may affect his recall as to what
happened in 1991.  However, the judge specifically took that into account
at paragraph 59 of the decision.

It is contended that, in considering elements of the evidence of the
witnesses, the judge reached an irrational conclusion.  I do not accept
that submission.  The judge set out the evidence from the witnesses at
paragraphs 45 to 47 of the decision.  The judge assessed this evidence at
paragraphs 70 and 71 where he said:-

"70. Two of his witnesses, Messrs Haque and Ashraq claimed to have known
him for in excess of twenty years and whilst both appeared credible as I
observed at the hearing in my experience people are notoriously bad at
remembering dates.  Mr Haque could not even remember the dates of his
marriage or divorce.  In his witness statement he said that he had known
the Appellant for 21 years.  His oral evidence was that they had met in
1995 which is 23 years.  The Appellant said that they had met in "maybe
1996 or 1997".  Neither was able to relate their meeting to a significant
personal or historical event for example the 1996 Atlanta Olympic Games or
the like."

 71. The Appellant said that he met Mr Ashraq in 1998 or 1999.  Mr Ashraq
said 1998 but when pressed he was unable to relate their meeting to any
significant event referring to a car whose plate he was unable to recall
and a redundancy process which apparently took five years to complete."

Miss Anzani submitted at the hearing that the judge made no express finding
in relation to the evidence of the witnesses.  She submitted that it seems
that the judge accepted that they were truthful witnesses.  She noted that
Mr Haque said that he knew the Appellant from around 1995, although she
accepted that this was not precise, and that the judge concluded that he
accepted that the Appellant has lived in the UK for "a substantial period
of time" at paragraph 72 of the decision.  In her submission the judge made
no clear findings as to how long the Appellant had lived in the UK.  She
submitted that this amounts to a material error because the judge has given
insufficient reasons, particularly in light of the fact that the witnesses
were found to be credible.  In her submission the findings were incomplete.
 Miss Anzani submitted that there was too much left undetermined by the
judge's decision and that the reasoning was not sufficiently clear.

I do not accept this submission.  In my view the judge pointed out that
there was no documentary evidence before October 2013 and made a clear
finding that he could not rely on the evidence of the witnesses as to when
they first met the Appellant and therefore made a finding open to him that
the Appellant had been in the UK for a substantial period of time which was
less than twenty years.  It is clear to me that the judge considered that,
whilst the two witnesses appeared credible, their recall as to the period
over which they had known the Appellant was not reliable and their evidence
did not withstand detailed scrutiny.  It is clear that the judge did not
consider their evidence established what they were asserting to the
appropriate standard.  The judge found that there was no documentary
evidence of the Appellant's residence in the UK before October 2013.  I
find that these were findings open to the judge on the basis of the
evidence before him and that these are sufficiently clear.  On the evidence
before him the judge could not make a clear finding as to how long the
Appellant had resided in the UK. The judge was entitled to find that the
evidence was inadequate. This ground discloses no material error.

The second ground contends that the judge erred in failing to take into
account the Appellant's subjective fear and his prospect of internal
relocation within Pakistan and that the judge failed to make any findings
as to whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh for this Appellant.
 At paragraph 66 the judge dealt with internal relocation as an alternative
finding after finding that the Appellant had not established that he had a
well-founded fear of persecution in Pakistan as a result of any risk from
the Pakistani authorities or Jihadists in his own area. As set out below, I
find that this finding was open to him on the evidence.  Accordingly, even
if there was an error in the approach to internal relocation, which I do
not accept, any error was not material in light of the fact that the
primary findings stand. In any event I find that there was no error in the
judge's approach to internal relocation.  In considering whether it would
be unduly harsh the judge took into account the Appellant's continuing
health issues, for which he had recently sought treatment in the UK.  I
note that the only evidence of medical treatment in the UK indicates that
he had not sought any medical assistance until November 2017.  The judge
took into account that the Appellant's father is resident in Pakistan and
considered that there was no reason why he could not internally relocate
within Pakistan.  I find that these were findings open to the judge and
sustainable on the evidence.

The third ground contends that the judge erred in reaching a conclusion
unsupported by the evidence.  It is contended in the grounds that the
medical evidence points to a sustained injury he suffered as past
persecution from Jamat u Dawa.  It is contended that the judge "fails to
set out adequate reasons for rejecting that the applicant suffered
persecution and sustained life threatening injury from Jawad Ud Dawa which
is in contradiction to the fact if returned he would face persecution from
the Jihadist group and the state could not and would not protect him". It
is difficult to understand what this ground means, given that the judge
found that the Appellant had sustained the injuries in the way claimed. The
judge also made very clear findings that there was insufficient evidence
that the Appellant would be of interest to Jihadist groups after 25 years
and had rejected the evidence of ongoing interest.  In my view the grounds
do not point to any evidence ignored by the judge in making this finding
and I find that this finding was open to the judge on the evidence.

The fourth ground contends that the judge failed to take into account
relevant evidence in relation to ongoing interest by Jihadists.  However,
in my view the judge made clear findings in relation to this matter at
paragraphs 63, 64 and 65 of the decision. The judge noted that the
Appellant remained in Pakistan for two years after the attack without
further harm. He rejected the Appellant's claim that Jihadists had been
attending his father's home 2 or 3 times a year since his departure to make
inquiries about him and rejected the claim that the Jihadists had left a
photograph and message for the Appellant on his father's door. These
conclusions were open to the judge on the evidence for the reasons given.

It is contended in the fifth ground that the judge failed to consider
Article 8 outside of the Immigration Rules and failed to set out clear
reasons for not applying the five steps set out in the decision in R v SSHD
ex parte Razgar [2004] UKHL 27.  However, the judge considered the human
rights provisions from [72] to [77] where he took into the Appellant's
residence in the UK.  Miss Anzani submitted that there was no adequate
consideration of proportionality in light of the substantial amount of time
the Appellant has spent in the UK.  However, I find that the judge was
unable to make a definitive finding as to how long the Appellant has been
in the UK but took his claim at the highest by considering that he had been
in the UK for a substantial period of time in light of the confused
evidence in relation to this issue.  It is clear that the judge took this
into account in his consideration at paragraph 72.

The judge then considered the provisions of paragraph 276ADE.  Miss Anzani
submitted that the judge's finding that there were no insurmountable
obstacles to returning to Pakistan was not sufficiently reasoned in light
of the fact that the Appellant had injuries sustained in the manner
described by him.   However the judge had already made clear findings that
there was no ongoing risk to the Appellant. Miss Anzani referred to the
Appellant's ongoing medical issues and issues in relation to depression and
high blood pressure.  However, the medical evidence indicates that the
Appellant had not sought medical treatment throughout his time in the UK
until November 2017 (according to the letter of 29th May 2018 from Tooting
South Medical Centre).  This does not indicate that he has had ongoing
medical issues such as to be a bar to his removal to Pakistan. The evidence
shows that the Appellant had received medical treatment in Pakistan after
his injuries in 1991.  There is no reason to believe that such medical
treatment would not be available to him upon return to Pakistan now.

The judge went on to look at the public interest considerations at Section
117 of the 2002 Act.  The judge went on to consider whether there were
other factors including the fact that the Appellant has many friends in the
UK and took into account the oral evidence and the letters of support at
paragraph 75.  The judge took into account at paragraph 76 that there was
no evidence that the Appellant spoke English to the required standard or
that he had passed the Life in the UK test. The judge took into account the
fact that the Appellant had been accessing specialist medical treatment to
which he is not entitled. The judge considered all of these factors before
concluding that the Appellant's removal was proportionate to the legitimate
aim.  These were all findings open to the judge on the basis of the
evidence and the judge undertook a legitimate proportionality assessment
based on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not contain a material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal will stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 28th September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
