
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05457/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th March 2018                            |On 2nd May 2018               |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    [N A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Colin Yeo of Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr Irwin Richards, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who claims his date of  birth
    is [ ] 2000.  He says that he entered the United Kingdom in about  June
    or July 2015 and claimed asylum on 8th October 2015.

2.   The appellant's application was refused, but he was  assessed  to  have
    been born on [ ] 1999 and was granted  discretionary  leave  to  remain
    until 10th June 2017.  Before the expiry of  his  discretionary  leave,
    the appellant requested the Secretary of State to recognise  him  as  a
    refugee.  In a letter dated 6th May 2016,  the  respondent  refused  to
    grant  the  appellant  refugee  status.   The  appellant  appealed  the
    decision and his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grimmett
    in Birmingham on 16th March 2017.

3.   The appellant's claim was largely misbelieved  by  the  judge  and  his
    appeal was  refused.   In  granting  permission  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Lindsay said this:

         "3.  The grounds of appeal contend, in summary, that  firstly  that
             the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  consider  any   country
             guidance decisions, but particularly AA (unattended  children)
             Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 16 and AK (Afghanistan) and  others
             [2012] EWCA  Civ  1014.   Secondly,  the  First-tier  Tribunal
             failed to properly consider the  appellant's  age  and  mental
             health when assessing his credibility.  No reference was  made
             to the evidence of his psychiatrist, social worker  or  foster
             carer about his fragile mental health but only  to  the  prior
             evidence  of  the  educational  psychologist.   There  was  no
             reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010
             on children and vulnerable  adults.   Thirdly,  the  appellant
             contends  that  undue  weight  was  given  to  the   screening
             interview notes as to whether the appellant's father was alive
             and to ambiguous questioning on this  point,  when  all  other
             records state that he died.  Furthermore, it is contended that
             the hearing was procedurally unfair.  The respondent  withdrew
             a concession that the appellant had been previously  recruited
             by the Taliban on the day of the hearing, and this  prejudiced
             the appellant as he had not  been  given  the  opportunity  to
             provide evidence on this issue.  It is accepted that this  was
             an error of Counsel not to apply for an adjournment,  but  the
             appellant should not be fixed with this  error,  FP  (Iran)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] EWCA Civ 13.
              This was  a  significant  issue  which  affected  credibility
             findings against the appellant.  Fifthly there was  a  failure
             to consider whether the appellant could safely access his home
             area, and also properly reason  the  decision  on  whether  he
             would be  met  at  the  airport  and  would  receive  adequate
             reception conditions, and in turn failed to look at  the  Home
             Office guidance  on  processing  asylum  claims  on  reception
             conditions - a document which the Presenting Officer ought  to
             have drawn to his attention  as  per  UB  (Sri  Lanka)  v  the
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
             85."

4.   In addressing me, Mr Yeo told me that he had  no  instructions  on  the
    significance of the withdrawal of the concession by  the  Secretary  of
    State.  The Secretary of State appeared to have written to the Tribunal
    and to the appellant's solicitors two days before the hearing, but  the
    appellant's solicitors had never received any such letter  and  it  was
    not until the day of the hearing that the appellant  and  his  advisors
    became aware that the concession was withdrawn.

5.   The appellant was born in 2000 or in 1999 and  arrived  in  June  2015,
    aged either 14 or 15.  The events which the  appellant  recounted  took
    place much earlier.  The judge made no allowance at all for the age  of
    the appellant when the events he related occurred  at  a  much  earlier
    time in his life and  the  judge  showed  no  awareness  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.

6.   Mr Yeo submitted that  one  of  the  most  notable  omissions  was  the
    failure by the judge to refer to AA or to  Article  15(c).   There  had
    been a failure by the judge to grapple with paragraph 276ADE(vi) and no
    consideration at all  of  the  psychiatric  evidence  or  of  the  oral
    evidence of the foster carer and the oral evidence of the  teacher  who
    appeared before the judge.

7.   Mr Richards suggested that there was no material  error  of  law.   The
    late concession was not actually withdrawn on the day of  the  hearing,
    it was drawn two days before the hearing and faxed copies of the letter
    were sent to the Tribunal  and  to  the  appellant's  solicitors.   The
    credibility findings  made  by  the  judge  were  ones  which,  on  the
    evidence, were open to her.  He asked me to uphold the decision.

8.   This appellant was no more than 15 years of age when he arrived in  the
    United Kingdom.  He could not have been more than 16 years of age  when
    he was interviewed  in  connection  with  his  claim.   However,  there
    appears to be no recognition of the appellant's  vulnerability  by  the
    judge before  considering  the  evidence  before  her.   When  she  did
    consider the evidence, she failed to consider  the  psychiatric  report
    and the oral evidence of the appellant's long-term foster carer and the
    oral evidence of the appellant's English teacher, Ms Booth.

9.   It is not possible for me to know whether the late  withdrawal  of  the
    concession by the Secretary of State would have had any impact  at  all
    on the appeal, because Counsel was without instructions on  the  point.
    Nonetheless, that aside, I am satisfied that there are errors of law in
    this determination such that no part of it can stand.  I set  it  aside
    in its entirety.

10.  Given the lengthy delays that can occur when part-time judge's  reserve
    cases to themselves, I have decided not to reserve this  to  myself  in
    the Upper Tribunal, but instead to remit this appeal for hearing afresh
    by a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal other than Judge Grimmett.

11.  I would respectfully suggest that  two  and  a  half  hours  should  be
    allowed for the hearing of the appeal.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley                              Date: 28th  March
2018

