
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05105/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 29th March 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Hussain of Raiyad Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha of the Specialist Appeals Team


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Bangladeshi born in  1987.   On  26  March  2011  he
    entered with leave as  a  student  which  leave  was  extended  on  one
    occasion.  Subsequently on 6 March 2015 the Appellant applied for leave
    to remain on the basis of his private life.  This  was  refused  and  a
    similar application made on 9 July 2015 was refused on 27 August  2015.



 2. On 20 January 2016 the Appellant made a claim for subsidiary protection
    on the basis of his sexual orientation.

The SSHD's Decision

 3. On 3 April  2018  the  Respondent  (the  SSHD)  refused  the  Appellant
    subsidiary protection and also rejected his claim based on his  private
    life.  The SSHD accepted the Appellant's claimed sexual orientation  as
    a gay man.  The SSHD accepted  that  LGBT  people  in  Bangladesh  face
    discrimination but concluded there was no  evidence  suggested  by  the
    country information that the treatment of the general  LGBT  population
    in Bangladesh was so adverse as to amount to persecution. Further,  the
    Appellant  was  not  involved  in  activities  which  would  raise  his
    visibility as a gay man and so he would not  face  any  increased  risk
    from society at large: see foot of page 7 of the reasons for refusal.

 4. On 17 April 2018 the Appellant appealed against the decision  asserting
    that the reasons given for the SSHD's rejection of his claim  were  not
    supported by the background evidence  and  that  the  SSHD  had  failed
    correctly to apply the learning in HJ (Iran) v SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.

The Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 5. By a decision promulgated on  4  June  2018  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Obhi dismissed the appeal  finding  at  paragraph  37  of  her
    decision:-

         "... the fact that  the  Appellant  will  live  in  a  more  closed
         environment in Bangladesh does not mean that he will be persecuted.
          I am not satisfied that the mere fact of the Appellant being a gay
         person will place him at risk.  Further there  is  no  evidence  to
         support the suggestion that he will be open about his sexuality and
         the only thing  preventing  him  from  being  open  is  a  fear  of
         persecution."

 6. She also dismissed his claim based on his private life because  he  did
    not meet any of the time critical requirements of paragraph  276ADE  of
    the Immigration Rules and there were no very significant  obstacles  to
    his re-integration in Bangladesh.

 7. On 21 September 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Froom  refused
    permission to appeal on the basis that the application  for  permission
    was nearly three months' late  for  which  there  was  no  satisfactory
    explanation.  His decision was made with reference to an application of
    8 September 2018 lodged by Syed Shaheen & Partners.  He referred to the
    Appellant having concerns  about  his  former  solicitors  who  in  the
    refusal of  permission  were  identified  as  Raiyad  Solicitors.   The
    relevance of the identity of  the  solicitors  lodging  the  permission
    application is of note as mentioned below in paragraph 10.

Proceedings in the Upper Tribunal

 8. On 18 October 2018 Syed Shaheen & Partners renewed the  application  to
    the Upper  Tribunal,  explaining  the  delay  in  making  the  original
    application to the First-tier Tribunal.

 9. On 17 December 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan granted permission  to
    appeal because the background evidence showed that  same  sex  activity
    between men is  illegal  in  Bangladesh  and  that  there  is  societal
    disapproval, discrimination and a rise in hate crime.   Further,  Judge
    Obhi had noted evidence to show that  an  individual  was  unlikely  to
    obtain effective protection from the  state.   She  had  arguably  also
    erred in finding the only reason why the Appellant  might  be  discreet
    about his sexuality on return was fear of  disapproval  by  his  family
    because he  had  given  additional  reasons  at  his  interview  by  an
    Immigration Officer and in his witness statement.

10. In the Tribunal file, separate from the correspondence  and  pleadings,
    is a fax of 15 June 2018  from  Raiyad  Solicitors  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal enclosing  an  application  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    permission to appeal together with a Transmission  Verification  Report
    showing it had been sent on 15 June at 6:44 p.m.  There is also a  copy
    of a letter of 20 October 2018 from Raiyad Solicitors to Syed Shaheen &
    Partners endeavouring to explain the position.

11. Ms Cunha for the Respondent raised a preliminary point that  the  grant
    of permission by the Upper Tribunal had  not  addressed  the  issue  of
    timeliness as required by Rule 21(7) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  She referred to the reasons upon for which Judge
    Froom had refused permission.

12. I am prepared to accept that the letter of 15 June 2018 was sent by fax
    and for some unknown reason not placed in  the  Tribunal  file  by  the
    Tribunal administration.  Regrettably, in my experience over  the  past
    eighteen months or more this sort of thing  appears  to  have  happened
    with an increased  frequency.   Given  the  current  pressures  on  the
    Tribunal's  administrative  staff,  no  criticism  of  any   particular
    individual member of staff is intended.

13. There was no evidence before me what may have  transpired  between  the
    Appellant, Raiyad Solicitors and Syed Shaheen & Partners. Consequently,
    I am not in a position to make any comment on it.  Nevertheless,  I  do
    find that the application for permission to appeal by Raiyad Solicitors
    was made in time, and in any  event,  taking  account  of  the  subject
    matter of  the  appeal,  I  find  it  appropriate,  if  the  permission
    application was out of time that it would be unjust not to extend time.



Submissions for the Appellant

14. Mr Hussain referred me to paragraph 36 of Judge Obhi's  decision  where
    she found:-

         "He said in his evidence that he came out once he was in the UK and
         he noted a more open society.  Despite that there  is  no  evidence
         that the Appellant has been open about his sexuality  even  in  the
         UK."

15. However, the Judge had also  noted  evidence  that  the  Appellant  has
    attended gay clubs in the United Kingdom and that he would be  unlikely
    so to do in Bangladesh.  She also noted the Appellant was not leading a
    celibate life in the United Kingdom.

16. Mr Hussain referred me to the Judge's findings at paragraphs 33 and  34
    of her decision that the Appellant  had  been  discreet  in  Bangladesh
    because of his parents' likely non-acceptance of his sexuality and that
    he had concealed it because of fear of his own  family's  reaction  and
    not as a result of any persecution suffered by him.  Mr Hussain  argued
    that this did not fairly reflect the evidence  before  the  Judge.   At
    interview (pages B20,  23  and  35  of  the  Respondent's  bundle)  the
    Appellant had said in reply to questions 38, 50 and 108:-

         "I am a homosexual person.  If I go back to Bangladesh and if  they
         come to know what I am I will be beaten up.  If police come to know
         they will arrest me.  They will take me to  the  lock-up  and  they
         will torture me and they will extract money from  me,  and  if  the
         fundamentalist religious extremists know, they will kill me.

         Anybody in the society comes to know I am a gay, I will  be  beaten
         up.  I was very scared of  other  people.   Whenever  I  looked  at
         attractive boys I used to look around myself whenever I was staring
         at them.  Because in our society people hate gay people.  They used
         to swear at them, used to say they are the dirtiest in society.

         If I go back, I would hide away.  If somebody came to know  that  I
         am a homosexual they will definitely attack me.  If people  know  I
         am homosexual my parents may face problems because of me.   I  just
         came to (learn?) on 17 April 2017 297 people have been arrested  by
         police on suspicion of being homosexual.  In 2016 one  gay  person,
         Qulhas Manman  was  killed.   He  posted  his  gay  photos  on  the
         internet, he wanted to be open."

    At paragraphs 6 and 7 of his witness statement, the Appellant had  said
    he had not told anyone in Bangladesh because he feared if  his  friends
    found out they would not be his  friends  anymore,  his  parents  would
    disown him and throw him out and the  general  public  would  hate  and
    attack him.  He added that he had acted like a  heterosexual  to  avoid
    people finding out about his sexuality.

17. Mr Hussain submitted that at paragraph 36 of her decision the Judge had
    appreciated the issues in the appeal were  the  threat  from  non-state
    actors and whether there would be a sufficiency of protection  for  the
    Appellant on return.

18. He referred to paragraph  2.3.17  of  the  SSHD's  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note - Bangladesh: Sexual orientation and  gender  identity
    of November 2017 which was before  the  Judge.   This  states  that  in
    general an LGBT person who does not conceal their sexual orientation or
    gender identity may be at risk  of  adverse  treatment,  which  by  its
    nature  and  repetition  amounts  to  persecution  or   serious   harm.
    Paragraph 4.2.1 it notes that in Bangladesh sexual activity between men
    is illegal and at paragraph 2.4.5  that  in  general,  the  Bangladeshi
    authorities appear able but unwilling to offer effective protection  to
    members of the LGBT community. Further, in the previous  paragraph  the
    Note finds that the authorities have  been  responsible  for  arbitrary
    arrests, detentions, harassment and discrimination towards LGBT persons
    with reports of the police physically and sexually assaulting them.

19. He  continued  that  the  Judge's  assessment  of  there  being  little
    likelihood the Appellant would be persecuted on  return  to  Bangladesh
    was contrary to the background evidence.  The absence of any systematic
    persecution by the state indirectly referred to at paragraph 36 of  her
    decision did not mean that there was no risk on return.   The  evidence
    is that there is discrimination against members of the  LGBT  community
    which may amount to persecution and that the authorities  are  able  to
    but unwilling to supply a sufficiency of protection.

20. Mr Hussain continued that the fact is the Appellant  has  declared  his
    sexual orientation in the United Kingdom and had explained the  reasons
    why he had been discreet in Bangladesh included his fear of violence at
    the hands of non-state actors and the lack of protection by the  state.
    This was in addition to his fear of parental disapproval.

21. The Appellant had given ample reasons  why  he  feared  persecution  on
    return to Bangladesh at interview and  in  his  witness  statement  and
    having regard to HJ (Iran) the Judge had made a material error  of  law
    in dismissing his appeal.

Submissions for the SSHD

22. Ms Cunha submitted that a reading of the  Appellant's  interview  reply
    108 did not disclose that on return to  Bangladesh  he  would  be  open
    about his sexual  orientation.   The  Judge  at  paragraph  34  of  her
    decision had found the Appellant would be discreet and consequently  he
    was not likely to be persecuted on return.  The Judge  had  noted  that
    even in the United Kingdom the Appellant had provided limited  evidence
    of his sexual orientation being a  public  matter.   Consequently,  his
    fear  on  return  was  not  well-founded.   There   may   be   societal
    discrimination in Bangladesh against members of the LGBT community  but
    the Appellant would lead a very private life and therefore  not  be  at
    real risk of persecution.  There was no material error of  law  in  the
    Judge's decision.

Response for the Appellant

23. Mr Hussain referred again to the background evidence  and  the  replies
    the Appellant had given at interview.  The reason he had been  discreet
    in Bangladesh was precisely because he feared persecution by  non-state
    actors and rightly  believed  that  the  state  authorities  would  not
    protect him.  The Judge's decision had failed to take  account  of  the
    background evidence and what the Appellant had said at interview and in
    his witness statement and should be set aside.



Consideration and Conclusion

24. I reserved my decision and obtained the agreement of both parties  that
    in the event I found a material error of law I should proceed  in  this
    decision to deal with the substantive appeal.

25. I find there is a material error of law because the Judge did not  take
    adequate or any account of  the  reasons  given  by  the  Appellant  at
    interview and in his witness statement why he had been  discreet  about
    his sexual orientation while in Bangladesh.  The Supreme  Court  in  HJ
    (Iran) at paragraphs 77-80 set out the approach to be followed:-

         "At the most  basic  level,  if  a  male  applicant  were  to  live
         discreetly, he would in practice have to avoid any open  expression
         of affection for another  man  which  went  beyond  what  would  be
         acceptable behaviour on the part of a straight man.  He would  have
         to be cautious about the  friendships  he  formed,  the  circle  of
         friends in which he moved, the places where he socialised. He would
         have constantly to restrain  himself  in  an  area  of  life  where
         powerful emotions  and  physical  attraction  are  involved  and  a
         straight man could be spontaneous, impulsive even.  Not only  would
         he not be able to indulge openly in the mild flirtations which  are
         an enjoyable part of heterosexual life, but he would have to  think
         twice before revealing  that  he  was  attracted  to  another  man.
         Similarly, the small tokens and gestures  of  affection  which  are
         taken for granted between men and women could well be dangerous. In
         short,  his  potential  for  finding  happiness  in   some   sexual
         relationship would be profoundly affected.  It is objectionable  to
         assume that any  gay  man  can  be  supposed  to  find  even  these
         restrictions on his life and happiness reasonably tolerable.

         It would be wrong, however, to limit the areas  of  behaviour  that
         must be protected to  the  kinds  of  matters  which  I  have  just
         described - essentially, those which will enable the  applicant  to
         attract sexual partners and establish  and  maintain  relationships
         with them in the same  way  as  happens  between  persons  who  are
         straight. ...

         In short, what is protected is the applicant's right to live freely
         and openly as a gay man.  That involves a wide spectrum of conduct,
         going well beyond conduct designed to attract sexual  partners  and
         maintain relationships with them.  To  illustrate  the  point  with
         trivial stereotypical examples from British society: ...  In  other
         words, gay men are to be as free as their straight  equivalents  in
         the society concerned to live  their  lives  in  the  way  that  is
         natural to them as gay men, without the fear of persecution.

         This  is  not  to  give  any  false  or  undue  prominence  to  the
         applicant's sexuality or to say that an individual  is  defined  by
         his sexuality ... an applicant for asylum does  not  need  to  show
         that his homosexuality plays a particularly prominent part  in  his
         life.  All that matters is that he has a well-founded fear that  he
         will be persecuted because of that particular characteristic  which
         he either cannot change or cannot be required to change.

         ... a tribunal  has  no  legitimate  way  of  deciding  whether  an
         applicant  could  reasonably  be  expected   to   tolerate   living
         discreetly and concealing his homosexuality indefinitely  for  fear
         of persecution.  Where would the tribunal  find  the  yardstick  to
         measure the level of suffering which a gay  man  -  far  less,  the
         particular applicant - would find reasonably tolerable?  How  would
         the tribunal measure the equivalent level for a straight man  asked
         to suppress his sexual identity indefinitely?  The answer surely is
         that there is no relevant standard since it is something  which  no
         one should have to  endure.  In  practice,  of  course,  where  the
         evidence showed that an applicant had avoided persecutory  harm  by
         living discreetly for a number of years  before  leaving  his  home
         country, the tribunal would be tempted to  fall  into  error.   The
         tribunal would be liable to hold that the evidence showed that this
         applicant, at least, must have  found  his  predicament  reasonably
         tolerable in the past - and so would find it  reasonably  tolerable
         if he were returned to his country of nationality.  But, in  truth,
         that evidence would merely show that the applicant had put up  with
         living discreetly for fear of the potentially dire consequences  of
         living openly."

    At paragraph 82 the Judge did not adequately  address  the  Appellant's
    testimony and background evidence which was before her.  This will have
    materially infected her finding that the Appellant could safely  return
    to Bangladesh.

26. The Appellant acknowledged the difficulties his parents would  face  if
    his sexual orientation  became  known  on  his  return  to  Bangladesh.
    However, it is clear  from  his  evidence  that  the  reasons  for  his
    discretion in Bangladesh  included  fear  of  violence  from  non-state
    actors and an insufficiency of protection.  The background evidence  is
    clear  that  such  fears  are  justified  and  having  regard  to   the
    jurisprudence in HJ (Iran) and given the Appellant has  chosen  not  to
    lead a celibate life, I find he would be at  real  risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh and the appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Anonymity

27. An anonymity direction has previously been made. It should continue.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
    law and is set aside.  The following decision is substituted:

    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 26. iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

TO THE RESPONDENT: FEE AWARD

The appeal has been allowed but in all the circumstances I do  not  consider
it appropriate to make a fee award.


Signed/Official Crest  Date 26. iii. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

