
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/05815/2019 (V)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2020                            |On 14 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                GS (AKA PSG)

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

For the appellant: Mr G  Brown  of  counsel,  instructed  by  Legal  Justice
Solicitors

For the Respondent: Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer

This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face-to-
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,
I indicated that I found no error of law but reserved my full  decision  and
reasons, which I now give. The order made is described at the end of these
reasons.


1. The appellant, who claims to be a citizen of  Afghanistan,  has  appealed
   with permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal  promulgated  28.8.19  (Judge  Malik),  dismissing  on  all
   grounds his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State,  dated
   29.5.19, to refuse his claim for international protection  on  the  basis
   that he is in fact Indian and not Afghan.

2. His asylum claim was rejected and  certified  as  clearly  unfounded.  In
   July 2017 he  lodged  further  submissions,  then  producing  new  Afghan
   passports, issued in 2016 at a time when he was in  the  UK.  It  is  the
   refusal of these further submissions that was the subject of  the  appeal
   to the First-tier Tribunal.

3. In dismissing the appeal, the  First-tier  Tribunal  concluded  that  the
   appellant and his family are Indian and not Afghan as claimed.

4. In summary, the grounds argue that the judge erred in assessment  of  the
   appellant's nationality, in circumstances where the  respondent  accepted
   that he and his family held genuine Afghan passports and  the  background
   country information establishes that it is not legally possible to  be  a
   dual Indian national. It is further submitted that  the  judge  erred  in
   placing the burden on the appellant to establish that he is not Indian.

5. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal  on  1.10.19.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge  Owens  granted  permission  on  27.1.20,  considering  it
   arguable that the judge failed to take into  account  the  material  fact
   that the respondent conceded that the  appellant  had  a  genuine  Afghan
   passport and  is  an  Afghan  national.  The  judge's  finding  that  the
   appellant is  an  Indian  national  is  arguably  irrational  given  this
   concession by the respondent and in light  of  background  material  that
   India does  not  accept  dual  nationals.  These  findings  are  arguably
   material to an assessment of the risk  to  the  appellant  on  return  to
   Afghanistan."

6. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the  light  of  the  submissions  and  the  grounds  of  application  for
   permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.   I  have  also  taken  into
   account the written  submissions,  including  the  respondent's  Rule  24
   response of 4.2.20; the respondent's written submissions of 23.7.20;  and
   the appellant's reply of the same date.

7. Having read the impugned decision with care, I do not accept  Mr  Brown's
   submission that the judge placed the burden on  the  appellant  to  prove
   that he was not Indian. In support of this submission, Mr Brown relied on
   the judge's observation at [26(VI)] of the decision that, "It was open to
   the appellant to approach the  Indian  authorities  and  take  reasonable
   steps to establish that he is not an Indian national -  or  at  the  very
   least obtain confirmation from them, that given he has obtained an Afghan
   passport, he is no longer a national of India."

8. However, the respondent relies on MW (Nationality;  Art  4  QD;  duty  to
   substantiate) Eritrea [2016] UKUT 00453 (IAC),  to  the  effect  that  an
   applicant who denies that he is a national of a country  where  he  could
   obtain protection can be expected to take reasonable steps  to  establish
   that he is not such a national. Although at [26(VI)] Judge Malik observed
   that the appellant had not taken such reasonable  steps,  the  judge  was
   very clear at [4] and [26] of the decision that she  understood  that  as
   the respondent made the positive assertion that the appellant is  Indian,
   it was for the respondent to discharge that burden,  on  the  balance  of
   probabilities. In the premises, I am satisfied that the judge applied the
   correct burden and standard of proof throughout.

9. With respect to the judge granting permission,  the  respondent  did  not
   concede that the appellant was an Afghan national. The concession made in
   the refusal decision was limited to the fact that  the  Afghan  passports
   issued in 2016, a year after the family's arrival in the UK,  were  found
   on a verification check to be  genuine.  As  the  refusal  decision  made
   clear, "even though you have submitted genuine Afghan passports it is not
   accepted that you are Afghan as claimed."

10. The judge accepted that the  Afghani  passports  were  genuine,  adding,
   "but this does not mean to say the appellant, if born an Afghan national,
   did not subsequently acquire Indian nationality." The judge  rejected  as
   not credible the claim that the agent had retained his  Afghan  passports
   used to leave Afghanistan in 2015.

11. It is an indisputable fact  that  the  appellant  and  his  family  made
   applications in 2012 for entry clearance to the UK, in which he  provided
   what  were  accepted  to  be  genuine  Indian  passports,  so  that   his
   nationality was accepted to be Indian, as then claimed.  He also  claimed
   to have lived in India for a number of years.

12. Evidently, when the appellant made his asylum claim in August  2015,  he
   was unaware that by matching his fingerprints  the  respondent  would  be
   able  to  tie  him  to  his  2012  visa  applications,   uncovering   the
   inconsistency between his asylum claim and the information he provided in
   the visa applications. As Judge Malik found, the appellant has by his own
   admission  engaged  in  deception  and  lied  in  his  asylum  interview,
   initially denying that he had ever been fingerprinted and asserting  that
   he had never left Afghanistan before 2015. Further, the identities  given
   in the Indian passports were under different names and dates of birth  to
   those he now claims. At the time of his asylum claim he submitted  Afghan
   identity documents issued in 2014, which gave inconsistent  and/or  false
   personal details, as detailed by Judge Malik. He claimed that his  Afghan
   passports had been confiscated by the agent smuggling them to the  UK,  a
   claim disbelieved. It is clear from  the  impugned  decision  that  Judge
   Malik found that the appellant undermined his own credibility so that  in
   the light of his dishonesty  and  deception,  little  reliance  could  be
   placed on his assertion to be Afghan.

13. Whether the appellant ever was Afghan or held an Afghan  passport  prior
   to or on coming to the UK, it does not necessarily follow that he is  now
   a citizen of Afghanistan. Neither does it necessarily follow that because
   the appellant and his family have now obtained genuine Afghan  passports,
   issued in 2016, that the judge was obliged to accept that he is Afghan as
   claimed. Certainly, the fact of the  genuine  passports  is  evidence  in
   support of the appellant's  claim.  The  judge  also  accepted  that  the
   appellant may have been born and lived  in  Afghanistan  at  some  stage.
   However, the judge provided cogent reasons open to her on the evidence to
   reject his claim and to find that he and his family are in  fact  Indian,
   as he had claimed in 2012.Whilst  the  appellant  now  asserts  that  the
   Indian passports were obtained by deception  and  the  visa  applications
   dishonest, it was open to the judge  to  reject  that  claim.  There  was
   evidence supporting the respondent's assertion that the appellant and his
   family are Indian, and the judge was entitled, for the reasons given,  to
   find that assertion had been established on the balance of probabilities.



14. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands and the appeal  remains
      dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       4 December 2020





Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        appellant and the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction
        could lead to contempt of court proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       4 December 2020



