
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05362/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2020                  |On 14 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     RK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1992 and is male citizen  of  Bangladesh.  He
    entered the United Kingdom as a student in 2016. He claimed  asylum  in
    November 2018. By a decision dated 25 May 2019, the Secretary of  State
    refused his application for asylum. The appellant appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  12  August  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant did not attend the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal
    on 23 July 2019. He had written to apply for  an  adjournment  claiming
    that, shortly before the hearing, he had fallen and injured  his  back.
    The grounds of appeal complain that the judge did not  have  regard  to
    medical evidence submitted and that the  judge  failed  to  follow  the
    procedure rules as regards the application for an  adjournment.  Having
    proceeded in the absence of the appellant, the appellant  asserts  that
    the  judge  failed  to  consider  all   relevant   circumstances   when
    determining the appeal. It emerged from submissions made  by  Mr  Khan,
    who appeared for the appellant before the Upper Tribunal, that  various
    discrepancies in the appellant's evidence could, so the  appellant  now
    claims,  have  been  explained  had  the  appellant  been   given   the
    opportunity to give oral evidence before the Tribunal.

 3. I find that the appeal should be dismissed. I am  completely  satisfied
    the judge has correctly followed the Procedure  Rules  as  regards  the
    adjournment application. She has accurately cited the appropriate  rule
    at [12] and has gone on  to  apply  it  making  reference  to  relevant
    jurisprudence  [13].  She  paid  detailed  attention  to  such  medical
    evidence as she had before at the date of the hearing  [11],  namely  a
    letter from the appellant's GP in Newcastle upon Tyne  which  had  been
    written without sight of any information at all from the  Accident  and
    Emergency Department at Halifax which  the  appellant  claims  to  have
    attended following his accident. Whilst acknowledging that the  GP  was
    wishing to be helpful, the judge quite correctly attached  very  little
    weight to his letter  given  that  the  doctor  could  say  nothing  of
    relevance regarding the injury or its effect upon  the  appellant  and,
    indeed, did no more than  to  comment  that  there  was  no  reason  to
    disbelieve the appellant whom the GP had  always  considered  to  be  a
    'straightforward and honest patient.' At  the  Upper  Tribunal  initial
    hearing, I was given a copy of a subsequent  medical  report  providing
    further details of the appellant's injury. However,  this  document  is
    dated 9 August 2019, that is after  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing;
    obviously, the judge cannot be criticised for failing to  have  regards
    to evidence which had not been created by the time she determined  this
    appeal. The judge was also entitled to have regard to the fact that the
    adjournment application made to her was  the  third  advanced  by  this
    appellant, previous  applications  on  the  same  grounds  having  been
    refused by judicial colleagues. Moreover, I find that  it  was  plainly
    open to the judge to reach the robust finding [15] that  the  appellant
    had never intended to attend the hearing on 23 July 2019 and there  was
    nothing in  the  evidence  before  her  which  suggested  that  he  was
    medically unfit to attend.

 4. Mr Khan attempted to expand the scope of the grounds of appeal  in  his
    oral submissions at the initial hearing. However, it is clear that  the
    second ground of appeal, concerning the alleged failure  of  the  judge
    consider all relevant circumstances, refers  only  to  the  refusal  to
    grant an adjournment. There is nothing at all in the  judge's  detailed
    analysis of the written evidence which suggests that she made any error
    of law. The judge was fully entitled  to  attach  less  weight  to  the
    evidence submitted by and on behalf of the appellant (see the  analysis
    of the evidence of Mr Islam at [43]) given that none of  that  evidence
    was tested under cross-examination. Accordingly, Mr Khan's  submissions
    amount to nothing more than a disagreement  with  findings  which  were
    available to the judge on the evidence which was before the Tribunal.

    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                       Date 23 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

