
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05925/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 October 2018                            |On 31 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     V K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by Sterling Lawyers
Limited
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
Appellant.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this direction could give rise to contempt  of  court
proceedings.



1.   The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Ukraine.   His  date  of  birth  is  5
    February 1978.  I make an anonymity direction because of the nature  of
    his claim. He made a claim on protection grounds. His  application  was
    refused by the Secretary of State on  19  April  2018.   The  Appellant
    appealed.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge M P  W
    Harris in a decision promulgated on 23 July 2018 following a hearing on
    28 June 2018.  Permission was granted to the  Appellant  by  Designated
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald on 23 August 2018.

2.   The Appellant's claim can be summarised. In  2003  in  Ukraine  he  was
    involved in a road traffic accident whilst employed as a bus driver.  A
    car involved in the accident contained two important men.  One  of  the
    men died as a result of the accident.  The Appellant  received  threats
    following the incident. The Appellant was unsuccessfully prosecuted  on
    account of having a good  legal  representation.   In  2004,  when  the
    Appellant was in the UK, his wife in Ukraine received calls by  someone
    asking of his whereabouts.  These calls ceased in 2005.  The  Appellant
    returned to Ukraine in 2007.  In 2010 a person was knocked down in  the
    Appellant's village. The Appellant was held  responsible  and  in  2010
    wrongly convicted.  He believes that this is linked to the incident  in
    2003 and the threats that he received.  The Appellant was sentenced  to
    three years suspended sentence and prohibited from leaving the country.
     He was required to report regularly to the police.   However,  he  was
    given permission by the police to leave the country six  months  later.
    He came to the UK in 2011 with the help of people smugglers.   In  2013
    an acquaintance told the Appellant that he had been seen on  a  website
    for wanted people in the Ukraine.  The Appellant checked  this  website
    and learned from it that the suspended sentence had been revoked and he
    was now liable to serve a prison sentence.  He made a claim for  asylum
    in June 2013.   In 2014 officials came to his parents' home looking for
    him.  In January 2017 his parents' home was firebombed.   A  relative's
    car was damaged and the  police  did  not  do  anything  to  help.  The
    Appellant has already  completed  military  service  in  Ukraine.   The
    Appellant received mobilisation call up papers in May and October 2017.
     He  fears  imprisonment  resulting  from  the  criminal  sentence.  In
    addition he fears having to serve in the army where he will  be  forced
    to carry out human rights abuses.

3.   The Appellant was represented by Ms Fisher at the hearing before  Judge
    Harris.  The judge had before him a skeleton argument.   The  Appellant
    gave  evidence  through  an  interpreter.  He  relied  on  his  witness
    statement. There was also a  witness  statement  from  the  Appellant's
    solicitor, Nadia Pylypchuk.



The Decision of the FTT

4.   The judge set out the Appellant's immigration history.  He came to  the
    UK in 2004 with limited leave as a work permit holder.   He  overstayed
    before returning to Ukraine in 2007.  He returned to  the  UK  entering
    illegally in  2011.   In  2013  he  was  encountered  and  served  with
    liability to remove as  an  illegal  entrant.   He  was  convicted  and
    sentenced for motoring offences in the UK on 13 June 2013.  On 17  July
    2013 he claimed asylum.  The Respondent's case is that he absconded and
    his claim was treated as withdrawn.  He was encountered on  8  February
    2018 and detained.  He made a fresh asylum claim on 14 February 2018.

5.   The judge made findings at paragraphs 40 through  to  100.   The  judge
    directed himself in relation to Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKAIT 439 and  the
    applicable country guidance VB Ukraine CG [2017] UKAIT 00079.  There is
    no challenge to  the  judge's  self-direction.   The  judge  turned  to
    credibility  and  engaged  with  the  documentary  evidence  that   the
    Appellant submitted in support of his claim.

6.   The Appellant relied on an extract from a website to establish that  he
    was wanted in Ukraine and that the suspended sentence had been revoked.
    He submitted this with his application for asylum along with  a  Google
    translation.  He produced a proper translation and at the  hearing  his
    solicitor, Ms Pylypchuk  submitted  a  witness  statement.   The  judge
    stated as follows in respect of this document:-

         "46. One document central to the appellant's claim  is  an  extract
             from a website, said to be from the Nadvirna  police,  listing
             criminals wanted by the Ukrainian authorities upon  which  the
             appellant's photo and details appear. Its importance  is  said
             to be that it shows the appellant is at real risk of immediate
             detention by the Ukrainian authorities on return to Ukraine.

         47.  It can be seen that the details of the appellant appearing  on
             the website extract assert that he disappeared on 8 July 2013.
              This is clearly at odds with the appellant's account that  he
             left  Ukraine  in  2011;  it  is  also  at  odds  with   Court
             documentation produced by the appellant  suggesting  that  the
             occasion when  the  appellant  first  failed  to  register  as
             required with the Nadvirna police was August 2011 and that the
             court order cancelling the suspension of his  prison  sentence
             was  made  on  6  March  2013  (see  p.4  of  the  appellant's
             supplementary bundle).  There is no  satisfactory  explanation
             before me about why  an  official  website  of  the  Ukrainian
             authorities should list the appellant has  having  disappeared
             in July 2013.  This inconsistency on  such  a  central  matter
             raises significant doubt in  my  mind  about  the  appellant's
             claim.

         48.  It is explained in her witness statement  by  Ms.  Pylypchuck,
             the appellant's solicitor, that  she  google  translated  into
             English the version  of  the  wanted  list  submitted  to  the
             respondent at the time of the asylum claim and  which  appears
             in the respondent's bundle.  Another version in Ukrainian with
             formal translation, which is produced in the appellant's  main
             bundle at pages 41 to 47, contains similar content.  I see  no
             reason to doubt the explanation of Ms  Pylypchuk  (although  I
             observe that it would have assisted if she had explained  this
             to the respondent at the time of the document's submission).

         49.  However, what Ms Pylypchuk does not explain in terms  of  what
             precise website she visited and on what  basis,  if  any,  she
             could say this was a reliable witness  run  by  the  Ukrainian
             authorities.  Nor is there any expert evidence produced  about
             the reliability of this website.

         50.  In the circumstances, I am not satisfied  it  is  demonstrated
             that either the  mere  heading  asserting  the  webpage  lists
             people wanted by the Nadvirna police or the web  link  at  the
             bottom of  the  website  page  are  enough  of  themselves  to
             demonstrate this is actually  a  reliable  website  containing
             information upon which I can place weight.

         51.  I remind myself that there is no requirement  in  law  for  an
             asylum appellant to produce documentary corroboration for  his
             claim.  Nevertheless, where documentary evidence is  produced,
             it  has  to  be  assessed  in  the   round.    This   includes
             consideration of the issue of the provenance of the  documents
             in question.  In the end it  is  the  word  of  the  appellant
             rather than any other source  of  evidence  that  the  website
             showing him  as  wanted  by  police  is  reliable.   Thus  any
             assessment of the reliability of the website will involve also
             consideration  of  the  reliability  of  the  appellant  as  a
             witness.  That consideration I will undertake  later  in  this
             decision."

7.   There were other  documents  on  which  the  Appellant  relied  and  in
    respect of these the judge stated as follows:-

         "52. It is in his supplementary bundle that the appellant  produces
             what are said to be certified copies of:

                - the  court  order  dated  19  November  2010  including  a
                  sentence  against  him  of  3  years  imprisonment   'with
                  discharge from sentence with probation of 2 years';

                - the court order dated 6 March 2013  determining  that  the
                  appellant has breached the conditions of his probation and
                  cancelling the discharge from sentence.

             The appellant has explained in his oral evidence that he asked
             his Ukrainian lawyer to obtain these court documents.

         53.  There is no letter or witness  statement  from  any  Ukrainian
             letter produced in support of this claim.   The  appellant  in
             cross-examination says that he did not realise that this might
             be material evidence. Be that as it may  notwithstanding  that
             the appellant has been legally represented in this appeal, the
             consequence is that when considering in the round what  weight
             to place on these documents  it  is  again  the  word  of  the
             appellant alone that  he  has  produced  certified  copies  of
             reliable court documents.

         54.  The appellant produces in the main bundle what he says are the
             two mobilisation call up notices in his name.  The address for
             service  on  both  notices  has  the  appellant  residing   at
             Tumenivka Street in the village of Ptsiv: see translations  at
             pages 33 and 37 of the bundle.  It is said by the appellant in
             his full interview at q.73 and in his oral evidence that  they
             these notices were sent to the address of his parents.   Other
             documentation produced by the  appellant  indicates  that  his
             parents' home is at 26 Humenivka Street, Pniv: see for example
             the police document regarding the complaint of arson at D17 of
             the bundle.  Moreover, the documentation in respect of the pre-
             trial investigation of mobilisation evasion (at pages 49 to 59
             of  the  appellant's  main  bundle)  clearly  identifies   the
             appellant as resident  at  26  Humenivka  Street,  Pniv.   The
             serving of call up notices for the appellant at an address  in
             Ptsiv rather than the address of  his  family  home  in  Pniv,
             which is known to the  Ukrainian  authorities,  has  not  been
             satisfactorily explained before me.  I find it raises  serious
             doubts in my  mind  about  the  reliability  of  the  call  up
             notices.

         55.  The appellant also has produced police/register  documentation
             relating to mobilisation evasion and the complaint made by his
             father about the 2017 arson attack.  As mentioned  above  they
             identify the authorities treating the appellant's family  home
             as 26 Humenivka Street, Pniv, the address  where  his  parents
             still live.

         56.  However, this  is  at  odds  with  the  2010  and  2013  court
             documentation produced which identifies  the  appellant  as  a
             resident at another address: 3 Humenivka Street,  Pniv.   This
             is another inconsistency which  has  not  been  satisfactorily
             explained before me by the appellant and leads to the  raising
             of further doubt  against  the  reliability  of  documentation
             produced by him."

8.   The judge on to consider  the  Appellant's  evidence  about  a  YouTube
    video but concluded that he had not provided either  the  footage  with
    translation or a transcript of the video  contents  which  limited  any
    weight that could be placed on it.  The judge  took  into  account  the
    Respondent's submission of widespread problem with the  reliability  of
    documentation  said  to  originate  in  Ukraine.   In  respect  of  the
    documentary evidence he stated as follows:-

         "58. The respondent has submitted there  is  a  widespread  problem
             with the reliability of documentation said to  originate  from
             Ukraine and relies on the 'Cheating Nation' article  produced.
             However, I am not satisfied it is the case that I  must  treat
             any document said to originate from Ukraine  as  automatically
             unreliable.  I consider that the appellant's documents must be
             assessed in their own right.  For the reasons given above,  in
             my assessment I have serious doubts about the  reliability  of
             the police and court  documentary  evidence  produced  by  the
             appellant.  I am not satisfied that this documentary  evidence
             is of such strength that by itself I am able to  treat  it  as
             reliable and adding weight to the appellant's claim."

9.   The judge indicated at paragraph 59 that he was going on to assess  the
    personal evidence of the Appellant  and  at  paragraph   60  he  raised
    issues  about  the  Appellant's  screening  interview.   He  stated  as
    follows:-

         "60. In his first screening  interview  on  13  September  2013  at
             sections  4.1  and  4.2  the  appellant   provided   a   brief
             description of why he came to the UK  and  why  he  could  not
             return to Ukraine.  He gave these answers:

                  [Section 4.1] I came for help.  I was  being  hassled  and
                  threated  by  the  police.   This  is  because  when   the
                  revolution took place, I was taking people in  my  van  to
                  Kiev to take part in the demonstrations. The  police  said
                  they would give me a lot of problems.

                  [Section 4.2] The police have  given  my  details  to  the
                  court and I  have  been  convicted  and  sentenced  to  my
                  absence for an unknown crime which  I  didn't  commit.   I
                  know this because they have visited my parents and brother
                  to look for me.  I have only found  out  about  the  court
                  case recently.

         61.  I bear in mind that this was a screening interview where  only
             brief details of his claim was required  from  the  appellant.
             Nevertheless, the appellant's assertion that he was  convicted
             of an unknown crime in his absence is  inconsistent  with  the
             details of the account he now  seeks  to  rely  upon  in  this
             appeal that before he left Ukraine he had undergone  the  2010
             court proceedings, in  which  he  was  convicted,  albeit  the
             appellant says wrongly, for a driving offence relating to  his
             car hitting a person.

         62.  In his witness statement the appellant says that  he  did  not
             refer to the 2003 accident in  the  2013  screening  interview
             because he was not completely sure that it was related to  the
             2010 incidents - he says it was  only  after  the  2017  arson
             attack on his parents' house that he felt sure.  However, that
             does not explain why the appellant refers  in  2013  to  there
             being a conviction in his absence for an  unknown  crime.   At
             the time of his interview the appellant knew,  and  had  known
             for approaching 3 years, about the  details  of  the  November
             2010 conviction.  I find this is a  significant  inconsistency
             in the appellant's account that damages his credibility.

         63.  It also does not help the appellant in  terms  of  reliability
             that his September 2013 screening interview at section 6.3  he
             says that he last saw his wife in Ukraine  in  2011  when  his
             evidence now is that in  2011  he  joined  his  wife  who  was
             already in the UK."

    The judge went on to find at 64 that he could not ignore the  Appellant
    having returned to Ukraine in 2007 and living openly there  whilst  his
    claim was that he was targeted by members of  the  Ukraine  authorities
    who were friends of the men involved in the traffic accident  in  2003.
    The judge took into account that the Appellant's enemies  waited  until
    2010 to seek revenge  on  him  by  framing  him  with  a  road  traffic
    accident.  The judge took into account that the Appellant had given  an
    account of his wife having received menacing calls about him  after  he
    first came to the UK in 2004 which would be  indicative,  according  to
    the judge, of people knowing where he and his  family  lived  and  that
    they were eager to show animosity towards him.   The  judge  took  into
    account that the Appellant's enemies waited until after  his  departure
    in 2011 until 2017 to target his family members.  The judge found  that
    the delay was "at odds with the Appellant's claim that he  is  at  real
    risk from powerful elements in the Ukrainian  authorities  or  security
    forces who can act with impunity against him".  The  judge  found  that
    this raised doubt about the credibility of his claim.

10.  The judge  took  into  account  that  the  Appellant's  wife,  although
    present in the UK and available to appear as a witness was  not  called
    to give evidence in support of his claim  whilst  she  had  had  direct
    experience according to the Appellant of the threatening calls said  to
    have been received in 2004 and 2005.

11.  The judge took into account that the Appellant's claim was  that  since
    2013 he had known that his 2010 suspended sentence had  been  cancelled
    for breach of conditions and  that  he  faced  imprisonment  should  he
    return to the UK.  The judge took into account the Appellant's evidence
    that the police permitted him to take actions which the court found  in
    breach of his sentence conditions. He took into account  that  although
    the Appellant stated he had a lawyer in Ukraine with  whom  he  retains
    contact, he had made little or no attempt  to  approach  the  Ukrainian
    courts to  appeal  or  review  the  decision  to  activate  his  prison
    sentence.  The judge concluded that  he  would  have  expected  someone
    facing imprisonment in Ukraine to have been more  active  in  resolving
    his case before the Ukrainian Courts.  The judge found that this raised
    doubts about the Appellant's credibility.  The judge took into  account
    that since 2013 when the Appellant was  able  to  access  legal  advice
    during his detention he has been aware of the existence of  the  asylum
    process in the  UK.   The  judge  took  into  account  the  Appellant's
    evidence that he believed that he had an outstanding asylum claim  that
    he had heard nothing about it; however the judge observed that in March
    2018 the Appellant made no mention of this in his screening  interview.



12.  The judge took account that the Appellant's evidence was  that  it  was
    the targeting of his family in the Ukraine at the start  of  2017  that
    made him sure it was members of the Ukrainian authorities who had  been
    friends with the two men killed in 2003 and that they were  responsible
    for targeting him.  However, the judge found that it would appear  from
    the Appellant's account that in 2017 he was aware, through his wife and
    her parents, about being treated as an evader of mobilisation  and  yet
    he waited until after his arrest in 2018 to add these important matters
    to his claim.  The judge concluded that his actions were not consistent
    with those of someone who fears return to Ukraine.  The judge concluded
    that since 2017 the Appellant had reasonable opportunity to  raise  the
    central parts of his claim but did not do so until  2018  when  he  was
    arrested.  The judge found central parts of the Appellant's account  to
    be  problematic  as  well  as  significant  parts  of  the  documentary
    evidence.  He said at, paragraph 70, considering matters in  the  round
    he was not satisfied that the documentary evidence  was  reliable.   He
    concluded that the Appellant was not credible.   He  did  not  find  it
    credible that the Appellant had been sentenced to  imprisonment  as  he
    claimed in 2010 and that  he  would  face  imprisonment  on  return  to
    Ukraine as a result.  He was not satisfied that the Appellant had  been
    called up for mobilisation as claimed. He rejected his account  in  its
    entirety.



The Grounds of Appeal

13.  There are three grounds of appeal.  Ms Fisher  expanded  on  grounds  1
    and 2 in oral submissions.

14.  Ground 1 is that unfairness issue arose as  a  result  of  the  judge's
    engagement with the Ms Pylypchuk's evidence.  She drafted a handwritten
    statement regarding the issues  relating  to  the  translation  of  the
    website.  She was not asked to give evidence,  nor  was  she  asked  to
    address the specific issues raised by the judge.  The judge did not put
    the discrepancies in the call up papers to the Appellant.  The case  of
    the Secretary of State for the Home  Department  v  Maheshwaran  [2002]
    EWCA Civ 173 is relied upon.

15.  Ground 2 is in reality an extension of ground 1.   It  focuses  on  the
    documentary evidence and the judge's treatment of it.  It  is  asserted
    that at paragraph 51 the judge having stated previously that there  was
    no legal requirement to corroborate evidence seemed to require it after
    all.  It is asserted that  if  the  First-tier  Tribunal  thought  that
    further corroboration was needed this  should  have  been  put  to  the
    Appellant so that he could either have sought an  adjournment  or  have
    obtained the necessary documentation.  The different addresses  in  the
    documentary evidence was an issue that was not put  to  the  Appellant.
    In addition, the judge failed to consider the  country  guidance  which
    establishes that there have been a number of military call ups  through
    waves of mobilisation.  It was not clear why  the  Appellant,  who  has
    already done military service and who is  a  reservist,  would  not  be
    called up.

16.  Ground 3 relates to the credibility of the Appellant  and  the  judge's
    findings.  It  is  asserted  that  the  judge  conflated  issues.   The
    Appellant falls within VB.  The FTT relied on the screening  interview.
    The case of YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKAIT 00145 is relied upon.

17.  Ms Fisher in oral submissions went beyond the  grounds  asserting  that
    the judge had applied a too high standard of proof.  She submitted that
    the documentary evidence that  the  judge  rejected  was  described  as
    central to the case.  The inconsistencies in  the  address  were  as  a
    result of mistakes in the documents and the Appellant could have  given
    evidence about this but did not have the  opportunity  to  do  so.   Ms
    Everett  submitted  that  it  was  for  the  Appellant  to  deal   with
    inconsistencies in his evidence.  The reliability of the documents  was
    not a new issue.  The judge was not unreasonable in requiring  evidence
    of the provenance of documents.  The judge was entitled to be concerned
    about the evidence.  The judge did not require corroborative  evidence.
    The judge identified major inconsistencies in the Appellant's  evidence
    and was entitled to attach weight to the SEF.



Conclusions

18.  Grounds 1 and 2 can be dealt with as one.  I conclude that there is  no
    unfairness arising from the  findings  of  the  judge.   The  Appellant
    relied on a document in order to establish that he was  wanted  by  the
    Ukrainian authorities.   His  solicitor  obtained  a  printout  from  a
    website in order to support this claim.   The  judge  was  entitled  to
    raise concerns about the reliability of this evidence.  In  respect  of
    the Appellant's solicitor's witness statement, it was not incumbent  on
    the judge to enter the arena and direct questions to this witness or to
    assist the represented Appellant in the preparation of his  case.   The
    Appellant's solicitor should have been aware of  what  information  the
    Tribunal was likely to expect bearing in mind her profession  and  that
    reliability of the documentary evidence was an issue clearly raised  by
    the Secretary of State.  The Appellant  was  represented  by  competent
    Counsel.  It was not unreasonable  to  expect  the  Appellant  to  have
    produced evidence relating to the provenance of the documents.

19.  Ms Pylypchuk's  hand  written  witness  statement  was  skeletal.   The
    Appellant bears the burden of proof.  There was no adequate explanation
    why she had not provided better evidence. There is no  evidence  before
    me that had she given oral evidence she would have said  anything  that
    would have made a material difference to the outcome  of  this  appeal.
    The grounds ignore the internal discrepancies between the  extract  and
    the Appellant's evidence as found by the judge.  The assertion that the
    judge  did  not  apply  the  correct  standard  of  proof   is   wholly
    unsupported.

20.  In respect of the documents referred to at  paragraphs  54  through  to
    56, whilst Ms Fisher told me that  the  discrepancies  were  errors  in
    translation, there was simply no evidence of this before the First-tier
    Tribunal.  The documentary evidence was produced by the Appellant.   It
    was his evidence. There  were  internal  inconsistencies  within  these
    documents of which he and  those  representing  him  should  have  been
    aware. The reliability of documentary evidence had always been an issue
    in this case.   It is not the case that the Appellant was ambushed.  He
    had ample opportunity to prepare his case.  He had the benefit of legal
    representation.  The judge's findings are grounded in the evidence  and
    adequately reasoned. There was no unfairness.   Ms Fisher did not  make
    oral submissions in respect of SSHD v Maheshwaren referred  to  in  the
    grounds. However, having considered the case, I highlight the following
    paragraphs because they support my conclusions on the matter:

         "4.  Undoubtedly a failure to put to a party to litigation a  point
             which is decided against him can be grossly unfair and lead to
             injustice. He must have a proper opportunity to deal with  the
             point. Adjudicators must bear this in mind. Where a  point  is
             expressly conceded by one party it will usually be  unfair  to
             decide the case against the other party on the basis that  the
             concession was wrongly made,  unless  the  tribunal  indicates
             that it is minded to take that course. Cases  can  occur  when
             fairness will require the reopening of an appeal because  some
             point of significance - perhaps arising out of a post  hearing
             decision of the higher courts -  requires  it.  However,  such
             cases will be rare.

         5.   Where much depends on the credibility of a party and when that
             party makes several inconsistent statements which  are  before
             the decision maker,  that  party  manifestly  has  a  forensic
             problem. Some will  choose  to  confront  the  inconsistencies
             straight on and make evidential  or  forensic  submissions  on
             them. Others will hope that 'least said, soonest  mended'  and
             consider that forensic concentration on the  point  will  only
             make matters worse and that it would  be  better  to  try  and
             switch the tribunal's attention to some other  aspect  of  the
             case. Undoubtedly it is open to the tribunal expressly to  put
             a particular inconsistency to a witness because  it  considers
             that the witness may not be alerted to the point or because it
             fears that it may have  perceived  something  as  inconsistent
             with an earlier answer which in  truth  is  not  inconsistent.
             Fairness may in some circumstances require this to be done but
             this will  not  be  the  usual  case.  Usually  the  tribunal,
             particularly if the party is represented, will  remain  silent
             and see how the case unfolds."

21.  I now turn to ground 3. The judge was mindful of the limitations  of  a
    screening interview (see  para  61);  however,  the  problem  with  the
    answers given by the Appellant was not a lack  of  detail  but  glaring
    consistency.  He had claimed in the screening interview  to  have  been
    convicted in his absence, but this was not his claim as later advanced.
    I remind myself of what the UT said in YL;

         "19. When a person seeks asylum in the United Kingdom he is usually
             made the subject of a 'screening interview'  (called,  perhaps
             rather  confusingly  a  "Statement  of  Evidence  Form  -  SEF
             Screening-). The purpose of that is to establish  the  general
             nature of the claimant's case so that the Home Office official
             can decide how best to process it. It is  concerned  with  the
             country of origin, means of travel, circumstances  of  arrival
             in the United Kingdom, preferred language  and  other  matters
             that might help the Secretary of State  understand  the  case.
             Asylum seekers are  still  expected  to  tell  the  truth  and
             answers given in screening interviews can be  compared  fairly
             with answers given later. However, it  has  to  be  remembered
             that a screening interview is not done to establish in  detail
             the reasons a person gives to support her claim for asylum. It
             would not normally be appropriate for the Secretary  of  State
             to ask  supplementary  questions  or  to  entertain  elaborate
             answers and an inaccurate summary by an  interviewing  officer
             at that  stage  would  be  excusable.  Further  the  screening
             interview may well be conducted  when  the  asylum  seeker  is
             tired after a long journey. These things have to be considered
             when any inconsistencies between the screening  interview  and
             the later case are evaluated."

22.  The judge was wholly entitled in this case to rely on  the  Appellant's
    screening interview during which the  Appellant  failed  to  mention  a
    significant part of his account on which he later relied about which he
    failed to provide an adequate explanation.

23.  The judge did  not  conflate  the  issues  of  evasion  and  risk  from
    wrongful prosecution. There were  serious  credibility  issues  arising
    from the Appellant's claim on both grounds. The judge did not find that
    the Appellant was credible and rejected his  account  in  its  entirety
    (see para 69). It was open to  the  judge  to  reject  the  Appellant's
    evidence of mobilisation in the  light  of  the  discrepancies  in  his
    evidence.  There is nothing unlawful about this finding. In any  event,
    the judge did not find that there were criminal proceedings and as such
    even if the Appellant is a draft evader  as  claimed,  applying  VB  he
    would not be at risk on return. In  addition,  I  take  account  of  PK
    (Draft evader; punishment; minimum severity) Ukraine [2018] UKUT 00241:
    person will only be entitled to refugee protection if there is  a  real
    risk that the prosecution or  punishment  they  face  for  refusing  to
    perform military service in a conflict that  may  associate  them  with
    acts that are contrary to  basic  rules  of  human  conduct  reaches  a
    minimum threshold of severity. There was insufficient evidence of  this
    before the FTT.

24.  The grounds fail to properly reflect the decision of the judge.   There
    were  numerous  credibility  issues,  many  of  which  have  not   been
    challenged in the grounds.  A proper reading of the decision  makes  it
    clear that the judge considered the evidence in the round and  properly
    applied Tanveer Ahmed.  The judge made findings that  are  grounded  in
    the  evidence  and  adequately  reasoned.   The  grounds  amount  to  a
    disagreement with them.  There are no fairness issues arising.

25.  The decision of the judge does not contain an  error  of  law  and  the
    decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal is maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 30 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
