
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/05635/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester    Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 2nd May 2019   On 05th June 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  M H A S H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr F Farhat of Gulbenkian Andonian Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born in February 1988. He
         lived in Baghdad and is a Sunni Muslim. He made a claim for
         protection on 11 February 2016 on the basis he would be at risk if
         returned by reason of imputed political opinion. His wife and their
         2 children were dependent upon his claim.




      2.  There were various strands to his claim. The primary claim was
         that he worked for the government and this placed him at risk from
         terrorist groups; in particular, he would be targeted by ISIS. He
         also said he would be at risk because of his wife's work as a
         hairdresser. Finally, he said he was at risk because of his
         religion.

      3. His claim was rejected by the respondent and his appeal before
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew at Birmingham on 8 October 2018
         was unsuccessful.

      4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal has been granted on the
         basis it was arguable the judge failed to properly take into
         account a report provided by a country expert, Dr George.

      5. A DVD was shown of a car bomb exploding. The judge said this did
         not help because the appellant could not be linked to what was
         shown. The judge accepted that in the course of his work as a
         heating engineer he was allowed to enter government buildings to do
         maintenance work. Reference is made to the report from Dr George
         and the decision of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT
         00018 (IAC). The judge accepted an attempted kidnapping of the
         appellant happened but it was not established ICIS were behind it.
         The judge also accepted that his work colleague Safaa died on 18
         August 2012 in a bomb explosion. However, the cause behind this was
         not identified.

The Upper Tribunal

      6. Mr Farhat said that the appellant's case was that he was at risk
         because of his employment and that a work colleague, Mr Safaa had
         been killed for similar reasons. He said the judge's findings were
         contained at paragraph 18 through to 30 of the decision in relation
         to the risk from ISIS. Paragraph 30 onwards deal with his religious
         beliefs and his wife's hairdressing business.

      7.  He said that at paragraph 18,19 and 20 it was accepted that the
         appellant was employed to carry out work on behalf of the
         government. At paragraph 21 the judge set out the respondent's
         guidance and BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018
         (IAC). A collaborator was not susceptible to a precise definition.
         At paragraph 22 the judge indicated the respondent's guidance
         accepts ISIS are active and capable of carrying out attacks in
         Baghdad. At paragraph 23 the judge refers to the report from Dr
         George who found that if the appellant's account were believed that
         he would be at risk of being targeted by ISIS because of his work
         for the government. Dr George had found his account plausible.

      8. At paragraph 26 the judge accepted the appellant was the victim of
         a kidnapping. At paragraph 28 and 29 the judge accepted he worked
         with Mr Safaa who was killed in an explosion on 18th August 2012.
         Thus, Mr Farhat said the central aspects of his claim were
         accepted. He then suggested the judge did an about face at
         paragraph 30 were she said she only had the appellant's word that
         Mr. Safaa was targeted because of his work and that the appellant
         was similarly at risk. He said the surrounding circumstances had
         been accepted and then there were the appellant's assertions as to
         the cause. Mr Farhat said the judge in fact did not make a negative
         credibility finding.

      9. I was referred to paragraph 25 where the judge referred to Dr
         George commenting upon a letter said to be from ISIS. The judge
         said the report from Dr George in this respect did not support the
         appellant's claims. However, Mr Farhat said this was a
         mischaracterisation of what was said in the report. At page 86 of
         the appeal bundle Dr George said he was surprised that the term
         Islamic State of Iraq and Syria is used in a letter dated 2016
         because by June 2014 ISIS had changed their name simply to Islamic
         State. However, Dr George does not otherwise dispute the letter's
         format or content. At paragraph 121 the report concludes by stating
         that the appellant would be at risk. Mr Farhat suggested there
         could be any number of reasons why an old name was used on the
         notepaper; for instance, because old surplus notepaper was used.

     10. He suggested that the judge, having accept the central aspects of
         the claim, rejected it at paragraph 34 for inadequate reasons. Mr
         Farhat accepted that the claims relating to religion and his wife's
         occupation were peripheral matters which he was not pursuing in
         argument. The judge had commented that a witness had not attended
         to confirm her statement. However, Mr Farhat explained on a number
         of occasions when she had attended the appeal which had adjourned.
         She could not attend on the last occasion because of childminding
         commitments.

     11. He said there are other aspects of the appellant statement which
         were not referred to by the judge which could have been relevant.
         For instance, it said Mr Safaa used a car which could have
         identified him as working for the government. He also stated that
         he was to have travelled with Mr Safaa but did not because he was
         off work and his son was born that day.

     12. Mr Bates said the judge had accepted that Dr George was an expert.
         The expert's role is to assess whether what the appellant says is
         plausible and the credibility findings are a matter for the judge.
         The expert commented on key areas which the judge had regard to .
         He made the point that the expert at paragraph 121 was accepting
         the risk for the appellant was based upon his testimony. The expert
         was indicating that if the tribunal found the appellant to be
         credible then there were risk factors as set out.

     13. At paragraph 119 the expert dealt with the letter submitted, said
         to be from ISIS. The letter was a photocopy which meant the expert
         could not categorically say it was genuine. The expert considered
         the format and referred to the use of the old title used by ISIS.
         Referring Mr Farhat's comment that there could be a variety of
         explanations Mr Bates question why, it is were so, was the expert
         be surprised. The expert did not say, for instance, that within his
         knowledge they continue to use the old name. He submitted the judge
         was entitled to find a clear inconsistency arising.

     14. At paragraph 119 Dr George said it was plausible that someone who
         was working as a contractor for a government department may be at
         risk from ISIS at that time. However, the expert expressed surprise
         that ISIS would so persistently pursue the appellant, bearing in
         mind he was someone with a low profile. He was an air-conditioning
         engineer working as a subcontractor. He was by no means a political
         or security -related target. Furthermore, he had ceased that type
         of work since mid-2012.The expert was expressing surprise that
         there would be a letter in 2016 threatening the appellant. The
         judge looked at these comments at paragraph 24 and 25 of the
         decision and concluded they did not support the appellant's claim.

     15. Mr Bates submitted that the report was not a ringing endorsement of
         the appellant's claim and that the judge was entitled to take on
         board the expert's comments in this context. He submitted the judge
         was not departing from what the expert said at para 121 of the
         report because this was premised upon the claim being accepted.

     16. The judge had accepted the appellant worked as a subcontractor and
         that Mr Safaa died in an explosion but it was not known if he was
         specifically targeted. He may have been killed simply because he
         was in a car which could be associated with the government but this
         would be speculation. At paragraph 25 the judge asked whether it
         would be credible that ISIS would have such an ongoing interest in
         the appellant and whether a risk existed at the time of hearing in
         2018.

     17. The acceptance of the kidnapping claim did not necessarily advance
         the appellant's claim. BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq demonstrated
         that kidnappings occurred in Iraq and the expert touched upon this
         in the report, stating people are kidnapped for a variety of
         reasons. The judge was simply making the point that this was not
         determinative of him being targeted by ISIS.

     18. At paragraph 27 the judge went on to consider the other aspects of
         the claim. In terms of the DVD evidence the judge was simply
         pointing out that this was not a continuous film and the judge
         could not say it was the same person.

     19. The judge also considered his religion and his wife's occupation.
         None of these were sufficient to tip the balance in the appellant's
         favour. The country guidance decision had confirmed that being a
         Sunni Arab in itself was not sufficient to establish a risk of
         persecution. Regarding the witness who did not attend, the judge
         was not being perverse or irrational in placing limited weight on
         her statement. Mr Bates made the point that the judge was always
         going to observe that their evidence could not be tested by cross-
         examination. Had the appellant's representatives thought this was a
         significant issue they could have applied for an adjournment.

Conclusions

     20. The appellant made a claim for protection and set out details of
         it. In support of that claim he submitted various pieces of
         evidence. These included a DVD of the outside of a house and
         subsequently, of an explosion involving a car. A country expert, Dr
         George, was engaged on his behalf. Part of the evidence he
         submitted was a letter said to be from ISIS.

     21.  It is the judge's task to evaluate the claim and determine if it
         has been established on the low standard of proof applicable. The
         respondent in refusing the claim had not accepted the account was
         credible. The judge rejected the claim.

     22. I have considered the points made by Mr Farhat and the response of
         Mr Bates. It is my conclusion that no material error of law has
         been established. The various arguments are set out above. I find
         the argument advanced by Mr Bates adequately address the
         challenges. Ultimately, it is my conclusion that Mr Farhat's points
         amount to a disagreement with the outcome. I can find no error in
         the judicial process.

     23. The challenge specifically has been in relation to how the judge
         treated the expert evidence of Dr George. As Mr Bates pointed out
         the expert can set out the country background and comment on the
         plausibility of the account. The fact an account is consistent with
         what takes place in a country is part of the assessment process.
         However, it does not follow that the account necessarily is true.
         It is for the judge to make that decision. Provided the judge has
         correctly approach that task it is not for an appellant court to
         interfere with the fact-finding exercise.

     24. Dr George sets out at paragraph 29 the documents he was provided
         with. He had the appellant's interview and his detailed statement
         as well as his wife's statement. The expert also had the
         respondent's detailed reasons for refusal. The expert was also
         provided with material by the appellant, including the DVD of a
         news report. Dr George is an expert on Iraq and had adequate
         information to provide a report. The expert is commenting on the
         consistency of the claim with the country situation as well as on
         the specific evidence submitted in support. The expert has
         approached his task in a professional way and shown an appreciation
         for the distinction between areas within his expertise and matters
         which are for the judge.

     25. As Mr Bates points out the report is not a ringing endorsement of
         the claim. The expert expresses `surprise' and the evidence being `
         curious' in relation to two significant issues. The expert comments
         upon the fact the old title of ISIS is used in the threatening note
         submitted on behalf of the appellant. Furthermore, he expresses
         surprise at the apparent persistence in the targeting of the
         appellant over a number of years, particularly as he was not a key
         political or security target and had ceased the employment he
         claimed made him a target by mid-2012. The expert again appreciates
         the judicial task involved and prefaces his comments by stating he
         does not consider the appellant's testimony to be implausible.
         However, the reference to him being `surprised' at their
         persistence and the use of ISIS on the notepaper as `curious' can
         be read as a `but'. Mr Bates makes the valid point that he is an
         expert and could have responded, for instance, by stating that in
         his experience ISIS do use their old title and can be tenacious in
         their pursuit. He does not say this.

     26. In summary, I do not find any material error of law disclosed in
         the judge's treatment of the expert report. The judge has properly
         considered the report and is highlighted the comments made at
         paragraphs 119 and 120 which tell against the claim.

     27. Mr Farhat argued that what the judge accepted appear to be leading
         to a favourable conclusion for the appellant. There was the
         acceptance of his employment. There was the acceptance of the
         kidnapping. There was acknowledgement of the explosion telling a
         work colleague. However these were matters setting the scene. They
         did not inevitably lead to a conclusion favourable to the
         appellant's claim. The aspects accepted did not inevitably create a
         nexus.

     28. The judge has properly evaluated the various issues and evidence
         submitted and it was a matter for the judge to determine where the
         truth lay. Claims can be consistent with country information and
         therefore plausible. Obviously however this does not make them
         true. It is a matter for the judge to evaluate the evidence and I
         can find no material error of law established in the present
         instance. The other issues have been treated as peripheral and I
         find no error established elsewhere. Overall, the decision reflects
         the care taken and the balanced approach of the judge

Decision

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Andrew. Consequently, that decision dismissing the appeal
shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

Dated 04 June 2019
