
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06362/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision on Papers (P)               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 June 2020                      |On 9 July 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Chohan, promulgated on 17  December  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant on 13 February 2020.

Anonymity

 2. No direction has been made previously, however out of an  abundance  of
    caution such a direction  is  now  made  owing  to  the  basis  of  the
    appellant's protection claim.

Background

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 3 July 2008 as a student.  His  attempt
    to extend his leave was unsuccessful owing to an  absence  of  a  valid
    Confirmation of Acceptance for Studies (CAS) and his leave expired on 9
    June 2014.  A subsequent human  rights  claims  was  unsuccessful.  The
    appellant applied for asylum on 12 November 2015 after  being  detained
    pending his removal to Bangladesh. The basis of that claim was that  he
    had become an atheist and feared for his life at the hands of a variety
    of actors. The Secretary of State refused  that  claim  in  a  decision
    dated 18 June 2019 primarily because  it  was  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant had become an atheist or written books  on  the  subject  and
    consequently it was not accepted that he had encountered problems as  a
    result.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant gave evidence to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  as  did  two
    witness I and L. The judge found that the appellant's claim  to  be  an
    atheist lacked  credibility  and  that  his  documentary  evidence  was
    deserving of no weight.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal are three-fold, but all concern  the  failure  by
    the judge to consider the report of an expert or the  evidence  of  who
    witness who gave oral evidence, in reaching his credibility findings.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis sought.

Procedure

 7. This appeal was originally listed for hearing on 15 April 2020 but  was
    adjourned on 20 March 2020 owing to public health concerns.

 8. Directions dated 24 March 2020 were served on the parties which  stated
    that a provisional view had been taken that the matter could be decided
    without a hearing and invited written submissions regarding whether the
    First-tier Tribunal made an error of  law  and  whether  that  decision
    should be set aside. The parties were further invited to submit reasons
    if it was considered that a hearing was necessary.

 9. The respondent provided a Rule 24 response on 16  April  2020  and  the
    appellant forwarded written submissions by email on 23 April 2020.   No
    submissions were made by either party to the effect that a hearing  was
    necessary in relation to the error of law issue.

Decision on error of law

10. I have taken into consideration all the documents before me in reaching
    my decision.   The  respondent's  Rule  24  response  states  that  the
    respondent  does  not  oppose  the  appellant's  appeal  and  expresses
    agreement that while the judge noted the evidence of the witnesses  and
    the report, he made no findings concerning them.

11. The respondent is correct to concede that the First-tier Tribunal  made
    no findings on the evidence  of  the  live  witnesses  nor  the  expert
    opinion. The evidence of one of the  witnesses  (I)  was  that  he  had
    witnessed the appellant being threatened in Bangladesh and the evidence
    of the other (L) was that the appellant held anti-Islamic  and  atheist
    views. Both of these issues were highly  relevant  to  the  appellant's
    protection claim. In these circumstances, the decision cannot stand.

12. Both the appellant and respondent are of the view that the remaking  of
    this appeal should be at a hearing, preferably  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statements of 10 February  2010,  it  is  the  case  that  the
    appellant has yet to have  an  adequate  consideration  of  his  asylum
    appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and it would be unfair to deprive him
    of such consideration.



Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Birmingham IAC, with a time estimate of 4  hours,  by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan.


Signed:                                 Date 15 June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

