

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration   and   Asylum   Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/06547/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On              the              12th              October              2017
 On the 18th October 2017

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                             MS BERTHA NKOMAZANA
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Mutgambizi-Dewa (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr Bates (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellant's appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge R.D. Taylor promulgated on the 20th December  2016,  in
      which  he  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  on   asylum   grounds,
      Humanitarian Protection grounds and on Human Rights grounds.

   2. The Appellant is a citizen of  Zimbabwe  who  was  born  on  the  12th
      October 1982.  It was her case before the First-tier Tribunal that she
      is a lesbian who was assaulted at  a  family  gathering  for  being  a
      lesbian by her brother, and that she could not return to Zimbabwe  for
      fear of persecution for a convention  reason,  namely  her  sexuality,
      both in respect of the fear from her brother, and also in terms of the
      argument that she would be unable to safely relocate elsewhere  within
      Zimbabwe away from her brother and away from  persecution  from  other
      members of the community, as a result of her sexuality.

   3.  In his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  accepted  the
      Appellant's account of having been attacked by her brother on  account
      of her sexuality as a lesbian,  and  also  found  that  it  was  quite
      possible that her brother would be likely to attack  her  again,  even
      though he may now have been spoken to by other members of the  family,
      as she returned to Kwekwe.  However, Judge Taylor found that following
      the Country Guidance case of LZ that a homosexual at risk  in  his  or
      her community can move elsewhere either in the same city or to another
      part of the country and that he or she might  choose  to  relocate  to
      where there is greater tolerance,  such  as  Bulawayo,  but  that  the
      choice of new areas are not restricted and that the  option  was  only
      excluded if personal circumstances presented  a  risk  throughout  the
      country.  He also relied upon the Country Guidance case of LZ to  find
      that the position summarised within paragraph 110 of the Judgment  was
      that the evidence did  not  support  the  conclusion  that  Zimbabwean
      authorities  persecuted  homosexuals  and  that  they  enjoyed   tacit
      tolerance and that Zimbabwe was not a country  where  finding  that  a
      person was gay dictated that persecution was reasonably to be  feared.
      The Judge found that the Appellant would be at risk  other  than  from
      her brother in her home area, who found it very  difficult  to  accept
      his sister was a lesbian, but she would not be at risk in other  parts
      of the country including but not limited to Bulawayo and that she  had
      lived independently herself in the past without  problems.   He  found
      that it did not appear given the answers in interview that  she  would
      be openly gay, as a result of a fear of  persecution,  rather  than  a
      fear of rejection or fear of being judged.  He found that although the
      Appellant may be at risk from her brother in her home area there  were
      no grounds for thinking that she would be at risk in  other  parts  of
      Zimbabwe including Bulawayo and Harare and that she would  be  capable
      of relocating there without  undue  hardship  and  that  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect her to do so. He therefore she  did  not  have  a
      well-founded fear of persecution or ill-treatment or any serious  harm
      upon returning to parts of Zimbabwe other than her home area.

   4. Although permission to appeal  was  initially  refused  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Pedro on the 27th March 2017, the Appellant renewed the
      application for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Within
      that application she argued that the Judge's finding that  the  attack
      by her brother alone was therefore not capable of being accepted as an
      act of persecution was wrong and that the Judge failed to examine  the
      possibility of the  Appellant's  brother  being  a  "non-state  actor"
      persecutor and whether or  not  the  Zimbabwean  government  would  be
      unwilling or unable to protect the Appellant from a  non-state  actor.
      It is argued that the Tribunal was not told whether or not the brother
      was employed by the government or not and that he attacked  her  in  a
      private gathering in his own capacity and was  therefore  a  non-state
      actor.  It was secondly argued that the Judge failed to consider  that
      the Appellant's attack, followed by  police  inaction  even  though  a
      report was  made  subsequently  and  demonstrates  the  absence  of  a
      deterrent against a future attack and that  as  the  brother  had  not
      received any caution and  the  police  had  done  nothing,  there  was
      nothing to demonstrate that his attack on another citizen would not be
      tolerated and that he was given an indication of tolerance and that he
      was a vigilante who would attack the Appellant again and nothing would
      happen.  It is argued that the Appellant's assertion that  she  cannot
      live elsewhere is not a bare assertion that her  brother  could  still
      attack her and there could be  another  person  such  as  an  anti-gay
      vigilante neighbour who would do so, in the knowledge that  there  was
      no law to  protect  the  victim  and  that  the  government  would  be
      unwilling to protect her.  In the third ground it is argued  that  the
      Appellant although being an educated person,  the  Judge  failed  when
      considering internal relocation to consider  the  fact  that  she  had
      already suffered serious harm and had never lived in Bulawayo and  the
      same law operates in Chegutu where she was attacked as in Bulawayo and
      Herare as Zimbabwe is not a  federal  country  and  that  if  she  was
      attacked there again there was no-one to protect her and  there  would
      be no deterrent on her attackers.

   5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on  the
      8th May 2017, who found that  it  was  arguable  that  the  First-tier
      Tribunal  Judge  failed  to  address  the  issue  of  sufficiency   of
      protection in his decision and reasons and that this was also relevant
      to the findings in relation to internal relocation  and  that  it  was
      therefore arguable that the Judge's decision did contain  an  arguable
      material error of law  and  therefore  it  was  appropriate  to  grant
      permission to appeal.  Permission to appeal was seemingly  granted  on
      that limited basis.

   6. It was on that basis that  the  case  came  before  me  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.  At the Upper Tribunal, I heard  oral  submissions  from  Mr
      Mutgambizi-Dewa on behalf of the Appellant and from Mr Bates on behalf
      of the Respondent.  The full contents of those  oral  submissions  are
      contained within the record  of  proceedings  and  are  therefore  not
      repeated in their entirety here, but I have fully taken account of the
      same in reaching my decision.

   7. Although Mr Mutgambizi-Dewa argued that sufficiency of protection  and
      internal relocation could not be separated in  the  instance  of  this
      case and that someone who cannot be  protected  by  the  State  cannot
      internally relocate, especially in a country which was not  a  federal
      State like Zimbabwe and that the laws applicable in Chegutu applied in
      Bulawayo and Herare and throughout the  country,  I  do  not  in  fact
      accept the submission that  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal
      relocation are not separate issues to be considered by a Court in this
      appeal hearing and that the same cannot be separated.  Mr  Mutgambizi-
      Dewa argued that the police had not done anything  and  the  Appellant
      was simply told that being a lesbian in Zimbabwe  is  unconstitutional
      and she had in effect been penalised as a victim  and  she  could  not
      rely upon the protection from the police or authorities  wherever  she
      went within Zimbabwe and that she  could  still  be  attacked  by  her
      brother again or by neighbours or anyone from the community.

   8. However, First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor at  [14]  of  his  decision,
      considered the Country Guidance case of LZ (Homosexuals)  Zimbabwe  CG
      [2011] EKUT 00487 and the head note which concluded specifically  that
      a homosexual at risk in his or her community can move elsewhere either
      in the same city or to another part of the country and that he or  she
      might choose to relocate to where there was greater tolerance, such as
      Bulawayo, but the choice in the area was not restricted and  that  the
      option was only excluded if personal circumstances  presented  a  risk
      throughout the country.  He  also  properly  summarised  the  position
      regarding the Zimbabwean authorities at paragraph 110 of the  Judgment
      and quoted that the evidence did not support the conclusion  that  the
      Zimbabwean authorities persecuted homosexuals and  that  they  enjoyed
      tacit tolerance. The Judge properly on the evidence of this case found
      that the risks simply came from the Appellant's  own  brother,  rather
      than from other members of her family,  and  in  the  absence  of  any
      evidence to show that her brother was so highly connected  within  the
      government or otherwise so highly connected to mean that he  would  be
      able to trace her if she were to internally relocate, the findings  of
      the First-tier Tribunal Judge that she could  internally  relocate  in
      safety was a finding which was open to him on the evidence.  The Judge
      has given clear, adequate and sufficient  reasons  for  that  finding.
      The Judge has further found that the  Zimbabwean  authorities  on  the
      evidence do not persecute homosexuals and that they mainly enjoy tacit
      tolerance, that homosexuals at risk of persecution can move  elsewhere
      including to an area where there is  greater  tolerance  which  is  in
      Bulawayo.  Those were findings open  to  the  judge  on  the  evidence
      before him.

   9. Although First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Taylor  has  not  made  specific
      findings regarding the question of sufficiency  of  protection,  given
      that he found that the risk to the Appellant was simply from  her  own
      brother and that she could reasonably relocate without undue  hardship
      to another part of the country including Herare, where the Judge found
      at [15], she had previously worked,  or  to  Bulawayo  where  she  had
      previously  visited,  as  an  educated  lady   who   worked   for   an
      international  company  in  quite  a  responsible  position  involving
      international secondment for over 10 years, it was open to him to make
      findings that she could without undue  hardship  relocate  to  another
      part of the country and it would be reasonable to expect her to do so,
      away from her home area, where she would  not  be  at  risk  from  her
      brother.

  10. In such circumstances, given that there  is  no  evidence  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal to show that her brother would be  able  to  trace
      her anywhere else within the country, although the Judge has not dealt
      with the question of sufficiency of protection, that does  not  amount
      to a material error in this case, given the fact that the Appellant on
      the Judge's findings, could safely internally relocate, given the size
      and population of the country, without real risk.  The Judge's finding
      on internal relocation, are not dependent upon the  finding  regarding
      the sufficiency of protection in that regard, given the fact that  the
      risk is limited to a local area and that the risk is from her  brother
      only, who is a non-state actor, and the Judge  was  entitled  to  find
      that this risk was limited to that home area.

  11. The Judge has further given  clear  and  sufficient  reasons  for  his
      finding that the Appellant would not be openly gay,  not  due  to  any
      fear of persecution, but for reasons of not wishing to be  judged  for
      fear of rejection at [15] and [16] of the decision.

  12. In the fourth ground of appeal  it  is  argued  that  the  Appellant's
      position as a brand executive with BAT meant that she was  comparative
      and elite in her own right and that BAT was listed as a major  company
      and major employer of Zimbabwe  and  that  she  would  be  within  the
      Zimbabwean elites.  In the fifth ground it was argued that  the  Judge
      wrongly placed reliance on the 2011 report by Galz  rather  than  rely
      upon the new 2013 constitution which it is argued  made  homosexuality
      unlawful and showed  that  hate  speeches  by  political  elites  were
      genuinely  held  entrenched   beliefs   that   found   favour   within
      overwhelming majorities in Zimbabweans who voted in the constitutional
      referendum.

  13. I further find that it was also open to the Judge  to  find  that  the
      Appellant was not connected to the "elite"  at  [16],  notwithstanding
      her role as a brand executive with  BAT,  as  was  argued  within  the
      fourth ground of appeal.

  14. Although within the fifth ground of appeal it is argued that the Judge
      wrongly relied upon a 2011 report by Galz and that the  authority  now
      should be the 2013 constitution which came after the report which made
      it unlawful to be homosexual  and  showed  that  the  hate  speech  by
      political elites was not in fact harmless political rhetoric  but  was
      in fact genuinely held entrenched beliefs and convictions held by  the
      majority  of  Zimbabweans  who  voted  for  the   new   law   in   the
      constitutional referendum, as Mr  Mutgambizi-Dewa  conceded,  that  he
      could not in fact say that the  2013  constitution  was  actually  put
      before the First-tier Tribunal in evidence.   There  was  no  evidence
      therefore to show that the  constitution  was  in  fact  part  of  the
      evidence before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Taylor,  and  it  certainly
      does not appear to be  contained  within  either  the  Appellant's  or
      Respondent's bundle before the First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge  cannot
      be criticised for having failed to  consider  evidence  that  was  not
      submitted before him.  In such circumstances, I do not accept that the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Taylor does contain any material
      error  of  law  and  the  decision  is  maintained.   I  dismiss   the
      Appellant's appeal against that decision.

Notice of Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge R.D. Taylor  does  not  contain  a
material error of law and is maintained.

I make no Order in respect of anonymity, no such Order having been  made  by
the First-tier Tribunal, and no such Order having been sought before me.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty     Dated 12th October 2017
