
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06801/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 25 September 2017                      |On 31 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before


                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     KN
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S. Caseley, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. K. Hibbs, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Woolley, dated 15 January 2017, in  which  he  dismissed
     the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
     grant asylum.


  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


     "I find that the lengthy grounds to identify properly  arguable  errors
     of law, particularly ground 1, 3, 4, 5 and 8, but I grant permission on
     all grounds."

The hearing


  4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
     reserved my decision.


Submissions


  5. Ms Caseley relied on the grounds of appeal.  In relation to ground  one
     she submitted that there had been no  suggestion  in  cross-examination
     that the Appellant's injuries had been caused in a separate way, namely
     self-infliction by proxy ("SIBP"). In  relation  to  ground  three  she
     referred to the case of AM [2012] EWCA Civ 521.


  6. In relation to ground four, at [45] the judge stated that Dr. Battersby
     had not been provided with the email at C1 of the Respondent's  bundle.
     She submitted that the judge had seen this email as she  had  seen  the
     reasons for refusal letter where the email  was  quoted  in  full.   In
     relation to Dr.  Bailey's  report,  I  was  referred  to  [23]  of  the
     decision.  It was submitted that the opinions of Dr. Battersby and  Dr.
     Bailey concurred.  The judge had rejected the  Appellant's  credibility
     but Dr. Battersby had undertaken a critical analysis of  the  Appellant
     and had not just  relied  on  the  Appellant's  own  evidence.   I  was
     referred to page 20 of her report.  Consistent  with  the  case  of  JL
     (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 (IAC)  she  had
     observed the Appellant.  The judge had accepted that Dr. Battersby  was
     an expert who had complied with the case law and therefore the  judge's
     findings  were  unsustainable.   Dr.  Battersby  had  made  a  clinical
     judgment as well as taking into account the Appellant's account.  I was
     referred to paragraph [52] where the judge  states  "I  find  that  his
     history is enough to  have  induced  PTSD  without  any  torture".   Ms
     Caseley submitted that it was not the role of the judge to make such  a
     finding.


  7. In relation to ground five the judge had made negative inferences  from
     the fact that the Appellant had not provided documentary evidence.   It
     was trite law that there was no expectation on  an  appellant  to  have
     obtained evidence from his persecutors.


  8. In relation to ground six concerning the Appellant's entry and exit  to
     Dubai in 2007 and 2008, the judge  failed  to  take  into  account  the
     guidance when determining that it was  plausible  that  he  could  have
     left.  Although AN and SS (Tamils - Colombo - risk?) Sri  Lanka  [2008]
     UKAIT 00063 had not been promulgated at the  time  that  the  Appellant
     travelled, the evidence contained in the decision related to this time,
     and indicated that only those who were of more serious interest to  the
     authorities would be stopped.
  9. In relation to ground seven, Judge Doran had found that  the  Appellant
     was a genuine student, but facts arising since this decision  indicated
     that the Appellant had delayed  in  travelling  on  his  student  visa.
     Something had gone wrong, and even on  the  Home  Office's  case,  with
     reference to the email at C1, the Appellant was not a  genuine  student
     if he was not travelling on the correct visa.  The  judge  should  have
     taken that into account.


 10. In relation to ground eight it had been argued  before  the  First-tier
     Tribunal that there  was  evidence  such  that  the  judge  could  have
     departed from country guidance case of  GJ.   The  judge  rejected  the
     report from Dr. Pedersen.  There was compelling  evidence  regarding  a
     deterioration in the treatment of  returnees,  either  those  who  were
     failed asylum seekers, or those who had some LTTE  involvement.   There
     were no findings on any part of that evidence.  It had  been  submitted
     at the First-tier Tribunal that  the  risk  categories  should  not  be
     construed too narrowly,  and  Dr.  Pedersen's  evidence  had  not  been
     challenged.   Given  the  crucial  nature  of  the  evidence   in   the
     Appellant's case, the judge should have made findings  or  referred  to
     the reports.  As it was found that he was a failed asylum seeker and  a
     low level supporter of the LTTE, the judge was required to  proceed  to
     make findings on the evidence.


 11. I was referred to the Freedom From Torture Report, and to paragraph 6.5
     of the Respondent's Country Information and Guidance: Tamil  separatism
     which pointed to a different conclusion from GJ.  Although the CIG  was
     not referred to in the skeleton  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Ms
     Caseley submitted that it had been provided at  the  hearing.   In  any
     event, it was the Respondent's guidance, and the Respondent had a  duty
     to bring it to the attention of the judge.  I was referred to the  case
     of UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85.


 12. In response Mr. Hibbs submitted that UB  had  been  decided  after  the
     First-tier Tribunal hearing.  More generally,  he  submitted  that  the
     grounds were an attempt to rehear the case again.   The  points  raised
     had been considered and the grounds were a mere disagreement  with  the
     findings and the weight which had been placed on various parts  of  the
     evidence.  In relation to the email at C1, whether  or  not  the  judge
     believed this email, its contents were pivotal to the case.   If  as  a
     factual matter the Appellant's account could not  have  happened,  then
     anything which was relied on was irrelevant and the case was doomed  to
     fail.  If the Appellant was not tortured then  the  injuries  were  not
     received for the reasons given.  There had been  no  request  from  the
     Appellant for the airline liaison officer to be produced.  This was not
     expert evidence, but primary evidence.  The judge's findings on C1 were
     central as, if the Appellant had been somewhere else, the events  which
     he had claimed had happened could not have done.


 13. In relation to SIBP, ground one missed the point.  If  the  Appellant's
     account was not credible then the scars were caused by another  reason.
     The reasons for refusal letter and  cross-examination  pointed  to  the
     conclusion that the events could not have happened as  claimed  because
     of the evidence at C1.  There was a multitude of reasons why the  scars
     could have occurred.  The medical evidence indicated burns  which  were
     over six months old, and this was as far as medical evidence could  go.
     Only the Appellant knew how the scars had been caused but it was not as
     a result of being stopped at the airport in 2009 as the Respondent  had
     shown that this could not have happened as claimed.


 14. In relation to ground two, an explanation had been  provided  regarding
     redaction.  This was not an expert opinion, but was  primary  evidence.
     I was referred to [34] and [36].  It was open  to  the  judge  to  give
     weight to the email.  The case had not been advanced before the  First-
     tier Tribunal that the airline liaison officer was lying.  He  was  not
     an expert but was relaying what he had seen.


 15. In relation to  ground  three,  a  doctor  was  only  as  good  as  the
     information which he had been  given.   The  Appellant  may  have  been
     scarred, but not on the date indicated by him.  The judge  agreed  that
     the scarring had occurred, but when and by what means  was  the  issue.
     The judge had taken on board the medical  experts  and  had  considered
     their evidence, but because of the evidence at  C1,  it  could  not  be
     correct that the Appellant had suffered the injuries  for  the  reasons
     given.  It was a matter of weight and assessment, and it  was  for  the
     Tribunal to  assess  the  evidence  and  come  to  an  opinion  on  the
     credibility of the story.


 16. In relation to ground four, Dr. Battersby had had sight of the  reasons
     for refusal letter where the email at C1 was set out but  she  had  not
     gone into the detail of the reasons for refusal letter and  the  email.
     Her report did not reference the email which indicated simply that  the
     Appellant was not where he claimed to be.  She had not dealt with  this
     point.  It had been accepted in the report that a psychiatrist was  not
     in a position to establish the credibility of a  claimant  (see  [45]).
     The issue of suicide had never been considered but was then  raised  as
     an issue.  The judge was entitled to take this into account [45].


 17. With reference to [43], the email at C1 had not been put to Dr. Bailey.
      This showed that the Appellant was not there at  the  time  and  place
     that he said.  The burden of proof did not shift to the  Respondent  to
     show where the Appellant was.   If the Appellant was not credible  than
     these matters all fell away, and it was not for the Respondent to prove
     a negative.


 18. In relation to ground five, this  comment  of  the  judge  was  obiter.
     Looking at the situation in the round, the  judge  had  not  found  the
     Appellant credible and there was no documentary  evidence  before  him.
     Without more, how could he accept the Appellant's word.


 19. I was referred to [49].  The judge had set out the expert evidence [38]
     to [40].  He had read the case law.  He had  looked  at  the  case  law
     regarding the evidence, and had  correctly  applied  the  case  of  AAW
     (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UT 00673 [40].   The  leading
     nature of questions put to an expert cast a shadow  over  the  expert's
     evidence.


 20. In relation to the sur place claim I was referred to [46].   The  judge
     had considered the evidence in the round.  The Appellant's evidence was
     that he was too busy  studying  and  working,  indicating  that  was  a
     genuine student.  I was referred to [47].  There was no material error.
      The finding that he was a genuine student did  not  materially  affect
     the decision as the Appellant had not  been  detained  at  the  airport
     illegally.  Section 8 must be held against the Appellant.


 21. In relation to [55] the judge went through the evidence  regarding  GJ.
     The Appellant not been at  risk  when  he  lived  in  Sri  Lanka.   The
     Appellant would have to show that every failed asylum seeker who was  a
     Tamil would be at risk on return, and the CIG did not state this.   The
     Appellant had never been a member of the LTTE.    The Judge  could  not
     be held at fault if matters had moved on.


 22. The judge had considered the Appellant's travel in 2007 and 2008 in his
     global conclusions.   The  Appellant  was  not  stopped,  and  was  not
     checked.  He was willing to  take  the  risk  and  return.   There  was
     nothing preceding the claimed event in July 2009 which  caused  him  to
     come to the United Kingdom.


 23. In response, Ms Caseley submitted that the  email  at  C1  was  primary
     evidence.  It stated that the Appellant was denied  boarding,  no  more
     than that.  The Appellant's evidence contradicted this as he said  that
     he had passed boarding procedure.  Cross-examination on  this  evidence
     was necessary.  The Respondent was obliged to cross-examine on SIBP and
     should have put to the Appellant that the scars were not caused in  the
     way claimed.  The Appellant was not cross-examined to the  effect  that
     he was making it all up.  This was an  issue  of  procedural  fairness.
     Even if the judge had accepted the email and found that  the  Appellant
     was denied boarding, the Appellant needed to be cross-examined on where
     he was.  This was very important as it was an unusual case.


 24. In relation to risk on return it had been accepted that  the  Appellant
     was an LTTE supporter [49].  It was not the case  that  the  judge  was
     assessing the situation for all Tamils, but was the specific case of an
     LTTE supporter.  Even if the judge had not accepted that the  Appellant
     had been detained and tortured, he still needed to consider the risk on
     return to the Appellant.  The judge's findings as to risk did not  take
     into account the background evidence set out in the skeleton  argument.
     The evidence provided by the  Appellant  consisted  of  more  than  Dr.
     Pedersen's report.  There was  a  great  deal  of  relevant  background
     evidence applicable to someone with the Appellant's profile.  The judge
     had an obligation to give reasons for why the  objective  evidence  was
     different.  This applied even if the email at C1 was accepted.

Error of law decision


Ground one: failure to take into account the fact  that  the  Appellant  had
not been cross-examined on any alternative cause for the scarring


 25. The judge states at [51]:


     "I have accepted that he does have scarring to his back which could not
     have been self-inflicted.  Although I have found  that  Dr  Bailey  was
     under no obligation to consider SIBP on the basis  of  the  information
     that he was given, I have  found  that  he  was  not  given  the  whole
     picture.  Under KV (scarring) I am not obliged to make  any  definitive
     finding as to whether scarring is the result of SIBP (Para 295).  I  am
     obliged  however,  to  say  whether  I  think  that  SIBP  is  a   real
     possibility.  I find that there are several presenting features of  the
     case that make SIBP a real possibility.  I have not accepted  that  the
     appellant is credible in his account of the 4th July 2009 or  of  being
     held in detention and tortured thereafter.  It follows  that  I  cannot
     accept that the scarring happened then.  The  appellant  has  given  no
     evidence of any other encounter with the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and
     there is therefore no other occasion he can point to  as  to  when  the
     scarring took place.  In summary, I find  that  the  appellant  is  not
     credible in his account of being tortured  at  the  hands  of  the  Sri
     Lankan authorities in July 2009, or indeed at any  time.   He  did  not
     receive the scars on his back in the way he claims."


 26. The grounds referred to the case of RR (Challenging Evidence) Sri Lanka
     [2010] UKUT 274 (IAC).  The headnote to RR states:


    "(3) If the Appellant or expert chooses to give oral evidence then  the
    Respondent's cross examination should fearlessly  and  clearly  include
    the suggesting to the Appellant or expert that, for example, an  injury
    was not caused in the way alleged by the Appellant but by  a  different
    mechanism.

    (4) If the Respondent does not put its case clearly it may well be very
    difficult for the Tribunal to decide against an Appellant who  has  not
    been given an opportunity to deal with the Respondent's concern."


 27. It was not submitted on behalf of the Respondent that the Appellant had
     been cross-examined on an alternative cause for the scarring and I find
     that it is agreed that he was not.  The headnote to RR  is  clear  that
     "the Respondent's  cross  examination  should  fearlessly  and  clearly
     include the suggesting to the Appellant or expert that, for example, an
     injury was not caused in the way alleged by  the  Appellant  but  by  a
     different mechanism."


 28. The reasons for refusal letter states at [17] "It  is  considered  that
     given that you did not present yourself for examination  by  Dr  Bailey
     until five years after the alleged event, self infliction is more  than
     a fanciful possibility".  The judge makes a finding that  goes  further
     than this when he states that SIBP is a "real possibility".  He further
     finds that the Appellant "did not receive the scars on his back in  the
     way he claims."


 29. I have carefully considered, with reference to  paragraph  (4)  of  the
     headnote to RR, whether the Appellant had been given an opportunity  to
     deal with the Respondent's concerns, notwithstanding my finding that he
     was not cross-examined on the possibility of SIBP.   I  find  that  the
     Appellant was aware of the Respondent's case.  It was set  out  in  the
     reasons for refusal letter that the Respondent did not believe that the
     Appellant was where he claimed to have been on 4 July 2009.   This  was
     by reference to the email at C1.  The text of the email was set out  in
     the reasons for refusal letter as follows:


     "On 04/07/2009 the passenger was denied boarding on Sri Lankan Airlines
     Flight UL 501 from Colombo to London  Heathrow  by  the  local  Airline
     Liaison Officer.


     When questioned, the passenger was unable to  confirm  details  of  his
     local educational certificates or when he followed those courses.


     He was advised to call over at the British High Commission for  further
     debriefing.


     However, failed to show up and it was later revealed that he boarded  a
     different flight to UK on 18/07/2009."


 30. The Appellant's case is that he was detained at the airport by the  Sri
     Lankan authorities after clearing passport control on 4 July 2009,  and
     tortured in detention.  The judge sums up the evidence as follows:


     "The email says that he was denied boarding while  the  Appellant  says
     that he was in the departure lounge when he was called down to the  CID
     office.  He does not mention that  his  educational  certificates  were
     checked by any  Liaison  officer,  but  instead  says  that  after  his
     documents were checked that he was cleared for boarding.  He  does  not
     mention any advice to call in at the BHC for further  debriefing.   The
     email, if it can be accepted, is extremely damaging to the  Appellant's
     case.  It would place his whole account of events on the 4th July  2009
     at Colombo airport in doubt.  The question arises as to whether  I  can
     accept this email as evidence."


 31. At [36] he concludes in relation to the email:


     "The email is from a reputable and official source and is referable  to
     the Appellant by the use of the relevant  VA  number.   It  provides  a
     clear account of what happened on the 4th July 2009  and  I  find  must
     have been based on actual events.  I find that I can place reliance  on
     the email dated 10th September 2013 when assessing the  credibility  of
     the Appellant's account of the events in July 2009."


 32. However, the email does not  indicate  where  the  Appellant  was  when
     boarding was denied and I find that, even if weight is  given  to  this
     email, it  cannot  in  and  of  itself  lead  to  a  finding  that  the
     Appellant's scarring was caused  other  than  by  the  Appellant's  own
     account.  It was open to the judge to decide the weight to be given  to
     this evidence, but given that the email does not go so far itself as to
     allege SIBP, reliance on the email does not negate  the  need  for  the
     alternative cause of scarring to be put to the Appellant.


 33. The judge found that the Appellant's claim to have been detained  on  4
     July 2009 was not credible as he placed weight on this email.  However,
     he did not consider the Appellant's  own  account  in  coming  to  this
     finding.  There is no consideration in the decision of the  Appellant's
     own evidence in his witness statement or his  oral  evidence.   Clearly
     there is no consideration of the Appellant's response to the suggestion
     that the scarring was caused by SIBP as this was not  put  to  him.   I
     find that the Respondent's case was  not  put  clearly  enough  in  the
     reasons for refusal letter to negate the need for cross-examination  on
     SIBP.


 34. I accept that this is an unusual case.  The Appellant  was  aware  that
     the Respondent's case was that he was not where he said he was, and  he
     gave an account which directly contradicted the Respondent's  evidence.
     He provided medical evidence to corroborate his claim.  The  judge  was
     entitled to give weight to  the  email,  and  while  I  find  that  the
     possibility of SIBP stems from the Respondent's evidence in the  email,
     I find that for the judge to  make  a  finding  that  it  was  a  "real
     possibility" he should have considered the Appellant's own response  to
     this suggestion before coming to this finding.  The Appellant  was  not
     clearly and openly cross examined on SIBP being a possible cause.


 35. With reference to the case of RR, I find that the judge erred in making
     a finding that SIPB was a "real possibility" in circumstances when this
     had not been put to the Appellant in cross-examination.   I  find  that
     this was a material error of law.


 36. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given that there  was  a  procedural  unfairness,
     having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective,  I  find  that  it   is
     appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


 37. Given that I have found that the decision involves a material error  of
     law which means that the decision must be set aside, there is  no  need
     for me to consider the further grounds of appeal.

Notice of Decision

38. The decision involves the making of a material error of law and  I  set
    the decision aside.

39. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 30 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
