


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/06530/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                             |Determination issued          |
|on 30 January 2018                           |On 01 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 A T OLUWOLE
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Ethnic
Minorities Law Centre, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against  a  decision  by  FtT  Judge  Mozolowski,
    promulgated on 9 October 2017.

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal are stated  in  the  application  for
    permission to appeal filed on 23 October 2017 as follows:

      Ground 1: Failure to have regard to Paposhvili v Belgium,  application
      no 41738/10, [ECtHR, Grand Chamber, judgement dated 13 December 2016],
      which is material because:

      (i) The relevant test should be  understood  to  refer  to  situations
      involving the removal of a seriously ill person in  which  substantial
      grounds have been shown for believing that he or she, although not  at
      imminent risk of dying, would face a real  risk,  on  account  of  the
      absence of appropriate treatment in the receiving country or a lack of
      access to such treatment, of being exposed to  a  serious,  rapid  and
      irreversible decline in his and  her  state  of  health  resulting  in
      intense suffering or to a significant  reduction  in  life  expectancy
      (see paragraphs 132, 136 to  137,  175  to  183  of  Paposhvili).  The
      findings made by the FtT  do  not  reflect  the  correct  approach  as
      outlined in Paposhvili as  the  decision  refers  to  the  appellant's
      illness not having reached a critical stage (i.e. that he is dying) or
      not being in the final stages of a terminal illness.

      (ii) The findings in relation to the  child's  medical  condition  are
      undermined by failure to take into account the letter at page  138  of
      the appellant's bundle from Mrs Koya who was the  child's  nurse.  She
      states that she was unaware of the  child's  condition  and  does  not
      think the family had enough money to fund a diagnosis.  Such  evidence
      undermines the findings that the appellant and her  husband  would  be
      able  to  afford  such  treatment.  This  is  material  as  Paposhvili
      (paragraph 190) refers to the need by the respondent to  consider  the
      cost of medication and treatment and the distance to be  travelled  to
      access to the required care.

      (iii) The findings in relation to availability  and  affordability  of
      treatment are not supported,  or  not  adequately  supported,  by  the
      evidence ... Reference is made to letters at pages 191 to 192 and  195
      of the appellant's bundle. In light of this information there  was  no
      or insufficient evidence to support the findings ... or the FtT failed
      to exercise anxious scrutiny. Even if the appellant  and  her  husband
      could afford such treatment, there was no, or  insufficient,  evidence
      to show such treatment was available or could be accessed.

      (iv) Such errors are material as serious doubts and the FtT has  erred
      in law by failing to find a breach where there was  no  evidence  that
      the respondent had obtained individual and sufficient assurances  from
      the receiving state, as a precondition for removal,  that  appropriate
      treatment will be available and accessible to the appellant's child so
      that he does not find himself in a situation contrary to article 3 [or
      article 8].

      Ground 2 - further errors in relation to article 8.

      (i) Although the FtT states that the best interests of the child are a
      primary consideration at paragraph 17 it has failed to ask  the  right
      questions in an orderly manner in order to avoid  the  risk  that  the
      best interests of the child might be undervalued when other  important
      considerations were in play: Zoumbas v  SSHD  2014  SC  (UKSC)  75  at
      paragraph 10 per Lord Hodge.

      (ii)  The FtT misapplied the law at paragraph 44. It is wrong to  look
      for compelling reasons before looking at the case outside  the  rules.
      The tribunal requires to look at the case outside  the  rules  in  any
      event and the correct question is  whether  there  is  a  sufficiently
      strong case to outweigh immigration control: Agyarko v SSHD  [2017]  1
      WLR 823 at paragraph 57 per Lord Reed.

      Ground 3 -  reaching  findings  not  supported,  or  not  sufficiently
      supported, by the evidence.

      The FTT erred in law at paragraphs 21 and 22 by reaching findings  not
      supported, or not sufficiently supported, by the evidence.

 3. FtT Judge Alis granted permission on 29 November 2017, on the  view  of
    arguable error by applying the test in N v SSHD rather than the test in
    Paposhvili (ground 1 (i), in effect, although other  grounds  were  not
    excluded).

 4. In EA and others [2017] UKUT  00445  the  UT  held  that  the  test  in
    Paposhvili was not one it was  open  to  the  tribunal  to  apply,  for
    reasons of judicial precedent.

 5. Although the decision in EA is dated prior to the  decisions  of  Judge
    Mozolowski and Judge Alis, it does not appear  to  have  been  reported
    until afterwards.

 6. There is nothing in the grounds of appeal to the FtT about  Paposhvili,
    and it does not appear to have been cited to the  judge.   If  she  did
    adopt the wrong approach, that would be  largely  due  to  parties  not
    drawing the case to her attention.  However, it  is  an  error  not  to
    apply relevant jurisprudence,  even  when  parties  fail  to  make  the
    submissions they should.

 7. Mr Winter observed that EA is not binding on the UT;  but  he  accepted
    that for practical purposes he would have to show that  it  is  wrongly
    decided, which he undertook to do.   He  advanced  an  interesting  and
    erudite argument, based mainly on Hicks v Commissioner of Police of the
    Metropolis [2014] 1 WLR 2152, to which the UT in EA was not referred.

 8. It is convenient firstly to resolve the other grounds.

 9. Ground 1 (ii) is based on a letter from a nurse in Nigeria who knew the
    appellant and her family, including her child A until the age of 5, but
    did not know he had sickle cell anaemia.  In her last sentence she says
    she does not think the family  "had  the  money  to  take  him  to  the
    hospital for proper diagnosis".

10. The appellant's main bundle in the FtT ran to 195 pages.  A judge  does
    not have to mention specifically every line of every item  of  evidence
    before her.  There does not appear to have been a submission  that  the
    nurse's  letter  was  a  principal  item  bearing  on   the   financial
    circumstances.

11. As Mrs O'Brien submitted, the judge at paragraphs 19 - 30 carried out a
    thorough analysis of the evidence from the appellant and  her  husband,
    much of which related to their financial circumstances,  and  found  it
    unsatisfactory for multiple reasons, in which no  errors  are  alleged.
    At paragraph 32 she found their evidence "riddled with inconsistencies"
    and their "general credibility to be poor".

12. Ground 1 (ii) is an afterthought, based on combing through the evidence
    after receiving the decision.  There  is  nothing  in  the  absence  of
    specific mention of the letter from the nurse which shakes the  judge's
    general findings.

13. This also removes any real foundation for grounds  1  (iii)  and  (iv).
    Sickle cell anaemia is a common disease in Nigeria,  but  treatment  is
    available. Although, sadly, it is not affordable to the poorer classes,
    on the findings of the FtT, soundly reached, about the  true  state  of
    family finances, it is accessible for the appellant's child.

14. The judge commented at paragraphs  40  -  41  on  the  shortcomings  of
    medical information at pages  87  -  94  of  the  bundle  but  did  not
    specifically mention the evidence towards the far end  of  the  bundle.
    To that extent, there is some force in the  point  at  ground  1  (iii)
    about evidence at the far end of the bundle.  Those reports are  rather
    more substantial, and there may have been an oversight.   However,  the
    appellant failed to show a state of affairs,  even  on  those  reports,
    which might meet  the  tests  in  Paposhvili.   As  submitted  for  the
    respondent, the picture which emerges is of a child  with  a  moderate,
    well-managed condition, and nothing to show that  such  management  may
    not continue in Nigeria.  The conclusions of the FtT at  paragraphs  41
    and 54 have not been undermined.

15. Grounds 2 and 3 are  only  generalised  disagreements,  framed  in  the
    language of case law, not showing any purchase on the present facts.

16. The various elements of the test in Paposhvili lower the  bar  from  N,
    but they still set it high.  The evidence and  findings  in  this  case
    would not  justify  conclusions  of  exposure  to  serious,  rapid  and
    irreversible decline  in  health,  intense  suffering,  or  significant
    reduction in life expectancy.

17. It is therefore unnecessary to decide whether EA is wrongly decided;  I
    say no more than that there may  be  a  respectable  argument  to  that
    effect.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]

            31 January 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




