
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/06527/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23rd February 2018                      | On 3rd April 2018             |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    HABS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Collins, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise, the appellant is granted  anonymity.  No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or  any
    member of their family. This direction applies both  to  the  appellant
    and to the respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead
    to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 4th April 1997.  She made application for  international  protection
    as a refugee.  On 28th June 2017 a decision  was  made  to  refuse  the
    application but she appealed.

 3. The appeal was heard on 8th August 2017  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Woolf sitting at Hatton Cross.  She dismissed the appeal.  Not
    content with that decision application for  permission  to  appeal  was
    made but in the first instance  refused  by  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Frankish.  A renewed application was lodged  on  1st  November
    2017.  Upper Tribunal Judge  McWilliam  on  9th  January  2018  granted
    permission principally because, as she said:

    "It is arguable that the judge did not consider whether  the  Appellant
         would be at risk on return because of her gender and membership  of
         a minority clan in the  light  of  the  evidence  produced  by  the
         Appellant.  It is arguable that MOJ (Return to Mogadishu) (Somalia)
         (CG) [2014] UKUT 00442  has  limited  application  because  of  the
         Appellant's gender."

Permission was granted on all grounds but that was the focus.

 4. I make reference to  where  the  focus  was  because  Mr  Walker  quite
    properly accepted that not only was it arguable  but  that  the  appeal
    should be conceded on that basis.

 5. The error is material, I find, and so the decision is to be set  aside.
    The question for me then is whether to remake the decision or remit  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  Material in this case is the fact that  since
    the appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant has given
    birth to a child.  It may be (it would  be  improper  for  me  to  make
    findings at this stage) that that child is a British national.  If  the
    child is a British national then  that  may  well  have  more  relevant
    Article 8 repercussions than would other be the case.

 6. This matter being remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  affords  the
    opportunity to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  have  regard  to  all  the
    material facts now relating to this case and affords to  the  Secretary
    of State the opportunity to consider the Appellant's  position  in  the
    light of all of the now known  facts,  assuming  that  the  Appellant's
    solicitors set them out for the Secretary of State's consideration.

 7. In the circumstances my finding is as follows:

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of  law
    and is set aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to
    be made afresh with no preserved findings.  For the avoidance of doubt,
    I was not asked by Mr Collins to preserve any findings but had he  done
    so I would have not thought it appropriate in this particular case.

Signed                              Date 29 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker
