
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06531/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4th April 2017                   |On 4th May 2017                         |
|                                    |                                        |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                      NH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Aitken of Counsel instructed by Wai Leung
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Afghanistan, appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  14th  June
    2016 to refuse his application for asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    in  the  UK  and  deciding  that  his  removal  would  not  breach  the
    Appellant's rights under the European Convention for Human Rights.  The
    appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Saffer in a  decision
    promulgated on 17th November 2016.   The  Appellant  now  appeals  with
    permission granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 16th February 2017.



 2. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claims  that  his
    mother died when he was 8 and at that stage he and his father moved  to
    Iran where he worked in a factory.  He claims that his father was  told
    by his employers to go and fight in Syria and that he was killed there.
     He claims that after that he had difficulties with his  employers  who
    wanted to send him to Syria as well.  The Appellant claims that he left
    Iran and went via Turkey and France to the UK and he arrived in the  UK
    on 15th October 2015 and claimed asylum on 29th October 2015.

 3. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State accepted  that
    the Appellant is an Afghan national.  However the  Respondent  rejected
    the Appellant's claim that he fled Afghanistan due to an attack on  his
    village by the Taliban and that he worked in a factory  in  Iran.   The
    Respondent went on to decide that, even if the  Appellant's  claim  was
    taken at its highest, he had not shown that he has a well-founded  fear
    in Afghanistan because the Taliban would have no interest in him and he
    could safely relocate to Kabul.

 4. The Appellant was not represented before the First-tier Tribunal and at
    that point he was 18 years old.  The  judge  accepted  the  Appellant's
    account that he left Afghanistan when he was 8 years old  and  went  to
    Iran following the death of his mother and attack on his village by the
    Taliban.  The judge accepted that the Appellant and his  father  worked
    in  Iran  and  were  there  illegally.   He  also  accepted  that   the
    Appellant's father would have felt obliged to carry out his  employer's
    request to fight in Syria and that after the death of  his  father  the
    Appellant was vulnerable to the wishes of his  employer  and  was  also
    asked to fight in Syria.  The judge accepted that the  Appellant  saved
    money and had money from  his  father  which  gave  him  the  financial
    ability to pay an agent to assist him to  leave.   The  judge  accepted
    that the Appellant had the problems he claimed in Iran.  The judge also
    accepted that the Appellant had  told  the  truth  about  his  life  in
    Afghanistan.  The judge accepted that the Appellant had the problems he
    claimed when he was 8 years old and that he has no  family  support  in
    Kabul or elsewhere.  The judge accepted that the Appellant could not be
    said to understand the culture or life in Afghanistan  as  he  has  not
    lived there since he was a very young child ten  years  ago  [25]-[26].
    The judge went on to assess what is reasonably likely to happen to  the
    Appellant on his return to Afghanistan and concluded that the Appellant
    would not be at real risk from the authorities there  as  there  is  no
    evidence that they have any adverse interest in him or in  the  Taliban
    due to their lack of reach or specific interest in him when  he  was  8
    years old or now.  The judge took into account that the  Appellant  was
    just an adult and concluded that, even though  he  cannot  be  said  to
    understand the culture or life in Afghanistan, it would  be  reasonable
    to require him to internally relocate to Kabul or elsewhere as he is  a
    fit and healthy young man who speaks Dari and has shown himself  to  be
    resourceful enough to travel across Europe for  many  months  where  he
    also did not understand the culture and life and he can work  in  Kabul
    or elsewhere to establish himself.

 5. The renewed Grounds of Appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  rely  on  three
    asserted errors. It is firstly  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to
    conduct a proper and fair assessment of the risk which would  be  faced
    by the Appellant on return to Afghanistan.  It is  contended  that  the
    judge failed to take account of the fact that the Appellant is of Sadat
    ethnicity and a Shia  Muslim  and  that  he  has  never  been  back  to
    Afghanistan since he left when he was 8 years  old.   It  is  contended
    that according to the country information Sadat is a tiny ethnic  group
    that comprises only one per cent  of  the  population  of  Afghanistan.
    They are Shia Muslim whilst the majority of people in  Afghanistan  are
    Sunni Muslim and that, similar to Hazara, they  suffer  discrimination,
    harassment and ill-treatment in Afghanistan. The second Ground contends
    that the Appellant's parents are deceased and he has no family  support
    in Kabul or elsewhere.  It is contended that  the  Appellant  does  not
    have any Afghan identity documents and will  need  to  obtain  identity
    documents in order to stay in Afghanistan.  It  is  contended  that  it
    would not be possible for him to obtain an ID card as he has no  family
    there.  It is contended that the country information shows  that  there
    is ethnic tension in Afghanistan  and  in  Kabul  and  that  the  UNHCR
    recognise that individuals belonging to one of  Afghanistan's  minority
    ethnic groups, particularly in areas where they do  not  constitute  an
    ethnic majority, may be in need of  international  refugee  protection.
    The third Ground contends that the Appellant's father's involvement  in
    the fighting in Syria would put the Appellant at  real  risk  from  the
    Afghan authorities as the Afghan authorities  would  be  interested  to
    find out whether the Appellant  was  himself  connected  to  any  armed
    groups and/or insurgents.  Also, as a young man of  fighting  age,  the
    Appellant would face a real risk of forced recruitment by  the  Taliban
    or other armed groups active in Afghanistan.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch  on  the
    basis that the Appellant was only 18 and was not legally represented at
    the appeal hearing and therefore it was even more  important  to  apply
    anxious scrutiny to all of the evidence in support of his appeal.   The
    Upper Tribunal Judge noted that in the decision and reasons the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge did not take into account  the  fact  that  in  his
    screening interview the Appellant said that he was of the Sadat  ethnic
    group and that the objective  evidence  submitted  in  support  of  his
    Grounds of Appeal indicates that this group makes up only one per  cent
    of the population of Afghanistan and shows that it is the UNHCR's  view
    that individuals belonging to an ethnic minority  may  be  in  need  of
    international protection.

 7. In the Rule 24 notice the Respondent pointed out that it is  not  clear
    that the Appellant relied  upon  his  Sadat  ethnicity  at  his  appeal
    hearing or what evidence was before the judge in relation to this.   It
    is contended  that  the  UNHCR's  view  that  individuals  from  ethnic
    minorities may be in need of international protection does not  suggest
    that being of Sadat ethnicity alone is enough to require  international
    protection.  It is contended that there is no error  disclosed  in  the
    reasoning.





Submissions

 8. Mr Aitken submitted that it is the Appellant's case that he is of Sadat
    ethnicity and is a Shia Muslim, that he left Afghanistan when he was  8
    years old.  It is contended that the judge should have  considered  the
    evidence from the UNHCR.   It  is  contended  that  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented and was just 18.  At the hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal therefore the judge's duty was heightened and the  failure  to
    consider his ethnicity amounted to an error of law.  He  accepted  that
    in the asylum interview the Appellant did not refer  to  his  ethnicity
    but at question 176 he said that he was a Shia  Muslim  and  Mr  Aitken
    submitted that this should have alerted the judge to his vulnerability.
     Mr Aitken also accepted that there is no reference in the reasons  for
    refusal letter to the Appellant's claimed Sadat  ethnicity  or  to  the
    claim that he is a Shia Muslim.  He submitted that the judge failed  to
    adequately consider the fact that the Appellant's father was killed  in
    Syria and the fact that this would elevate the risk to  the  Appellant.
    He submitted that this was highlighted in the expert  report  which  he
    accepted was not before the judge.

 9. In relation to the second ground Mr Aitken  submitted  that  the  judge
    erred in his assessment in relation to internal relocation.  The  judge
    attached undue weight to the fact of the Appellant's travel  from  Iran
    to the UK.  Mr Aitken submitted that the judge made further  errors  in
    paragraph 27 of the decision where he said:

         "In my judgment however, bearing in mind the guidance case  law  to
         which I have referred, even though he cannot be said to  understand
         the culture or life in  Afghanistan,  it  would  be  reasonable  to
         require him to internally relocate to Kabul or elsewhere as he is a
         fit and healthy young man who speaks Dari and has shown himself  to
         be resourceful enough to travel  across  Europe  for  many  months,
         where he also did not understand the culture or life, and can  work
         in Kabul or elsewhere to establish himself."

    Mr Aitken submitted that this paragraph demonstrates a failure  on  the
    part of the judge to appreciate that the journey made by the  Appellant
    was under the control of agents.  He submitted that travelling  through
    Europe is different from travelling from Kabul  to  a  remote  area  of
    Afghanistan.

10. Mr Aitken highlighted a further alleged error at paragraphs 20  and  24
    of the decision where the judge said that it was the Respondent's  case
    that the Appellant's failure to claim asylum in France  undermines  his
    credibility  and  at  paragraph  24  where  the  judge  said  that  the
    Appellant's credibility is damaged by his failure to  claim  asylum  en
    route. However at paragraph 29 of the reasons for  refusal  letter,  in
    considering Section 8 of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, the Respondent  concluded  that  weight  had
    been placed upon the fact that  the  Appellant  was  a  minor  when  he
    travelled to the UK and it was considered reasonable that he relied  on
    his father's advice and his credibility was  found  not  to  have  been
    damaged by his failure to claim asylum en route under section 8(4).  He
    submitted that the judge  should  have  provided  reasons  why  he  was
    departing from this acceptance on the part of the Secretary  of  State.
    Mr Aitken further submitted that there had been  no  reference  to  the
    background information as to how the Appellant would establish  himself
    or to find work or accommodation in Kabul.  The judge  failed  to  have
    regard to the fact that the Appellant has no  identification  documents
    which would make  it  difficult  for  him  to  establish  himself.   He
    referred to paragraph 43 of the asylum interview  where  the  Appellant
    was asked if he had any identification in Afghanistan and he said  that
    he  had  not.   Mr  Aitken  submitted  that  the   background   country
    information shows that the difficulties in obtaining  Taskira  document
    which is required in Afghanistan.  Mr Aitken accepted  that  there  was
    nothing before the judge to that effect but again emphasised  that  the
    Appellant was unrepresented and was only just 18 at the time.

11. In relation to the third ground, Mr Aitken submitted that the judge had
    failed to properly assess the Article 8 claim.  The  Immigration  Rules
    are the starting point for an assessment of  Article  8.   He  accepted
    that there was no evidence that the Appellant  met  any  of  the  other
    Immigration Rules but submitted that the judge was required to consider
    the Appellant's private life aspect under paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  and
    to carry out an assessment as to whether there  were  very  significant
    obstacles to the Appellant returning to Afghanistan.

12. Mr Tarlow submitted that the UNHCR document submitted by the  Appellant
    in connection with the Grounds of Appeal states that ethnic  minorities
    may be in need of international protection but  there  is  no  evidence
    that that threshold has been crossed in this case.   He  accepted  that
    the Appellant was unrepresented in the First-tier Tribunal but asserted
    that it was still for him to make his  claim.   He  submitted  that  at
    paragraphs 26 and 27 the judge made findings open to him in relation to
    internal relocation to Kabul.   He  accepted  that  the  assessment  of
    Article 8 at paragraph 29 is sparse but he submitted that it dealt with
    the key point.  Therefore he submitted that any errors  made  were  not
    material to the conclusion.  He submitted that membership of the  Sadat
    ethnic group is not sufficient to enable the Appellant's appeal  to  be
    successful.  In terms of the error in relation to Section 8 he that  at
    paragraph 24 the judge says that the Appellant's credibility is damaged
    by his failure to claim asylum en route but says  that  he  must  still
    assess the merits of the claim, therefore any error in this  regard  is
    not material.

13. In response Mr Aitken submitted that the UNHCR Report  was  capable  of
    crossing the threshold in terms of international protection.  Therefore
    the judge may have found that the UNHCR evidence brought the  Appellant
    over the threshold but that evidence was not considered.   He  accepted
    that it was for the Appellant to advance his case  but  submitted  that
    the Appellant was young and was unrepresented and had been absent  from
    Afghanistan for a number of years.  He accepted  that  the  factors  at
    paragraph 27 were relevant to the assessment under Article  8  but  the
    judge had not given  sufficient  reasons  for  his  decision  that  the
    Appellant's Article 8 claim fails.





Error of law

14. The judge found the Appellant's account to be credible. This meant that
    it was accepted that the Appellant left Afghanistan when he was 8 years
    old and that he has no family there and the judge found  that  he  does
    not understand the culture or life in Afghanistan. It is not in dispute
    that the Appellant  is  a  Shia  Muslim.  The  Appellant  said  in  his
    screening interview that he is of Sadat ethnicity. This is not disputed
    in the Reasons for Refusal letter. This was the judge's starting  point
    in assessing the reasonableness of internal relocation in Kabul.

15. The judge found that the appellant's  credibility  is  damaged  by  his
    failure to claim asylum en route. However the judge failed to take into
    account as accepted by the Secretary of State, that the  Appellant  was
    under 18 when he  travelled  to  the  UK  and  that  it  is  considered
    reasonable that he followed his father's advice (paragraph  29  Reasons
    for Refusal letter).

16. The judge attached  very  significant  weight  to  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant travelled across Europe for many months in deciding  that  it
    would be reasonable to expect him to relocate  to  Kabul.  This,  along
    with the fact that he speaks Dari, seems to have been the main  reasons
    why he found that it is reasonable to expect the Appellant to  relocate
    in Kabul.

17. The  submissions  on  his  behalf  emphasise  that  the  Appellant  was
    unrepresented at the hearing before the judge and that he was  only  18
    years old.  The  judge  did  consider  this  throughout  the  decision,
    particularly in  his  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  credibility.
    However I accept that the judge failed in  his  duty  to  give  anxious
    scrutiny to the Appellant's  case  in  his  consideration  of  internal
    relocation. He failed to take account of the fact that the Appellant is
    a member of  the  Sadat  ethnic  group,  as  stated  in  his  screening
    interview, and the fact that this is a minority group (as  set  out  in
    the UNHCR document before the First-tier Tribunal). The judge failed to
    take account of the fact that he is a Shia  Muslim  as  stated  in  his
    asylum interview where he said that  the  Taliban  kills  Shia  Muslims
    (Q176). In reaching his conclusion about the Appellant's journey to the
    UK the judge failed to consider the role of the agent in organising the
    journey. The fact that the Appellant used an agent potentially  reduces
    the weight of the fact that the Appellant had  undertaken  the  journey
    and undermines the assessment that he was 'resourceful enough to travel
    across Europe for many months' [27]. Further, the judge failed to  take
    account of the fact that the Appellant has  no  identity  documents  as
    stated in the screening interview.

18. Considering all of these matters I therefore conclude that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge erred in failing to give full consideration to  all
    of the evidence before him in assessing the reasonableness of  internal
    relocation to Kabul.

19. There is no challenge to  any  of  the  findings  of  fact  or  to  the
    (implied) finding that the Appellant is at risk in  his  home  area.  I
    therefore preserve the findings of the First-tier Tribunal in  relation
    to these issues and I set aside the findings as to internal relocation.



Remaking the decision

20. In remaking the decision as to internal relocation I  take  account  of
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal and the further  bundle  of
    documents served on the Upper Tribunal on  the  Appellant's  behalf  as
    well as the submissions made by Mr Tarlow and Mr Aitken.

21. I have considered the bundle of documents submitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal including the Appellant's witness  statement.  The  background
    information  in  that  bundle  contains  information  about  events  in
    Afghanistan.  However I see nothing in  that  bundle  relating  to  the
    issues now being  put  forward  in  terms  of  the  Appellant's  ethnic
    background or religious background.   In  the  Appellant's  new  bundle
    there is a report from the Washington Post at page 47 dated  24th  July
    2016 which indicates that there were increased fears sectarian violence
    could be unleashed by the Sunni majority Muslim population.  There is a
    further report from the Foreign Policy Journal of  21st  November  2016
    which refers to ethnic rivalries in Afghanistan.

22. There is a report from the  Independent  of  1st  November  2011  which
    states that Kabul is becoming increasingly divided along  ethnic  lines
    as residents relocate to neighbourhoods that would allow them a  speedy
    getaway to their home provinces and ancestral  villages  in  the  event
    that the country descends back into civil war.

23. In relation to remaking the decision Mr Tarlow relied  on  the  reasons
    for refusal letter.  He submitted that there was no evidence that being
    of the Sadat ethnicity would cause any problems  to  the  Appellant  on
    return.  The Appellant has worked in various countries for a long time.
     He is resourceful and he can  relate  to  Kabul  or  elsewhere.   Even
    looking at paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) there is no reason why the Appellant
    cannot be returned to Afghanistan.

24. Mr Aitken submitted that it was unchallenged that the Appellant  was  a
    member of the Sadat ethnic group.  He submitted that pages 35 to 36  of
    the Appellant's new bundle shows that one per cent of the population is
    Sadat. Whilst he accepted that this evidence was from 2012 he submitted
    that there was no recent evidence to the contrary.  He  relied  on  the
    UNHCR Report at page 37 of the  Appellant's  new  bundle  which  states
    that:

         "Individuals who belong to one  of  Afghanistan's  minority  ethnic
         groups, particularly in areas  where  they  do  not  constitute  an
         ethnic majority, may be in need of international refugee protection
         on the basis of  their  nationality  or  ethnicity/race,  or  other
         relevant grounds, depending on the individual circumstances of  the
         case.  Relevant considerations include the relative power  position
         of the ethnic group in the applicant's  area  of  origin,  and  the
         history of inter-ethnic relations in that area."

25. Mr Aitken relied on the  expert  report  at  pages  10  to  34  of  the
    Appellant's new bundle.  He relied on paragraph 16 of the expert report
    which states:

         "Afghanistan is a country formed by different ethnic groups.  There
         are nearly 55 different ethnic groups, who speak 30  languages  and
         dialects.  The major ethnic groups are the Pashtuns 42%, Tajik 27%,
         Hazara 9% and Uzbek 9%.  Each one of the  other  ethnic  groups  of
         Afghanistan form 1% or less than 1% of the population.   The  Sadat
         ethnic group  are  one  of  the  minority  Shia  Muslim  groups  of
         Afghanistan.  The Sadat does not have influential  members  in  the
         Afghan government.  There are no powerful communal  groups  and  no
         major  constituency  where  members  of  the  local   councils   or
         parliamentarians  represent  the   Sadat's   local   and   national
         interests.  The major risk to  the  Sadat  ethnic  group  is  their
         religious identity, as Shia Muslims."

26. I accept that the Appellant may face difficulties in Afghanistan  as  a
    result of his ethnicity. As the group is very small he will  be  unable
    to access the community support he may need because he  has  no  family
    members there.

27. Mr Aitken also relied on paragraph 17  of  the  expert's  report  which
    states that "a person who returns to Afghanistan from Iran or  Pakistan
    or from other countries  may  encounter  many  administrative  barriers
    before he can obtain a Taskira document".  It states that "repatriating
    refugees are undocumented and have to satisfy the following  conditions
    before they can obtain a Taskira:

         . To obtain a Taskira document issued to one's grandfather;

         . To obtain a Taskira document issued to one's father;

         . To submit a Taskira document issued to oneself;

         . To provide testimony from tribe, ethnic group chiefs and elders.
           "

    At paragraph 19 the expert says that in "Afghanistan a Taskira document
    is the more important  form  of  identity  which  also  confirms  one's
    citizenship.   It  is  used  for  enrolling  in  schools,  renting   an
    accommodation, and for employment".  It states that "following a  major
    terrorist incident the police forces carry out spot  checks  or  random
    house to house searches where people are expected to show a Taskira  as
    proof of their identity and if they cannot show a Taskira detention  is
    highly likely".  In the expert's opinion the Appellant if he  does  not
    have resourceful and influential relatives who  can  make  sure  he  is
    issued with one will not be able to receive a Taskira. In light of  the
    fact that the Appellant does not have any family members in Afghanistan
    it is unlikely that he will be able to obtain a Taskira. Given the size
    of his ethnic group it is not likely that he will  be  able  to  access
    their support in seeking the identity documentation.

28. Mr Aitken also pointed to paragraph 20 of  the  expert's  report  which
    refers to the fact that the Appellant's  father  died  in  the  war  in
    Syria.  According to the report the Islamic world is divided  into  two
    parts in relation to the Syrian conflict.  One side is the  Shia  Iran,
    Russia and other Shia Muslims of Iraq and Lebanon who support Bashar al-
    Assad and his government whilst the other are  the  Sunni  Muslims  and
    western powers that do not  support  him.   According  to  the  expert,
    nearly 80% of the Afghanistan population are  Sunni  Muslims  and  they
    support any war being waged  against  Shia  Islam.   According  to  the
    expert, if people in Afghanistan find out that the  Appellant's  father
    died in Syria whilst support Bashar  al-Assad  he  would  receive  ill-
    treatment from members of Afghan society.  In the opinion of the expert
    if the Appellant relocates to Kabul he is likely to be targeted by  the
    Taliban and their supporters. I accept that it  is  possible  that  the
    Appellant could face further difficulties because his father fought  in
    Syria.

29. The expert's  opinion  highlights  some  of  the  risks  to  which  the
    Appellant may be exposed. At paragraph 21 the expert says that a  young
    person relocating to Kabul  has  two  accommodation  options.   One  is
    living in shared accommodation with other men or the other is living in
    small rooms located in the inns.  He states at  paragraph  22  that  he
    believes that the Appellant is likely to be exposed to  risks  such  as
    drugs, male sex abuse, trafficking and other criminal activities living
    in this type of accommodation.  At page 26 the  expert  concludes  that
    the Appellant, a member of Sadat, is  a  vulnerable  and  unrepresented
    ethnic group in Afghanistan.  The Appellant is attributed to  the  Shia
    Sunni conflict by the fact that his father fought and  died  in  Syria.
    The Appellant is an undocumented citizen who may not be able  to  prove
    his Afghani citizenship status.  In  the  opinion  of  the  expert  the
    Appellant will not be able to apply for a job or rent an  accommodation
    if he cannot obtain a Taskira document.  If he is forced to live in the
    slums where there are crime-ridden inns, then he  will  be  exposed  to
    direct contact with drug dealers,  human  traffickers  and  members  of
    terrorist groups and there is a strong possibility  that  criminal  and
    terrorist groups actively look for people like the Appellant  who  have
    to commit crimes for survival.

30. Mr Aitken also referred to the Appellant's  updated  witness  statement
    dated 22nd March 2017 where at paragraph 19 he states  that  he  is  no
    longer a practising Muslim and suggests that  this  may  place  him  at
    further risk in Afghanistan.

31. I take account of the fact that the Appellant left Afghanistan when  he
    was 8 years old. He has no family there. He would  be  returning  there
    with little support from his ethnic group. His ethnicity  and  religion
    may make him vulnerable. He will  have  difficulty  accessing  identity
    documents and therefore accommodation and employment. In light  of  all
    of this evidence I find that it would not be reasonable to  expect  the
    Appellant to relocate to Kabul. Therefore the Appellant has established
    that he is entitled to protection as a refugee.

32. Mr Aitken accepted that Article 2 and 3 stand or fall with  the  asylum
    appeal. There is no  need  to  determine  the  Humanitarian  Protection
    appeal in light of my findings on asylum.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law.

I set the decision aside and remake it by allowing the appeal on asylum  and
human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

There is no fee award because no fee has been paid or payable.



Signed                              Date: 3rd May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

