

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/06673/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13 June 2017                            |On 16 June 2017                |




                                   Before


                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                 mr ndue uca
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:


For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath  (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.  I shall refer to the parties as "the  Appellant"  and  "the  Respondent"
    who is the Secretary of State.  This is an  error  of  law  hearing.  I
    consider whether or not there  is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision the First-tier Tribunal (Judge AW Khan)("FTT") promulgated  on
    19.01.2017 in which he dismissed the appeal on asylum and human  rights
    grounds.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was  born  on  15th  February
    1964.  He claimed asylum on the grounds that he was a potential  victim
    in a blood feud.  His claim was that his father killed a  man  in  1991
    because of a land dispute which led to a blood feud.  The appellant was
    not aware of the blood feud until 2000 when his father told  him  about
    it on the telephone.  The Appellant claimed  asylum  in  January  2015.
    The respondent did not find his account to be credible and refused  the
    application.

FTT decision

3.   The FTT found no reliable evidence that a blood feud existed  and  that
    the Appellant's account was not credible. The FTT found no evidence  of
    any death by killing by the Appellant's father. It found that a (twice)
    translated certificate from the Peace and  Reconciliation  organisation
    in Albania was not a reliable document as its provenance was uncertain,
    there had been a delay in obtaining the documents for which  there  was
    no satisfactory explanation and there was no evidence  to  support  the
    claim that there had been intervention to reconcile the families.   The
    FTT found no  explanation  for  why  the  Appellant's  father  had  not
    informed the family about the killing which took place in  1991,  until
    2000.  The FTT rejected the Appellant's explanation.  The FTT took into
    account the Appellant's immigration history in that he arrived  in  the
    UK in 1997 and claimed asylum on  completely  different  grounds  which
    were rejected in 2000.  He made no further claim  on  the  basis  of  a
    blood feud at that time and delayed until January 2015.  The FTT  found
    no detailed evidence of the reason for the blood feud other than it was
    linked to a land dispute.  The FTT found it lacking in credibility that
    between 2000 and 2010 the Appellant lived illegally in the UK and given
    that during that time he was aware of the blood feud, he made no asylum
    claim nor took steps to legitimise his stay until  January  2015.   The
    FTT placed no weight on the hearsay evidence that added nothing to  the
    case and was unreliable  because  the  letter  showed  the  Appellant's
    address when he was not in fact living there.

Application for permission to appeal

4.    In grounds for permission to appeal it  was  contended  that  the  FTT
    failed to make findings on material matters as follows:  Whether or not
    parties came to the appellant's family home  in  2000  and  established
    that there was a matter of honour between them?   Whether  or  not  the
    Appellant's father self-confined from 2000-2005?  Whether  or  not  the
    Appellant had been personally told by his father of the killing that he
    committed and that the Appellant was the next target?

5.     The grounds further argued that the FTT failed to consider the  claim
    and credibility in the context of  the  background  material.   Further
    that the FTT used the word "rational" which implied a  higher  standard
    of proof was being applied.  The FTT failed to given proper reasons for
    placing no weight on the Peace and  Reconciliation  document  ("P  &  R
    document").  The FTT was wrong to find against the Appellant because of
    the lack of death certificate when the FTT failed to ask the  Appellant
    about the death certificate.  The FTT was wrong to place no  weight  on
    the witness evidence.




Permission grant

6.      Permission was granted by FTJ Ford who  found  that  there  were  no
    arguable grounds as to the issue  of  the  death  certificate  and  its
    translation.  It was arguable that the FTT did not  adequately  explain
    why the P & R documents were unsatisfactory, that the FTT was wrong  to
    place no weight on the hearsay evidence of the witness and that the FTT
    failed to make findings on material matters.

Rule 24 Response

7.  The respondent opposed the application arguing  that  the  FTT  findings
    and reasons were sustainable on the evidence.


Submissions

8.   I heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Harding  expanded  on
    his grounds of appeal arguing that the decision amounted to an  unclear
    and unreasoned set of  comments  about  the  evidential  probity  of  a
    document, the FTT ought to have  placed  some  weight  on  the  hearsay
    evidence, and the FTT did not consider the claim in the context of  the
    background material (COIS July 2016) or EH and failed to make  findings
    on material matters. The decision was unsafe.

9.    Mr Nath contended that the findings made by the FTT were  open  to  it
    to make on the evidence.  It was reasonable that the document  was  not
    reliable given that it only came into  existence  after  3.12.14  [15].
    The finding as to the absence of the  death  certificate  was  an  open
    finding.  The FTT correctly took into account the delay  and  the  fact
    that the Appellant had previously made a claim  for  different  reasons
    [17].  It was reasonable that the FTT had not  specifically  considered
    EH given that it found that the Appellant's account  was  not  credible
    [21]. The background material produced was unhelpful.


Discussion and conclusion

10.    In terms of the criticism that the FTT did not look at  the  evidence
    in the round before reaching its credibility findings, I  am  satisfied
    that the FTT made findings on the subjective evidence that were open to
    it to make in considering if  the evidence was  internally  consistent.
    The FTT ought also to have considered the Appellant's  account  in  the
    context of the background  material,  in  other  words  whether  it  is
    externally consistent.  Mr Harding  acknowledged  that  the  background
    material included in the Appellant's bundle [20] was  neither  relevant
    nor of any assistance to the FTT, but he had  relied  on  the  COIS  on
    Blood feuds dated July 2016 to which no reference had been made by  the
    FTT. The COIS did not appear to  be  in  the  file  and  there  was  no
    reference to the same in the decision and reasons.  The FTT  considered
    the background material produced by the Appellant and  I  am  satisfied
    that this material had no bearing on the case at all and that  the  FTT
    was right to disregard it.  As to the COIS on blood  feud,  if  it  was
    produced it ought  to  have  been  referred  to  when  considering  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim but in the light  of  all  of  the
    evidence that was before the FTT and the findings made, I am  satisfied
    that this is not a material error.  The FTT did  not  deny  that  blood
    feuds existed nor take any points that could  have  been  supported  by
    background  evidence,  but  it  concluded  that  the  evidence  by  the
    Appellant was not reliable and that he  had  failed  to  establish  the
    existence of a feud.  Mr Harding  did  not  specifically  identify  any
    matters with reference to the COIS or to the country guidance  case  of
    EH that would have supported  the  Appellant's  particular  claim.   In
    essence I am satisfied that the FTT found no  reliable  evidence  of  a
    blood feud and it is hard  to  see  why  reference  to  the  background
    material would have altered the findings or conclusions reached in this
    appeal.  The FTT demonstrated  an  understanding  of  blood  feuds  and
    referred to EH.

11.  Whilst accepting that the decision  lacked  precision  and  clarity  in
    terms of the phrasing of the findings and reasons, I am satisfied  that
    overall the FTT did make findings that were open to it to make  on  the
    evidence and also having regard  to  the  immigration  history  of  the
    Appellant which it was entitled to take into account.  I take the  view
    that the FTT's use of the word "rational" rather  than  reasonable  was
    unfortunate but that it did not  imply  the  application  of  a  higher
    standard of proof. In reading the decision as a whole there can  be  no
    doubt as to why the FTT made the decision that  it  did.   The  grounds
    raised do not either  individually  nor  collectively  render  the  FTT
    decision as flawed.  The FTT is not expected to make findings on  every
    piece of evidence and I am satisfied that the findings made and  reason
    given were sufficient and that there was no material errors.

Decision
12.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.  The appeal is dismissed.

                               Signed                 Date 15.6.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD
                               Signed                 Date   15.6.2017


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


