
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06577/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th November 2018                         |On 05th February 2019         |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   r a p n
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Tooray (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Asjad, promulgated on  8th  September  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham on  8th  August  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Cameroon, and was  born  on  15th
    May 1990.  He appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent  dated
    28th  June  2017,  refusing  his  application  for   asylum   and   for
    humanitarian protection pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he is  gay,  having  first
    realised his sexual identity when he was 14 or 15  years  of  age.   He
    maintains that he  began  wearing  make-up  when  he  was  very  young,
    although it was just fun for him, and he did not know at the time  that
    he was gay.  His first sexual  experience  was  with  "Donald"  and  he
    subsequently had a relationship with "Martin." His friend "Olivia" used
    to cover for him, until she discovered photographs of him and Donald on
    his telephone, when she distanced herself from him.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was not satisfied that the Appellant gave  a  consistent  and
    convincing account of his sexuality.  A number of reasons given by  the
    Appellant were found to be contradictory, such as that how he began  to
    first wear make-up,  that  his  family  did  not  find  out  about  his
    homosexuality;  and  the  fact  that  he  exercised  his  homosexuality
    privately, a statement which sat unhappily with his claim that  he  had
    first met his first partner "Donald" at a party (paragraph 16).

 5. The crucial part of the judge's determination is at paragraph 18, where
    the judge considers the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  has  been  in  a
    relationship with someone called "Martin" and that in 2016  his  cousin
    "Fatso", found them having sex.  He claimed that Fatso simply moved out
    of his address but did not tell him.  This is the same Fatso,  who  the
    Appellant claims has been threatening to kill him.  Fatso is said  also
    to have spoken to a newspaper reporter about the Appellant.   The  tone
    and substance of the report published online "is supportive  in  nature
    and in no way written so as to be threatening towards the Appellant."

 6. The judge took the view that "the fact that Fatso cooperated with  such
    an article, and the fact that it names facts about the  Appellant  that
    only he could know about, leads me to find that the  Appellant  himself
    has had a hand in the article been published at all".  The  judge  went
    on to say that "it is  an  article  published  with  the  intention  of
    publicising his plight.  It is wholly inconsistent that the very person
    who the Appellant claims is threatening him would  assist  in  such  an
    article" (paragraph 18).

 7. The judge also went on to consider the Appellant's account that he  had
    been attending an LGBT centre in the UK but that "there was no evidence
    that the groups that the Appellant attended or joined were exclusive to
    LGBT persons.   The  photographs  relate  to  the  same  event  as  the
    Appellant can be seen wearing the same clothes" (paragraph 19).

 8. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 9. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  to  consider
    whether the Appellant would be at risk on return on the basis of  being
    "perceived" as gay, notwithstanding the fact that the judge  had  found
    that the Appellant was not in fact gay.  The  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that an online article, containing  some  of  the  Appellant's
    details had been published.  However, the Secretary  of  State  pointed
    out that it had been published in an obscure site,  and  had  not  been
    updated  for  months.   Although  the  judge  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellant must have had a hand in the writing  of  this  article,  such
    that it became a self-serving  article,  the  fact  remained  that  the
    perception would have been created of the Appellant  being  gay,  which
    would put him at risk in Cameroon were he to be returned there.

10. On 10th January 2018, the Upper Tribunal granted permission  to  appeal
    on the basis that the  judge's  determination  at  paragraph  18,  with
    respect to the publication of  the  online  article,  included  unclear
    findings.  On one reading, the Tribunal  appears  to  accept  that  the
    Appellant's cousin, "Fatso", contributed to the piece, confirming  that
    to his knowledge the Appellant was in fact gay.  However, this does not
    appear to have been taken into account by the  Tribunal  when  reaching
    his conclusion at paragraph 21 that the Appellant, is not in fact gay.

11. On 27th February 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered by the Respondent
    Secretary of State.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 16th November 2018, Mr Tooray, appeared  on
    behalf of  the  Appellant,  and  relied  on  the  accepted  grounds  of
    application.  He submitted that at paragraph 35  of  HJ  (Iran)  [2010]
    UKSC 31, had not been taken into account by  the  judge,  because  this
    contained the proposition that, the Appellant may well  be  "perceived"
    as being gay, even if he was not actually gay, a matter  that  was  not
    considered by the judge.

13. Consideration had to be given to the fact that the Appellant's actions,
    which included actions both past, present  and  in  the  future,  would
    identify him as being gay.  Second, his family members  would  identify
    him as being gay.  Third, his online activities would show  him  up  as
    being gay.  All of these aspects would create a perception that he  was
    gay, such as to place him at risk.

14. For her part, Ms Aboni relied upon the Rule 24 response.  She submitted
    that the judge's view was clear that the Appellant had  himself  had  a
    hand in drafting the article which was put on an obscure website on the
    internet.  The judge  was  also  clear  that  the  Appellant's  account
    contained  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  so  as  to  affect   his
    credibility.   The  Appellant  had  also  been  evasive  in   answering
    questions, and this too was made  clear  by  the  judge.   Finally,  no
    argument had arisen  before  the  judge  of  the  "perception"  of  the
    Appellant upon return to  Cameroon,  and  since  this  matter  was  not
    expressly put before the judge, there could be no material error in the
    judge's determination.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such as to enable me to set aside the decision.

16. First, the issue of the "perception" of the  Appellant's  homosexuality
    had not been raised before the judge.   Accordingly,  the  judge  could
    only ever address those matters that were expressly  put  to  her.   If
    they were not put before her,  the  judge  could  not  consider  it  as
    evidence meant to be taken into account, and therefore there  could  be
    no error.

17. Second, even if there was an issue of  "perception",  it  was  for  the
    Appellant to prove before the judge that a single  article,  which  had
    not been updated for months, would, in being published online, create a
    "perception" in the society in Cameroon at large, which would  lead  to
    the Appellant being subjected to the risk  of  attack.   In  fact,  the
    judge had misgivings about the nature of the article in more ways  than
    one.  She observed that "the tone and substance of the report published
    online is supportive  in  nature  and  in  no  way  written  as  to  be
    threatening towards the Appellant" (paragraph  18).   The  article  was
    about raising  awareness  of  homosexuality  in  Cameroon.   The  judge
    accepted that "it  is  an  article  published  with  the  intention  of
    publicising his plight", however,  it  is  a  considerable  stretch  to
    conclude on the basis of a single article, published in a website  that
    is other than mainstream, that the Appellant would be put  at  risk  by
    virtue of its publication alone.

18. Third, the judge was of the  view  that  the  Appellant  was  partially
    responsible  for  its  publication,  and  assisted  by  his  cousin  in
    publishing it.

19. Fourth, the judge rejected any contention that the  Appellant's  cousin
    was threatening the Appellant.  In short, the findings of the judge did
    not confirm that the Appellant's cousin knew  that  the  Appellant  was
    actually gay.

20.  For  all  these  reasons,  there  can  be  no  error  in  the  judge's
    determination.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not amount  to  an  error  on  a
point of law.  The decision shall stand.

The appeal is dismissed.

An anonymity order is made




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018


















