






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/06685/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 29th January 2018                   |On 12th February 2018                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE

                                   Between

                                     AL
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Wilford Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of the DRC. An anonymity direction was  made
    previously.  Having  considered  all  the  circumstances,  I  make   an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Widdup.

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom  in  December  2008.  He
    claimed asylum or humanitarian protection or relief on the  grounds  of
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR but his claim was refused. Thereafter in a
    decision dated 26 April 2009  Immigration  Judge  Baker  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal against the refusal  of  his  claim.  There  was  no
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal. It is noted that the appellant was appeal
    rights exhausted as of 14 April 2009.

 4.  The appellant remained in the United  Kingdom  and  on  12  July  2012
    further representations were made to the respondent, based in  part  on
    the original claim to asylum and in part founded on the appellant's sur
    place activities in the UK with APARECO,  a  DRC  opposition  political
    group, and other public demonstrations of political opposition  to  the
    DRC regime in the UK.

 5. As part of the further representations it was alleged that  there  were
    flaws in the previous judicial decision [the Judge Baker decision]  and
    further evidence was submitted in support  of  the  appellant's  claim.
    Included in that evidence was a  report  from  a  Dr  Bailey  from  the
    Medical Foundation from 2012 dealing with scarring  and  marks  on  the
    appellant's bodies and the appellant's mental condition.

 6. A new decision was issued refusing the  appellant's  protection  and/or
    human rights claims on 13 June 2016. It is that decision  that  is  the
    subject of the present appeal. As stated, by decision promulgated on 13
    October 2017 Judge Widdup dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  both  in
    respect of the sur place activities with APARECO [the new  elements  of
    the appellant's claim]  and as to the original claim to  asylum,  which
    had been considered in the decision of Judge Baker.

 7. The appellant has applied for leave to  appeal  against  that  decision
    citing grounds dealing with both the original claim and the more recent
    claim. In granting leave the only grounds upon which leave was  granted
    are set in the following terms: -

    4 It is arguable that the judge erred in failing  to  consider  whether
    the medical evidence in 2012 affected the findings of  Judge  Baker  in
    2009 and I grant permission on this ground.

 8. In the previous application, considered by Judge Baker,  the  appellant
    had claimed that he would be at risk on return to the DRC by reason  of
    his involvement with the MLC and his having been  arrested  because  of
    those activities. As part of that claim the appellant alleged  that  he
    had been arrested, detained and tortured.

 9. In the First -tier Tribunal the appellant was also seeking to rely upon
    his sur place activities in  the  United  Kingdom.  The  appellant  was
    claiming to be a significant member of APARECO, and by reason of  that,
    if returned to the DRC, he would be at risk. In respect of  the  latter
    claim Judge Widdup considered the country guidance case of BM &  others
    (Returnees - Criminal and Non-criminal) DRC CG [2015] UKUT 293.  Having
    considered the guidance given in the case law the  judge  came  to  the
    conclusion that the appellant did not have a  sufficiently  significant
    profile or role in APARECO or in protest demonstrations in  the  United
    Kingdom such that he would come to the attention of or be  of  interest
    to the DRC authorities so that if he were returned he would be at  risk
    by reason thereof. Judge Widdup had in paragraphs 75 to  95  considered
    carefully the appellant's role and activities in  the  United  Kingdom.
    Clearly the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that  he  did
    on the basis of the evidence presented.

10. In considering the decision  by  Judge  Baker  in  2009,  Judge  Widdup
    followed the guidance in the  first  instance  given  in  the  case  of
    Devaseelan 2003 Imm AR 1. The guidance given establishes that the first
    determination is the starting point and the subsequent hearing  is  not
    an appeal from that decision. Where however there is  further  evidence
    which brings into question the findings of fact by the first  Tribunal,
    any subsequent hearing is entitled to review the findings  of  fact  in
    light of the evidence before it. Where however there is no new evidence
    the findings of fact made in the original Tribunal should stand. As  is
    evident from paragraph 50 of the decision, Judge Widdup was aware  that
    there was further evidence, which he had to  consider,  evidence  which
    was additional to the evidence originally presented.

11. I note also the case of A M (Belarus) 2014 EWCA Civ 1506,  which  gives
    some support the view that a judge is entitled to give  greater  weight
    to the evidence and findings of fact of  judicial  hearings  nearer  in
    point of time to the events.

12. Central to a consideration of this matter is the report by Dr Bailey in
    2012 it is submitted that the judge has failed  to  take  into  account
    what Dr Bailey said within that report and whether that report  impacts
    upon the decision of Judge Baker.

13. In dealing with the decision of Judge Baker I would firstly  note  that
    Judge Widdup very carefully has looked  at  all  the  elements  of  the
    appellant's account as is evident  from  paragraphs  52  to  74.  Judge
    Widdup in paragraph 52 identified specific elements where  Judge  Baker
    has noted that not only was the appellant not  telling  the  truth  but
    where he was deliberately being  dishonest  and  lying  and  where  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim was not accepted.  Those  findings
    stand whatever the approach taken to the evidence of Dr  Bailey.  There
    was as noted in paragraphs 58 and 59 of Judge Widdup's  decision  other
    additional evidence.

14. Judge Widdup carefully noted the findings, including those where it was
    clear that the appellant was being dishonest and not telling the  truth
    as is evident from paragraph 52. Judge Widdup noted that the  appellant
    was found to be being deliberately untruthful.

15. Judge Widdup noted that Judge Baker went on to assess  the  appellant's
    knowledge of the MLC. At  various  points  during  the  course  of  the
    assessment the judge rejects the assessment made in the refusal  letter
    that the appellant's answers in interview  undermined  his  credibility
    and finds that the assertion that the answers undermine the appellant's
    credibility were not made  out.  Judge  Baker  was  not  merely  making
    findings adverse to the appellant but making findings  to  the  benefit
    the appellant.

16. Having made findings on some of  the  issues  to  the  benefit  of  the
    appellant, Judge Baker finds core elements of the  appellant's  account
    are not consistent and are not credible. Judge Baker finds in paragraph
    73 that parts of the appellant's account have altered fundamentally and
    that his statement  was  not  consistent  with  what  he  had  said  in
    interview. Judge  Baker  specifically  finds  that  the  appellant  has
    fabricated  parts  of  his  account  to  deal  with  issues  that  were
    specifically raised within the refusal letter.

17. The appellant's account of his problems began in 2006 as set out in the
    decision of Judge Baker at paragraph 12. At that  point  the  appellant
    was claiming that he had been hit on the head by a stone in 2006  in  a
    demonstration. Then in March 2007 he was arrested and lashed  resulting
    injuries and marks to his back. Again the appellant  was  arrested  and
    detained and on this occasion he was lashed every four  hours.  Finally
    the appellant was asserting that he had been arrested again in 2008.

18. In the version given to the Dr Bailey the injury to his head was caused
    when he was hit on the head by a gun whilst being arrested in 2008. The
    circumstances in which he received the injury to his head  are  clearly
    not the same.

19. Ultimately and perhaps most material from paragraph  82  onwards  Judge
    Baker comments on the claims of  the  appellant  to  have  returned  to
    Kinshasa at a time when the authorities were allegedly seeking him. The
    appellant had made assertions that  he  was  feeling  unsafe  in  Congo
    Brazzaville by reason of the fact that the DRC authorities were seeking
    him but yet the appellant returned to Kinshasa in  order  to  obtain  a
    stamp in his passport. Not only did he return to Kinshasa but  he  also
    went to his previous address to collect  personal  items.  Judge  Baker
    clearly considered whether an individual would go back  and  determined
    that it was not credible that  an  individual  would  return  to  their
    previous address knowing that the authorities were looking for. It  has
    to be noted that the appellant  had  given  contradictory  reasons  for
    going back to Kinshasa in paragraph 84 he was going  to  back  to  pick
    personal items up in paragraph 85 the judge noted  that  he  was  going
    back to sell goods in  order  to  have  money  to  survive.  Again  the
    findings of fact made by Judge Baker would not have been  brought  into
    question by the medical evidence, indeed they would only emphasise  the
    fact that an individual that had been subjected to such  torture  would
    be unlikely to return to Kinshasa and his home area.

20. It has to be accepted that within the report reference is made  to  the
    fact that the appellant has a poor memory because of the head injuries,
    which he had suffered. However the facts as presented to the doctor are
    inconsistent with the facts as presented previously before Judge Baker.
    It is not a situation in which the appellant is indicating he is having
    difficulty remembering but rather that the appellant is making positive
    assertions. As noted by Judge Baker  the  appellant  was  altering  his
    account to answer issues raised.

21. It is  also  to  be  noted  that  Dr  Bailey  had  commented  upon  the
    appellant's scars and  marks  on  his  back.  However  the  marks  were
    considered by Judge Baker.

22. In the circumstances whilst there were factors within the report by the
    doctor which sought to explain some of the injuries which the appellant
    had, Judge Baker has  in  part  dealt  with  the  injuries  within  her
    decision. Further to that the  accounts  given  by  the  appellant  are
    inconsistent with previous accounts and,  given  the  fact  that  Judge
    Baker  had  noted  that  the  appellant  had   lied,   the   additional
    discrepancies  merely  undermined  further  the  credibility   of   the
    appellant's account. In the light of that even if the judge should have
    considered whether the report undermined the findings of fact  made  in
    the previous decision, I find that the further discrepancies merely  go
    to undermine further the credibility and account of the appellant.  Had
    the judge considered the medical report, I do not  see  that  it  would
    have brought into question the findings of fact made by Judge Baker. In
    the circumstances there is no material error of law.

    Notice of Decision

23. I dismiss the appeal.

24. I make an anonymity direction


Signed





Date 5th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure





