

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06467/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                           |Decision issued            |
|On 20th February 2018                      |On 8th March 2018          |
|                                           |                           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     E E
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr E MacKay, McGlashan MacKay, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is brought against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Pears dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  The hearing before the First-
      tier Tribunal on 12th October 2017 at Harmondsworth proceeded in his
      absence.  The position was that until 11th September 2017 the
      appellant was detained at Harmondsworth IRC.  Upon his release he
      returned to Scotland, where he had been living previously, but his
      solicitors in London were still acting for him at that time.

   3. On the day of the hearing the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      attempted to contact the solicitors.  The judge was informed that the
      solicitor acting for the appellant was in court but a message would be
      passed to him.  The judge, who was informed by Tribunal staff that the
      appellant was now residing in Scotland, delayed the start of the
      hearing until midday.  The solicitor in question did not contact the
      tribunal until later in the day.

   4. I was informed by the appellant's current solicitor, Mr MacKay, that
      the appellant's solicitor had not returned to his office until after 5
      p.m. on 12th October.  He sent a fax to the Tribunal at once and
      attended the hearing centre next day in an attempt to remedy the
      position.  The solicitor acknowledged that he was at fault.  He was
      under the mistaken impression that the hearing had been adjourned and
      had even told counsel who had been instructed to stand down.

   5. The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal properly considered whether to
      proceed under rule 28 of the First-tier Procedure Rules.  It has never
      been disputed that notice of the hearing was given.  The judge decided
      that it was in the interests of justice to proceed.

   6. While the exercise of the judge's discretion to proceed is challenged
      in the grounds of appeal it is difficult to show that the judge erred
      in law by so doing.  The judge had made proper inquiries and delayed
      the start of the hearing for a response to be received.  The judge was
      aware that the appellant was living in Scotland but still had
      solicitors in London.

   7. What is of greater concern is what happened after the hearing.  The
      judge's decision was written with commendable despatch and was signed
      on 15th October and promulgated on 18th October.  However, in the
      evening of 12th October the appellant's solicitor contacted the
      hearing centre by fax to explain his absence.  He then went to the
      hearing centre the next day seeking confirmation that the fax had been
      received.  The fax of 12th October did not reach the judge, however,
      until after the judge had sent the decision for promulgation.  This is
      apparent from the judge's decision at paragraph 8, where the judge
      wrote: "I adjourned until midday but there was no message then or
      thereafter that reached me." (my italics)

   8. I had before me the letter of 12th October 2017 sent by fax seeking to
      explain the reasons for the solicitor's non-attendance.  The judge
      does not appear to have received notification of this letter until the
      day the decision was promulgated, 18th October.  The judge was seised
      of the appeal until the decision was promulgated.  Had the judge been
      aware earlier of the full position, it would have been open to the
      judge to have the appeal re-listed for hearing instead of promulgating
      the decision.  Indeed, it might still have been possible for the judge
      to recall the decision immediately prior to its promulgation on 18th
      October.  It would seem to have been in the interests of justice had
      these courses been followed.

   9. According to rule 32 of the First-tier Procedure Rules a decision may
      be set aside where it is in the interests of justice to do so and one
      or more of certain conditions are satisfied.  These conditions
      include:
      "(b) a document relating to the proceedings was not provided to the
      Tribunal at an appropriate time;
      (c) a party or a party's representative, was not present at a hearing
      related to the proceedings; or
      (d) there has been some other procedural irregularity in the
      proceedings."


  10. Any or all of these conditions may be considered to apply to the
      circumstances arising here.  Following the hearing there was an
      opportunity to apprise the judge of the letters from the solicitor
      explaining his absence, but this was not done.  I am satisfied that as
      a result of a procedural irregularity the appellant lost the
      opportunity of attending his appeal hearing and putting forward his
      case.  Because of this it is in the interests of justice for the
      decision of the First-tier tribunal to be set aside.


  11. Although I have considered this appeal in the Upper Tribunal I am able
      to exercise the powers available to a Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal, including the power of set aside under rule 32, in terms of
      section 12(4) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007.  It
      is unfortunate that an earlier decision in this appeal has already
      been set aside but this was based on different circumstances.  The
      proper course is for the decision of Judge Pears to be set aside with,
      of course, no findings preserved.  The appeal is then once again
      before the First-tier Tribunal.  It should be re-listed for hearing in
      Glasgow before a different judge.

  12. Because the decision is set aside it is neither necessary nor
      appropriate for me to consider any of the other grounds of appeal.  It
      was on the basis of an arguable procedural irregularity that
      permission to appeal was granted.

Conclusions
  13. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved a
      procedural irregularity.


  14. The decision is set aside.

  15. The appeal is to be re-listed before the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal made an anonymity direction.  This
direction shall remain in force to preserve the positions of the parties
pending a final decision in the appeal.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
              7th March 2018
