

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
pa/06402/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |            Decision & Reasons        |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 15 January 2018                    |            On 01 February 2018       |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

                       MRS PARIMALAM SITHAMPARANATHAN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms F Allen, Counsel instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Lawrence who, in a determination promulgated on
    17 August  2017,  dismissed  her  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State, dated 20 June 2017, to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 21 February 1952.   The
    basis of her claim to asylum was set out in short  form  in  answer  to
    questions at interview.  She said that she had lived in the same  house
    as her nephew, Bavanathan, who had been involved in the LTTE.  In  2015
    the army had come to the home in which they  were  living,  found  some
    notices relating to Black July, and when they searched the  house  then
    detained the appellant for two days before releasing her after a  bribe
    was paid.

3.   Judge Lawrence heard evidence from the appellant and from her  son  and
    daughter.  He noticed that there were significant discrepancies between
    the appellant's evidence and that given by her children, in  particular
    relating to whether or not the appellant had lived with  Bavanathan  in
    his house rather than nearby.  He concluded, having taken into  account
    the appellant's age and the fact that she was  nervous  throughout  the
    hearing, that her claim lacked credibility and that she would not  face
    persecution on return to Sri Lanka.

4.   Grounds of appeal were submitted which argued that the judge's  finding
    that the appellant was not credible was not open  to  him  and  stating
    that he had declined to make  findings  of  fact  on  whether  her  two
    cousins were high-ranking former members of the LTTE as  he  considered
    that that was not the reason for the claimed arrest and  was  therefore
    not material and that he had an obligation to make findings of fact  on
    material issues and had erred in law in not doing  so.   Reference  was
    also made to a decision of the Upper Tribunal in PP (Sri Lanka) v  SSHD
    [2017] UKUT 00117 which stated that:

         "A Tamil female single head of household  residing  in  the  former
         conflict zone of north and north eastern Sri Lanka may be  at  risk
         of sexual abuse and exploitation  perpetrated  by  members  of  the
         police, military and paramilitary state agents."

5.   The grounds went on to state that the appellant was  a  widow  with  no
    close family  in  Sri  Lanka  and  would  therefore  be  vulnerable  if
    returned.

6.   The appellant did  not,  when  interviewed,  state  that  she  had  any
    relation other than Bavanathan, who had been  connected  to  the  LTTE.
    The grounds of appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  are  short.   They
    stated that the Secretary of State had not accepted that the  appellant
    was a supporter of the LTTE from 2003 onwards and had not assessed  her
    risk due to her family and affiliation with the LTTE.  They also stated
    that the respondent had failed to appreciate that a perception that she
    was engaged in Diaspora activities in Britain would act  as  a  trigger
    which would lead to an investigation for her history.

7.   I would comment that the appellant's own witness statement stated  that
    she had supported the LTTE until  2005  but  not  thereafter  and  that
    indeed she had come to Britain to visit  her  sons  in  July  2007  and
    returned to Sri Lanka in January the following year and had then stayed
    in Colombo for two years.  In her statement she said that the army,  in
    2015, had come to her home, near Pillai, to ask  about  Bavanathan  and
    had then searched the house.  This  was  the  evidence  which  was  not
    accepted by the judge who gave clear reasons for so doing.  It is  also
    of note that in the statement she did not make a reference to any other
    relative that supported the LTTE although there is a picture of another
    cousin,  Gunaseelan,  with  Bavanathan  and  an  LTTE  leader  in   the
    appellant's bundle.

8.   Be that as it may, at the hearing of the appeal before  me,  Ms  Allen,
    argued that the determination in PP (Sri Lanka) [2017] UKUT 00117  made
    it clear that a single female head of household in  northern  or  north
    eastern Sri Lanka might be at risk.  I  note  that  that  determination
    does, however, state that each case is fact  sensitive.   Further  risk
    factors are referred to in that determination:  these   are  living  in
    isolation from others, low socio-economic  status,  dependence  on  the
    distribution of  relevant  aid  or  provisions  of  other  services  by
    security forces and the perception of former LTTE membership  links  or
    sympathies.

9.   Ms Allen argued that the judge had not  taken  into  account  the  full
    evidence of the appellant in that he had not considered her position as
    a single woman and her connections with the LTTE.  Ms Pal  argued  that
    the judge had properly considered all matters and was entitled to  find
    that the appellant's claim was a fiction and that she would not  be  at
    risk.  She pointed out that the appellant had been represented  at  the
    hearing before the First-tier Judge by experienced Counsel who had  not
    referred to PP either in his submissions or in  his  skeleton  argument
    and clearly did not consider that that was an argument which  it  would
    be appropriate to pursue.  She argued the judge could  not  be  faulted
    for not making a decision on an argument that was not made before  him.



Discussion

10.  I consider there is no material error of law in  the  determination  of
    the Immigration Judge.  The reality is that  the  appellant  based  her
    claim on one incident which was not found to be credible.  She did  not
    state that she feared returning to Sri Lanka because  she  was  a  lone
    female head of household and indeed the reality is that  she  does  not
    claim to have had anything to do with the LTTE since 2005 and was happy
    in 2007 to come to Britain and then return the following year.   Indeed
    she spent time in Colombo after her return.  I consider that the  judge
    did properly consider all evidence before him.  I would also  add  that
    PP is not a country guidance case but in any event it  emphasises  that
    each issue is fact sensitive.  This is not a case where  the  appellant
    has referred to any long period of, or any, abuse by  the  army,  apart
    from the one incident which the judge found was not credible.  He  gave
    clear findings for that conclusion which was fully open to him.

11.    The judge dismissed the appeal on Article 8  grounds.  That  has  not
    been challenged before me.

Notice of Decision

11.  I therefore find that  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the
    determination of the First-tier Judge and I  dismiss  his  appeal:  the
    decision of the Judge in the First-tier shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed:
     [pic]                      Date: 31 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

