
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06446/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 May 2019                                 |On 21 May 2019                 |
|                                               |                               |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                          MOHAMMED SHAMSADOR RAHMAN
                            (ANONYMITY NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Moksud of IIAS
For the Respondent:    Mr D Tan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction
1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.
2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Bannerman promulgated on 21 December 2016, which dismissed
   the Appellant's appeal against the refusal of a protection claim.
3. Grounds of appeal were  lodged  arguing  that  the  Judge  gave  perverse
   reasons for the rejection of the Article 8 private life claim and that he
   made adverse credibility findings that were not open to him.
4. On 16 January 2017 Designated Judge Manuell gave  refused  permission  to
   appeal and the application was renewed. On 20 March 2019  Judge  Chalkley
   gave permission to appeal.

5. At the hearing I heard submissions  from  Mr  Moksud  on  behalf  of  the
   Appellant that:

6. In assessing the credibility of the asylum  claim  the  Judge  failed  to
   take into account the medical evidence because the Appellant had scars.

7. The Appellant was not to blame if he could not recall things  because  he
   was unwell.

8. The Appellants previous solicitors had not raised  issues  in  his  first
   claim which was held against the Appellant.

9. On behalf of the Respondent Mr Tan submitted that:

10.  The  grounds  don't  identify  any  specific  error   in   the   Judges
   consideration of the protection claim.

11. In relation to the  medical  evidence  the  Judge  dealt  with  that  at
   paragraph 71 and identifies its limits.

12. He found the Appellants evidence vague and inconsistent.

13. In relation to the  suggestion  that  the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable
   witness whose evidence had to be considered in that light that was not an
   argument advanced at the hearing.

14. In relation to Article 8 16 years of  residence  without  more  was  not
   enough to establish a private life claim. While the findings were  brief,
   they reflected the law.

15. In reply Mr Moksud on behalf of the Appellant submitted argued  that  in
   the 2010 claim the Appellant was unrepresented.

The Law

16.  Errors  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
   authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons,  ignoring  material
   considerations by taking into account immaterial considerations, reaching
   irrational  conclusions  on  facts  or  evaluation  or   giving   legally
   inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural unfairness, constitute
   errors of law.

17. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give  too
   little weight or too much weight to a  factor,  unless  irrationality  is
   alleged. Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  to  fail  to
   deal with every  factual  issue  under  argument.  Disagreement  with  an
   Immigrations Judge's factual conclusions, his appraisal of  the  evidence
   or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of  risk  does  not  give
   rise to an error of law. Unless  an  Immigration  Judge's  assessment  of
   proportionality is arguable as being completely wrong, there is no  error
   of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge  not  to  have
   regard to evidence of events arising after his decision  or  for  him  to
   have taken no account of evidence that was not before him. Rationality is
   a very high threshold and a conclusion is  not  irrational  just  because
   some alternative explanation has been rejected  or  can  be  said  to  be
   possible. Nor is it necessary  to  consider  every  possible  alternative
   inference consistent  with  truthfulness  because  an  Immigration  judge
   concludes that the story told is untrue.
Finding on Material Error

18. Having heard those submissions I/we  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

19. In relation to the  challenge  to  the  asylum  aspect  of  the  Judge's
   decision tt was open to the Judge on the evidence before him to find that
   the Appellants asylum claim was not credible. The factual matrix  against
   which the Judge assessed the claim which was made for the first  time  in
   2016 when the Appellant had been detained for removal  was  that  he  had
   entered the UK in 2000 allegedly in fear for his life and had not made an
   asylum claim or sought to regularise his status until 2010 when he made a
   human rights claim. Contrary to  what  was  asserted  by  Mr  Moksud  the
   Appellant  gave  evidence  that  he  was  legally  represented  in   2010
   (paragraph 27) but blamed the solicitor for not advancing an asylum claim
   which he told them about at that time and there is no reference  to  such
   claims in any of the  witness  statements  prepared  in  support  of  the
   application and it was not raised in the previous appeal. The  Judge  was
   entitled to treat with caution an assertion that solicitors would  choose
   not to advance an asylum claim  articulated  to  them  in  favour  of  an
   arguably less persuasive Article 8 claim based only on private life.

20. It cannot be argues that in assessing the credibility of the  Appellants
   asylum claim the Judge did not consider the medical evidence  because  he
   set out the two sources of such evidence in the record of proceedings  at
   paragraphs 49-51 and 51 and while he does not specifically make  findings
   in respect of the report from Sri Lanka at page 9 of the bundle it  would
   have been open to him to note that the report that the  report  at  times
   makes little sense being headed 'Descars Certificate' and stating 'He was
   seafaring Physical Assault' . It had also been submitted that the  report
   was dated 2016 and related to events from 1994 but gave no detail of  the
   source material on which the report was based. In respect of the Rule  35
   report the Judge found that this was merely a record of scarring and  the
   explanation given by the Appellant being consistent with  the  scars.  It
   would also have been open to the Judge to  find  that  this  was  not  an
   expert report in the sense that consideration has not been given to other
   possible causation and therefore the  report  carried  less  weight.  The
   medical evidence was not determinative of the case and the Judge  rightly
   recognises that in asserting that he has considered the evidence  in  the
   round with the other evidence in the case.

21. In relation to Article 8 it would have been helpful  if  the  Judge  had
   considered this in a structured way by reference to paragraph 276ADE(vi),
   the tests in Razgar and the provisions of s 117B6 focusing on  the  legal
   tests that the Appellant had to meet if he hoped to  succeed.  Mr  Moksud
   quite properly accepted that 16 years residence with  unlawful/precarious
   status without more was not enough to succeed in a  private  life  claim.
   The Judge noted that the Appellant had no family in the UK and  while  he
   claimed to have friends 'he makes no significant  play  of  this  factor'
   because there was no evidence of these friends or indeed  any  engagement
   with the community other than the NHS in his bundle. He  notes  the  only
   ongoing treatment he received was an inhaler for asthma and this could be
   addressed in Bangladesh.

22. A more detailed and structured focus on these legal tests by  the  Judge
   would have also highlighted that this was a private life claim  only  and
   in that respect 117B(4) of the Nationality  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act
   2002 requires that private life established  when  status  is  precarious
   must be given little weight and the  Judge  was  required  to  take  into
   account that he did  not  apparently  speak  English  and  was  not  self
   sufficient. In respect to re  integration  in  Bangladesh  the  Appellant
   spoke Sylheti had a wife and family in Bangladesh who the Judge may  have
   found that he was still in contact with given the fact that he had  found
   his claim otherwise to be wholly 'incredible' particularly since his case
   was that he had 'chosen' not to remain in contact with them  rather  than
   fallen out with them; that he had worked in Bangladesh. While  Mr  Moksud
   claimed he was 'vulnerable' the only evidence  of  that  was  within  the
   medical notes from his immigration detention over 14  months  before  the
   hearing when he made an unsuccessful suicide attempt that Page 27 of  the
   medical notes suggests was made  against  a  background  of  no  previous
   attempts and made only  when  others  were  present  to  assist  and  the
   Appellant confirmed he had no future intent to self harm.  There  was  no
   medical evidence from any source relating to the period after his release
   from detention to suggest that there was a ongoing  suicide  risk  before
   the Judge and he was entitled to find on the  evidence  before  him  that
   given his only ongoing health issue was asthma this was not a  matter  of
   such weight as to result in a grant of leave under Article 8.  Mr  Moksud
   was unable to identify any evidence in respect of the Appellants  private
   life in the bundle that the Judge failed to take into account

23. As to the duty to give reasons I take into account what was said by  the
   Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at paragraph 26:

   "The  duty  to  give  reasons  requires  that  reasons  must  be  proper,
   intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this court in Re
   Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964] 2 QB 467.  The only dispute  in  the
   present case relates to the last of those elements, that is the  adequacy
   of the reasons given by the FtT for its decision allowing the appellant's
   appeal.  It is important to appreciate that adequacy in this  context  is
   precisely that, no more and no less.  It is not a counsel of  perfection.
   Still less should it provide an opportunity to  undertake  a  qualitative
   assessment of the reasons to  see  if  they  are  wanting,  perhaps  even
   surprising, on their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is,
   in part, to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also
   to enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the reasons for  the
   decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of  approach
   has been committed." (my bold)

24. I am therefore satisfied that  while  the  Judge's  determination  could
   have been more structured and detailed when read as a whole  it  set  out
   findings that were sustainable and adequate given the absence of relevant
   evidence in the bundle.

CONCLUSION

25. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

26. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
17.5.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell


