
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06507/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2018                  |On 12 December 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                  Asiye [B]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Panagiotopoulou of Counsel, Montague Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This  is  an  appeal  from  a  decision  of  Designated  Judge  Manuell
    promulgated on 8 August 2018.  The appellant is a Turkish national born
    on 3 August 1987.  The claim related to refugee  status  under  the  UN
    Geneva Convention. The appeal  was  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  on
    humanitarian protection grounds and on human rights grounds.

2.   Oral argument  focused  exclusively  on  the  ground  of  appeal  which
    related to paragraph 29, where the judge cited the country guidance  on
    which he purported to place reliance.

         "[29]    Furthermore, SSH  and  HR  (illegal  exit:  failed  asylum
         seekers) Turkey CG [2016] UKUT 00308  (IAC)  provides  the  country
         guidance to the effect that failed asylum seekers are not  at  real
         risk on return to Turkey merely on account of illegal exit.  In any
         event, the tribunal cannot find  that  the  Appellant  left  Turkey
         unlawfully, as her evidence has not  been  credible  to  the  lower
         standard and there is no reason to believe any of it save what  has
         been properly conceded."

3.   As stated in the grounds, the  correct  citation  for  that  refers  to
    Iran, not Turkey. The decision of Upper Tribunal Judges Allen, Southern
    and Smith relates solely to Iran.  Quite how the judge came to refer to
    it as a Country Guidance for Turkey case is far from certain.  It seems
    to be a most unfortunate and regrettable aberration in the  context  of
    an  otherwise  clear  decision  by  a  judge  with  very   considerable
    experience.

4.   On behalf of the Secretary of State, it was argued  that  the  decision
    is elsewhere clear in relation to findings of fact and credibility  and
    that  those  parts  can  properly  be  preserved,  with  a  fresh  risk
    assessment being undertaken having regard to  the  appropriate  country
    guidance and all other factors relevant to Turkey and not Iran.

5.   Superficially attractive though that disposal might be, the concern  of
    the Upper Tribunal is  not  merely  doing  justice  but  ensuring  that
    justice is seen to be done  openly,  unambiguously  and  transparently.
    There would be an abiding sense of unease were any part of  a  decision
    to be upheld which contained an error so prominent and  significant  as
    citing and applying Country Guidance from completely the wrong country.
    It cannot be glossed over as a mere typographical slip.  It goes to the
    very heart of the decision. It would be bold to assume that a  decision
    with such a clear flaw was otherwise sound and I  do  not  consider  it
    proper to do so in the circumstances of this case.

6.   The outcome of this appeal is of great importance to the appellant  and
    her family members.  The  flaw  is  of  such  centrality  that  justice
    requires and demands that the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  be
    set aside in its entirety, and that the appeal is remitted  to  be  re-
    heard in its entirety by another judge.  In  the  circumstances  it  is
    unnecessary for me to address any of the other grounds  raised  in  the
    application for permission to appeal, upon which I chose  not  to  hear
    oral submissions.

Notice of Decision

      1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

      2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at  Hatton  Cross
         to be heard afresh by a judge other than Designated Judge Manuell.

      3) No findings of fact are preserved.

      4) No anonymity direction is made.


Signed   Mark Hill     Date     7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC

