
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06761/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On December 21, 2018                         |On January 21, 2019           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                   MR P K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Popal, Counsel, instructed by S Satha & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008  (the  UT  Procedure  Rules)  I  make  an  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure  or  publication  of  specified  documents  or   information
    relating to the proceedings or of any matter likely to lead members  of
    the public to identify any person whom  the  Upper  Tribunal  considers
    should not be identified. The effect of such an "anonymity  order"  may
    therefore be to prohibit anyone (not merely the parties  in  the  case)
    from disclosing relevant  information.  Breach  of  the  order  may  be
    punishable as a contempt of court.

 2. The appellant claimed to have entered the United  Kingdom  on  May  15,
    2010. He made an application for leave to remain as a student  on  June
    15, 2011 but this was refused. The appellant  remained  in  the  United
    Kingdom and claimed asylum on March 12, 2013.  The  respondent  refused
    his application and his appeal was dismissed on June 6, 2013.  Although
    granted permission to appeal the Upper  Tribunal  found  there  was  no
    error in law and he was refused permission to appeal to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

 3. Further submissions were rejected on January 19 and July 22,  2016.  On
    April  23,  2018  he  submitted  further  representations   which   the
    respondent treated as  a  fresh  claim.  The  respondent  refused  this
    application on April 30, 2018.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on  May  29,  2018  under  section
    82(1) of the nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Mace  on  June  28,
    2018 who in a decision promulgated  on  July  19,  2018  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal finding the starting point was the previous findings
    of the First-tier and Upper Tribunal who had rejected his claim.

 5. The Judge concluded the appellant was only involved at a low  level  in
    the TGTE and would not attract the attention  of  the  authorities  and
    that his activities since 2013  would  not  bring  him  within  a  risk
    category set out in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka
    CG [2013] UKUT 00319.

 6. Grounds of appeal were lodged with the Tribunal on August 2,  2018  but
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Lambert refused permission  to  appeal
    on August 20, 2018. Permission to appeal was renewed  on  September  5,
    2018 and Upper Tribunal Judge  Perkins  granted  permission  to  appeal
    finding it arguable the Judge had erred:

      a) The Judge had not properly considered the risks facing those who
         returned to Sri Lanka after demonstrating support for Tamil
         separatism.


      b) Paragraph [3] of the grounds of appeal made the best point.


    SUBMISSIONS

 7. Ms Popal relied on the grounds of appeal. In his earlier appeal it  had
    been accepted he was supporter and had been detained and tortured.  The
    new grounds centred around his sur place  activities  and  whether  the
    authorities retained an interest in him. She submitted that the finding
    at paragraph [32] did not amount to an inconsistency  and  argued  that
    the Judge's decision was tainted.

 8. Ms Popal submitted  the  Judge  described  a  highly  public  event  in
    paragraph [34] and argued that the Judge  should  have  looked  at  the
    appellant's position against the background  of  paragraphs  [336]  and
    [354] of GJ. References to face recognition are made  in  the  decision
    and there is an acceptance sophisticated technology is  used.  None  of
    this was considered by the Judge when he considered the risk  posed  to
    the appellant on return.

 9. Paragraph 4 of the grounds dealt with issue  of  return  and  Ms  Popal
    submitted the Judge did not consider the risk on return at all  but  as
    the appellant would be returned on an ETD he would be questioned and as
    he previously had an LTTE connection and given there are  no  detention
    facilities at the airport article 3 ECHR would be  engaged.  The  Judge
    should have considered that para 399K HC 395 is engaged.

10. Turning to the second ground of appeal she referred to paragraph  [453]
    of GJ as this dealt with medical facilities in Sri Lanka. The Judge did
    not consider any of this  and  failed  to  give  any  reasons  why  she
    departed from the country guidance case. Whilst  it  was  open  to  the
    Judge to depart from GJ she must give reasons for doing so.

11. Finally, the Judge failed to tackle  the  fact  TGTE  is  a  proscribed
    terrorist group.

12. Mr Duffy submitted the fact no one attended from the TGTE was  evidence
    that the appellant was not an important person within the organisation.
    The Judge had considered the evidence and found him to be  low  ranking
    member for reasons given in paragraph 32.

13. Referring to GJ he submitted it is  about  perception,  but  perception
    must be linked to the reality. He argued  the  authorities  were  aware
    people did  these  things  to  bolster  asylum  claims  and  that  mere
    attendance at an event would not be sufficient.  The  authorities  were
    only interested in those people who wanted to  re-invigorate  the  LTTE
    and he argued the Judge found the appellant  did  not  form  into  this
    category. The Judge gave plenty of reasons  to  reject  the  claim  and
    concluded that although he attended all these demonstrations  he  would
    not be on their radar.

14. The Brigadier's actions were not directed at the appellant, so he would
    not  have  been  specifically  recognised.  The  fact  he  attended   a
    demonstration was, he repeated, insufficient.

15. In relation to suicide risk he submitted the findings were open to  the
    Judge and there was nothing to suggest in the medical evidence  he  was
    at risk. The observations in Appendix F was not  the  country  guidance
    finding but was simply a finding in that particular case.

16. On the issue of the TGTE being a terrorist group  he  referred  to  the
    findings in GJ and being a  member  who  organised  meetings  and  sold
    lottery tickets risk did not place him in a risk category.

17. Ms Popal responded to these submissions and maintained that  the  Judge
    failed to  properly  consider  he  was  formerly  identified  as  being
    involved with the LTTE and his actions in the United Kingdom  would  be
    viewed as a continuation of his former behaviour and thereby placed him
    in a risk category. He would  not  be  viewed  simply  as  an  economic
    migrant but as a  person  who  outwardly  supported  the  campaign.  At
    paragraph 34 the Judge failed to give reasons why the Brigadier was not
    looking at him. On the issue of suicide, she submitted the suicide risk
    was part of the country guidance and was not a separate sub-section and
    this point had been conceded by the respondent in GJ.

18. I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS

19. The renewed grounds of appeal centred on the claim that the  Judge  had
    failed to adequately assess  the  appellant  sur  place  activities  or
    adequately assess the appellant's mental health  issues.  In  her  oral
    submissions Ms Popal expanded on these grounds and invited me  to  find
    that there had been an error in law.

20. The Judge recognised that this was not the first time the appellant had
    appeared before the Tribunal to argue his case and quite properly  made
    reference not only to the First-tier Judge's decision from June 3, 2013
    but also the decision of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Lewis  who  heard
    representations on October 3, 2013.

21. In giving  permission  to  appeal  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Perkins  had
    concerns that the First-tier Tribunal had not considered  properly  the
    risks facing those who returned to Sri Lanka after demonstrating  their
    support for Tamil separatism. Insufficient weight may have  been  given
    to the events of February 4, 2018 which concerned a  protest  involving
    Brigadier General Fernando.

22. Judge Mace was alert to the fact that much of the evidence  adduced  at
    the original appeal-hearing was  evidence  that  had  been  before  the
    Tribunal in June 2013. The Judge was satisfied that there was no reason
    to revisit the earlier  findings  and  gave  detailed  reasons  between
    paragraphs 27 and 42 to support his reasons.

23. With regard to the current grounds of appeal, weight is placed  on  two
    additional matters:

      a) The events from February 2018 in which it is said the appellant  is
         reasonably  likely  to  have  been  identified  by  agents  of  the
         government and this evidence had not been  properly  considered  by
         the First-tier Judge.

      b) His membership of the TGTE.

24. The Judge set out the evidence relating to the events  of  February  4,
    2018 in paragraph [15] of his decision. The appellant claimed  that  he
    had been specifically threatened outside the Sri Lankan High Commission
    by the Brigadier. He claimed that the Brigadier had pointed at him  and
    then pointed at his army badge and did a "slitting" action to his neck.
    The Judge considered the evidence at paragraph [34] of his decision and
    whilst he accepted that there had been a protest there on that day  and
    that the Brigadier's action had been widely reported he did not  accept
    that this action had been targeted  at  the  appellant  personally  but
    concluded that the actions were towards the whole group rather.

25. Ms Popal submitted that the Judge failed to have  regard  to  the  fact
    that the Sri Lankan authorities used facial recognition technology  and
    intelligence that was gathered by its agents. Mr Duffy reminded me that
    there had already been  a  finding  that  the  appellant  had  attended
    demonstrations, but this was found to be  insufficient  to  engage  the
    Refugee Convention and this earlier finding was  subsequently  endorsed
    by the Upper Tribunal in GJ.

26. Unless the Judge found that the appellant's role had been  enhanced  by
    his subsequent activities then his conclusions would have been open  to
    him because mere attendance at meetings/demonstrations  did  not  bring
    the appellant within the risk categories identified in paragraph 356(7)
    of GJ.

27. Whilst Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins accepted there was a possible error
    in this assessment, I am satisfied that the Judge made findings on  the
    events from February 2018 and subsequently applied the country evidence
    and country guidance in considering whether there was a  real  risk  of
    persecution to the appellant.

28. The Judge did considered both the appellant's activities and  the  case
    law and then posed the  correct  question  at  paragraph  [39]  of  his
    decision. He concluded at paragraph [40] that the appellant's  profile,
    perceived or otherwise, was little changed from the 2013 decisions.

29. In reaching the current decision, the Judge took into account the  fact
    that he had continued to attend events and had joined the TGTE.

30. I do not accept Ms Popal's submission that the Judge erred.  I find the
    Judge did give adequate consideration  to  the  appellant's  sur  place
    activities and reached a decision on the evidence that was open to him.

31. The second ground of appeal  concerned  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
    appellant's mental health condition and in oral  submissions  Ms  Popal
    argued the  Judge  did  not  properly  consider  the  evidence  and  in
    particular paragraph [453] onwards  of  GJ  as  well  as  the  relevant
    Appendix.

32. The Judge did give due consideration from paragraph 45 of the  decision
    to mental health issues and reminded himself that  as  there  had  been
    past trauma there was a possibility that returning the appellant  would
    create a risk of suicide.

33. The Judge noted the medical report  and  that  the  appellant  had  not
    attempted suicide and had no active plans to  do  so.  The  Judge  also
    noted that the appellant's parents were  a  protective  factor  and  he
    could return and live with them in Sri  Lanka  thereby  mitigating  any
    risk of suicide. The Judge set out the test that should be followed and
    concluded in paragraphs [50] and [51] that the appellant would be  able
    to access treatment. The Tribunal in GJ  noted  there  was  a  lack  of
    psychiatrists but did not conclude treatment was not available and  the
    Judge found that the appellant had previously accessed therapy  in  Sri
    Lanka.

34. I am satisfied that the Judge did  properly  consider  this  issue  and
    reached findings open to him.

    DECISION

35. There was no error in law and I uphold the  previous  decision  in  all
    respects.


Signed                              Date     31/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     31/12/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

