
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06397/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |        Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 14 June 2019                      |        On 24 September 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                     a a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr V Ogunbusola, Counsel instructed by Winston Rose
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
       2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure  or  publication  of
       any matter likely to lead members of  the  public  to  identify  the
       appellant or children of his family. Breach of  this  order  can  be
       punished as a contempt of court. I make this order because this case
       concerns the welfare of the children and there is  a  risk  that  it
       would be harmed by publicity.

    2. This is an appeal against a decision of the respondent on 4 May 2018
       refusing the appellant's claim for protection and/or leave to remain
       on human rights grounds.

    3. The appeal was allowed on human rights  grounds  with  reference  to
       Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights by  the  First-
       tier Tribunal which also dismissed the appeal on other grounds.  The
       Secretary of State appealed the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal
       and it came before the  Upper  Tribunal  (the  Honourable  Lady  Rae
       sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Perkins) and that division of the Tribunal found that the First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law and set aside its decision insofar  as  it
       related to the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.  A
       copy of the decision is appended hereto.

    4. The appellant had not challenged the decision to dismiss his  appeal
       on other grounds. In order to avoid any possible misunderstanding  I
       make it clear that I am concerned solely with the  appellant's  case
       that removing him would interfere disproportionately with his or his
       family members rights under Article 8 of the European Convention  on
       Human Rights.

    5. When the Upper Tribunal found an error of law we directed  that  the
       appeal be heard finally in the Upper Tribunal.  The appeal then came
       before me sitting on my own.

    6. Put simply, for the  purposes  of  introduction,  the  appellant  is
       subject to  deportation.   Clearly  refusing  him  leave  to  remain
       interferes with the private and family life  of  the  appellant  and
       those  close  to  him.  The  contentious  issue  is   whether   that
       interference would be proportionate and that is a matter for  me  to
       decide after conducting a balancing exercise guided by  part  5A  of
       the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

    7. I begin by considering the Secretary of  State's  reasons.   I  have
       considered the entire  letter  but  much  of  it  is  not  presently
       relevant because it relates  to  protection  claims  and  determines
       matters that are no longer in issue.

    8. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh.  He was born in 1985.   He
       tried unsuccessfully to obtain leave to enter the United Kingdom but
       following an appeal on 27 September 2005 he was issued with a twelve
       month work visa.

    9. In September 2009 he was arrested as an illegal entrant having  been
       encountered during an enforcement visit at an  "Indian  restaurant".
       He gave a false account of his identity  and  entry  to  the  United
       Kingdom.

   10. On 30 November 2009 at the Crown  Court  sitting  at  Luton  he  was
       convicted of  possessing  a  false  passport  with  intent  and  was
       sentenced  to  twelve  months'  imprisonment.   Notwithstanding  his
       guilty plea to an offence of "having false identity  documents  with
       the intention of using  them  for  establishing  registerable  facts
       about yourself" the Crown Court Judge  commented  disapprovingly  of
       the appellant's dishonesty.  The judge said, "The problem  when  you
       lie repeatedly is that the court finds it impossible to discern what
       is the truth."

   11.  On  8  January  2010  he  received  a  "Notice  of   Liability   to
       Deportation".  On 27 January 2010  by  solicitors  he  submitted  an
       asylum and human rights claim.  Further  representations  were  made
       but on 5 August 2010 his asylum claim was refused and a  deportation
       order was made and signed.   He  appealed  against  the  deportation
       decision (as was then permissible) but his appeal was  dismissed  in
       October 2010 and his appeal rights exhausted in May 2011.

   12. He did not report as required and was treated as an absconder.

   13. In January 2014 his solicitors made an application for Further Leave
       to Remain.  The application was refused in May 2014.  He came to the
       attention of the authorities again in  November  2017  when  he  was
       reported to the Thames Valley  Police  and  he  was  detained  under
       immigration powers.

   14. On 14 December 2017 his  representatives  made  further  submissions
       based on Article 8 of the European Convention on  Human  Rights  and
       also on an alleged fear of persecution. The claim was amended and in
       that form came to the attention of the caseworker in  January  2018.
       The letter dealt with the protection part of his claim.

   15. At paragraph 61 it began to consider the claim under  Article  8  of
       the European Convention on Human Rights.

   16. It noted,  correctly,  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  be  in  "a
       relationship" with JF who  is  a  British  national  born  in  1984.
       Additionally, he claimed to act as the father of the partner's  four
       children and to have lived in the United  Kingdom  for  over  twelve
       years.

   17. The children are all boys.  PD was born in April 2005 and so is  now
       aged 14 years.  CD was born in July 2008  and  so  is  now  aged  11
       years.  AD was born in March 2010 and so is now aged 9 years. FD was
       born in March 2012 and so is  now  aged  7  years.   The  respondent
       accepted  that  there  is  a  "genuine   and   subsisting   parental
       relationship" with the stepchildren.  The evidence showed  that  the
       children have lived with their mother and the claimant and  he  took
       parental responsibility for them.  The respondent accepted  that  it
       would be unduly harsh for the stepchildren to live in Bangladesh and
       I treated that as an agreed fact although it sits uneasily with  the
       finding at paragraph 80 and that  the  children  could  remove  with
       their mother to Bangladesh.

   18. Importantly it was not accepted that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
       the  stepchildren  to  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  after   the
       appellant's deportation.  I  set  out  below  paragraph  81  of  the
       refusal letter.  This states:


  "It is noted from the evidence provided that your partner states that she
  has struggled with your detention and in the  time  that  you  have  been
  detained she has lost her job.  However, she was able to take [FD] to his
  medical appointment on 9 February 2018 and no evidence has been  provided
  to show that she has been able to care for the children in your  absence;
  it is noted that your relationship only began 2.5 years ago and  she  has
  therefore previously managed to care for  her  four  children  alone  and
  without your support.  Whilst  it  is  accepted  that  your  partner  and
  stepchildren may prefer you to remain with them in  the  UK,  it  is  not
  accepted that it would be unduly harsh for your stepchildren were they to
  remain in the UK without you.  As  British  citizens,  the  children  can
  continue to reside in the UK in your absence with their  British  mother,
  [JF], and will be able to continue  to  access  benefits  and  privileges
  afforded to them, including education and any  healthcare  they  require.
  The children will also have the continued support of any extended  family
  members and so the current scope and nature of their  daily  family  life
  would not be adversely affected by your deportation."

   19. The respondent then considered the appellant's family life with  his
       partner.  The respondent concluded  that  there  is  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship between JF and the appellant  but  that  the
       relationship was formed when the appellant was in the United Kingdom
       unlawfully so his status  was  precarious  and  therefore,  applying
       paragraph 399(b) of HC 395, the  appellant  could  not  rely  on  an
       exception to deportation because of the terms of paragraph 399(b)(i)
       which shows that the exception operates only when:
  "the relationship was formed at a time when the person (deportee) was  in
  the UK lawfully and their immigration status was not precarious."

   20. The respondent also looked at the  appellant's  "private  life"  and
       found that he could not come within the scope of paragraph  399A  of
       HC 395 because he had not been resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
       half of his life and certainly not lawfully resident for most of his
       life.

   21. The respondent then looked at "very  compelling  circumstances"  but
       found none.  The appellant is a foreign criminal who had  stayed  in
       the United Kingdom  without  permission.   The  child  FD  had  some
       medical problems that needed referral  to  hospital  but  there  was
       nothing before the Secretary of State to  indicate  that  they  were
       going to be especially demanding or something with which the child's
       mother could not cope without the appellant's presence.   Similarly,
       his partner had problems with her physical health but  nothing  that
       was particularly concerning.  The partner's mental health issue  was
       a  different  matter.   She  said  that  before  she   started   her
       relationship with the appellant she had attempted  suicide  after  a
       traumatic breakup with  her  ex-husband.   The  respondent  said  at
       paragraph 99:

  "It is not disputed that your partner has experienced  and  continues  to
  experience very  unfortunate  problems  in  her  personal  life.   It  is
  accepted that she would prefer for you to remain with her in the  UK  and
  that this may address some of her psychological and emotional  needs  and
  alleviate some of her problems, however, it is considered that there  are
  other means of support available to her.  It is clear that she is in  the
  care of NHS doctors and receiving treatment for her mental  and  physical
  health problems.  As a British citizen she is entitled to help  from  the
  state, for example in the form of benefits to assist her  with  childcare
  and with seeking new employment."

   22. The Secretary of State refused the application.

   23. Before me the appellant relied on a bundle that had  been  available
       before the First-tier Tribunal paginated 1-94  and  a  supplementary
       bundle running to thirteen pages.

   24. The appellant gave evidence.

   25. Unsatisfactorily he relied on a witness statement prepared  for  the
       First-tier Tribunal because much of that related  to  parts  of  the
       claims that have proved unsuccessful.  I accept that relying on this
       largely discredited evidence was a pragmatic approach but it  was  a
       little odd to hear a witness adopt evidence which he knew  had  been
       disbelieved and which to a large extent did not relate to the issues
       before me.

   26. In his statement he confirmed that he was in a "loving  and  genuine
       relationship" with his partner JF and that there are  four  children
       of JF's former marriage who lived with them.  He said  at  paragraph
       7:
  "It has been a very difficult and distressing time for my partner and our
  stepchildren who have seen their partner and  stepfather  being  held  in
  detention recently.  My partner has been suffering intolerably without my
  presence during that time.  Due to  the  uncertainty  of  my  immigration
  status and future, she is left constantly in a depressive state  of  mind
  which is evidenced in a  letter  she  has  written  as  well  as  letters
  provided by her family."

   27. He did not think it feasible for the partner  to  leave  the  United
       Kingdom.  Apart  from  having  her  family  there  she  had  medical
       problems.  He  then  referred  to  the  children.   FD  has  regular
       appointments because of eye problems.  At paragraph 10 he said  that
       the child CD aged 9
  "... has been substantially affected by my  ongoing  appeal  process  and
  from not being able to communicate with me or be in my presence  while  I
  was detained.  The submission documentary evidence dated  10  April  2018
  shows that he is suffering behavioural problems and  developing  suicidal
  tendencies as a result."

   28. He also referred to his own health problems but  there  was  nothing
       that I would regard as serious.

   29. He was asked supplementary questions.  He said  that  he  had  taken
       part in an Islamic marriage ceremony in September 2018 and  intended
       to take part in a civil marriage ceremony binding in English law  in
       August 2019.  He was  asked  particularly  about  his  son  who  was
       missing him.  He said that the boy was trying to  harm  himself  and
       that he was not a normal child.

   30. He was not cross-examined.

   31. The appellant's partner gave evidence.  She  adopted  her  statement
       made in the earlier proceedings.  In that  statement  she  confirmed
       that she was  in  a  "genuine  and  subsisting  relationship".   The
       statement was dated June 2018 and she said they had met about  three
       years before.  She believed there  was  a  close  bond  between  her
       children and the appellant.  He referred to having  "a  few  medical
       matters persisting" and this required frequent visits  to  hospital.
       She also said that the son FD attended hospital  frequently  because
       of eye problems.  She said that the appellant supported her and  she
       discharged these responsibilities and duties.  She said  that  there
       was "shared parental responsibility" and that the  appellant  "is  a
       great role model for them, as a father figure".

   32. She then went on to say how she had been dealing with depression and
       was on medication.

   33. She said how  the  children  were  all  adversely  affected  by  the
       appellant being taken into detention.  The child CD then aged 9  had
       been  substantially  affected  by   things.    His   behaviour   had
       deteriorated.  She said at paragraph 8 "He  has  attempted  to  hang
       himself  on  several  occasions  and   has   been   suffering   with
       depression."

   34. She could not contemplate removing her family to Bangladesh.

   35. She too adopted her statement and confirmed that she had taken  part
       in an Islamic marriage.  In response to a supplementary question she
       confirmed the appellant's role in helping run the  family  and  also
       confirming that the children  had  no  contact  with  their  natural
       father and a close bond with the appellant.  She described the  bond
       as "strong and lovely to see".

   36. She then talked a little about her personal circumstances.  She  had
       been reconciled with her father but he was  in  a  care  home.   Her
       mother had cancer and was continuing to be treated.

   37. She was cross-examined.

   38. Her attention was drawn to a school report concerning the child  CD.
       It is dated 10 April 2018.  He had behaved badly.  He  had  not  co-
       operated with the taxi driver taking him to school.  He had  refused
       to wear his seatbelt saying that his mother did not require  him  to
       wear a seatbelt.   However,  according  to  the  school  report,  he
       continued to say that he wanted to die, that  he  wanted  to  commit
       suicide, that he could strangle himself with  a  seatbelt,  that  he
       wanted to kill himself and he wanted to kill his family and let then
       drown in their own blood.  He complained that his brother T beat him
       and his mother did nothing and that  he  said  he  had  stabbed  his
       brother and was going to kill him when he was asleep by cutting  his
       throat  and  pushing  a  knife  into  his  head.   The  mother   was
       telephoned.  She denied telling CD not to wear a seatbelt and  asked
       to speak to him on the phone, according to the teacher's  note:  "CD
       then physically attacked staff, hitting, thumping and kicking  them.
       He screamed at his mother down the phone."  He then  used  extremely
       bad language directed at members of staff.

   39. She was asked why it was not recorded there that he had attempted to
       hang  himself.   It  is  right  the  independent  evidence  has  not
       confirmed the claim that he had tried to hang himself  and  she  did
       not answer the question  satisfactorily.  However  in  a  manuscript
       letter dated which does not seem to be dated (page 27 in the bundle)
       she said of CD:
  "... my boy has tryed(sic) suicide and is also(sic) waiting to  get  more
  help, because of past problems that he's(sic) DAD caused him, he's looked
  at [the appellant] as he's(sic) DAD. he talks to Him and  loves  Him  And
  trust's this MAN".

   40. The appellant's partner may not be well educated but  she  knows  to
       how to write to make her point.

   41. The child had been helped by the Child and Adolescent Mental  Health
       Services.

   42. In answer to re-examination she  said  that  the  child  got  better
       because of her husband's support.  He protected and cared for him.

   43. I have read the papers including the supporting letters from  family
       members.  These  are  obviously  written  from  the  perspective  of
       someone who writes as an advocate rather than an expert and can only
       give them limited weight but they all add to the picture  of  a  man
       who is playing a valuable part in upholding a family that  has  been
       damaged.

   44. The notes from  the  children  are  short  but  each  refer  to  the
       importance of their relationship with the appellant and I give  them
       some weight.

   45. I have noted medical  evidence  confirming  the  need  for  hospital
       treatment by FD and the appellant's partner.   They  simply  confirm
       the oral evidence.

   46. I am  concerned  about  character  references  from  various  public
       officials.  I accept that the  appellant  has  thrown  himself  into
       certain community projects and conducted himself well.  That  is  to
       his credit.  It is a relevant  feature  although  not  a  particular
       weighty one in a case of this kind.  However, it concerns  me  that,
       for example, I am provided  with  a  letter  from  a  Milton  Keynes
       councillor describing the appellant as "a good person  of  integrity
       and honesty".  He has been convicted of an offence of dishonesty and
       sent to prison for twelve months.  Either  the  person  writing  the
       letter does not know him very well or is very careless in the way he
       expresses himself.  This has not assisted the case.

   47. I am most concerned with a letter dated 27 May 2019 from  one  Simon
       Phillips described as a senior practitioner in  the  Family  Support
       South and West Team at Milton  Keynes  council.   He  had  been  the
       allocated social worker to the appellant's partner's family.  I  set
       out much of his letter below.  He said:
  "I have had the opportunity to meet [AA] a number of times while visiting
  the family.
  I must say, my observations are positive to date.
  It has been a difficult time for the mother  of  the  children  and  [AA]
  genuinely does appear to be a stable and positive influence in the  home.
  He is clearly working hard to help and support his current  partner  [JF]
  to care safely and consistently for the children, and  there  are  strong
  indicators of a genuinely warm and healthy relationships between him  and
  the children., there have been practical improvements made  to  the  home
  environment and I have seen [AA] actively engage with the children.
  I have been impressed by his good grasp  of  the  children's  own  unique
  needs and the thoughtful conversations I have observed  with  the  mother
  and helped her in understanding the root causes of some of the children's
  challenges.   On  her  part,  she  seems  to  have  benefited  from   the
  relationship and the wider families on both sides seem very supportive of
  a couple."

   48. In some ways this is the  most  important  evidence  before  me.   I
       accept that Mr Phillips is in a position to offer the opinions  that
       he does and that he does so from an entirely objective position.   I
       have no hesitation in concluding that for all the things that  could
       be said to his detriment the appellant is playing a significant part
       in stabilising a family that has been disrupted by breakup.

   49. I have a letter from CAMHS dated 31  January  2019.   It  is  marked
       confidential and not to be copied or  shared  without  the  author's
       permission.  As far as I am aware permission has  not  been  sought.
       Nevertheless it is before me and it is not subject to  appeal  order
       of a court.  The important thing is that it confirms that the  child
       CD has been given support and has been discharged.

   50. There  is  clear  evidence  that  the  appellant  is  a  stabilising
       influence in the family and life is better  with  him  than  without
       him.  I have no hesitation in  saying  the  best  interests  of  the
       children involved here are that the appellant remains in the  United
       Kingdom.  This  is  an  important  consideration  indeed  a  primary
       consideration but it is not the only consideration. I have to  apply
       Section Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.
        Section 117C tells me that the deportation of foreign criminals  is
       in the public interest.  It also says the more serious  the  offence
       committed the greater  the  public  interest  in  deportation.   The
       appellant has been sentenced to twelve months'  imprisonment.   That
       makes him a foreign offender but he is also a foreign  criminal  but
       lower end of the bracket.  This does not mean that he should not  be
       deported. The public interest in his deportation remains strong.  It
       simply means that the appeal is without aggravating  factors  beyond
       the  factors  inherent  in  his  being  a  foreign  criminal.    The
       requirement that the deportation of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the
       public interest is mitigated by certain exceptions.    I  need  only
       consider Exception 2 because that is the only one that is  relevant.
       This applies
  "Where C has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
  partner, or a genuine  and  subsisting  relationship  with  a  qualifying
  child, and the effect of seeing his deportation on the partner or a child
  would be unduly harsh."

   51. The appellant does have a qualifying partner but I do not give  much
       weight to that relationship on its own.  It was  formed  at  a  time
       when the appellant was in the United Kingdom  unlawfully  and  I  am
       required  by  Section  117B(4)  to  give  little  weight   to   that
       relationship.  Indeed, if it were not for the children there  is  no
       good reason why the appellant's  wife  could  not  go  with  him  to
       Bangladesh.  She does not want to live in  Bangladesh  and  she  has
       family ties responsibilities and ties in the  United  Kingdom  apart
       from those involving her children but that is a  matter  of  choice.
       Children apart, nothing was raised that I would regard as  "weighty"
       in an article 8 balancing exercise or a  "compelling"  circumstance.
       Her serious mental health issues are behind her in part  because  of
       her relationship with the appellant.

   52. That said, writing as if her relationship with her children could be
       discounted is highly artificial. I accept that the  children  cannot
       be expected to go to  Bangladesh.   Their  home  is  in  the  United
       Kingdom.  They have no life nowhere else.  To expect them as British
       citizens to establish themselves in a country  where  they  are  not
       nationals and which would involve adopting  a  life  very  different
       from the life they enjoy in the United Kingdom is unrealistic and it
       is has never been the Secretary of State's case.

   53. What  troubles  me  is  whether  I  also  say  that  the  effect  of
       deportation on the children would be unduly harsh.

   54. With respect to Mr Bramble he went right to the root of the  problem
       and said the case focuses around CD. He has clearly been a disturbed
       child  but  he  has  also  clearly  benefited  from  mental   health
       treatment.  Mr Bramble said that the evidence is that CD is  getting
       home schooling and the issue is whether removing the  father  figure
       from the family unit would be unduly harsh.

   55. He said that there is  no  independent  evidence  about  that.  That
       submission, whilst strictly correct,  does  rather  push  aside  the
       observations of the social worker Mr Phillips. He did not  speculate
       about what might  happen  on  removal  but  it  is  clear  that  the
       appellant's presence is a considerable advantage to the stability of
       the family.

   56. I remind myself that the relevant test is whether removal  would  be
       "unduly harsh". It is implicit in this that harshness  is  a  likely
       consequence.  It is established law (and obvious without the need to
       resort  to  authority)  that  deportation  can  have   very   severe
       consequences on family lives  established  in  the  United  Kingdom.
       That is what deportation does and Tribunals must not shy  away  from
       upholding the deportation decision because  deportation  is  in  the
       public good.  This is a case where the appellant's  new  family  has
       suffered as a consequence a marital breakup.  There is evidence from
       the appellant's partner that  the  appellant  has  helped  them  re-
       establish themselves.  There is evidence that one of the children in
       particular has suffered badly and has  been  particularly  disturbed
       and is now on a right footing.

   57. I simply do not know how much that is to do with the presence of the
       appellant in the United Kingdom.  It is very hard to think  that  he
       did  not  contribute  significantly  to  that  end.    Little   boys
       approaching the age of 10 could be expected  to  misbehave.   Indeed
       there might be reason to worry if they never did.  It is right  that
       a child of  that  age  tests  boundaries  and  asserts  himself  and
       sometimes that could be expected to go further than  is  acceptable.
       I am not unduly concerned that he complains that  his  brother  beat
       him.  Brothers do things like that without  it  leading  to  lasting
       harm.  The child has done more and  talked  about  wanting  to  die,
       wanting to "do suicide", speculating how he could do it in a car and
       saying how he wanted to kill his family.  His behaviour towards  the
       staff was appalling,  being  both  violent  and  expressed  in  foul
       language.  These are extra elements here.

   58. The fact that CD has been discharged from CAHMS does not  mean  that
       the appellant's involvement is no longer relevant. Rather,  I  find,
       his presence is part of the care package and is one of  the  reasons
       that treatment and new plans have been successful.

   59. Doing the best I can I find it probable that  the  presence  of  the
       appellant is beneficial to each of the  children  because  it  helps
       their mother  and  it  helps  them.  The  relationship  with  CD  is
       particularly beneficial to that child and his removal would  add  to
       the child's  problems.   This  case,  contrary  to  Mr  Ogunbusola's
       submissions is quite finely balanced but I  am  persuaded  that  the
       effect of removal would be unduly  harsh  for  the  children  and  I
       therefore allow the appeal even though I have reminded  myself  very
       firmly that the deportation of foreign criminals is  in  the  public
       interest.

   60. It is very important that the appellant understands that this appeal
       had been allowed in the Upper Tribunal (as it was in the  First-tier
       Tribunal  although,  for  reasons  we  have  explained,   not   with
       sufficient information) for the sake of the children.  I do not know
       what leave will be granted as a result  of  this  decision  but  the
       appellant needs to understand very  clearly  that  if  he  does  not
       continue to be an important factor in the lives  of  those  children
       his human right claim becomes considerably weakened.

   61. I append hereto the judgment of the Tribunal  chaired  by  Lady  Rae
       finding an error of law

   62. For the reasons given we set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.  I have remade the decision and I too allow the appeal.

Notice of Decision

   63. The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  the  First-
       tier Tribunal is allowed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       is set aside. The appeal of the claimant (described in this part  of
       the decision of the "the appellant") against  the  decision  of  the
       Secretary of State is allowed.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 23 September 2019              |


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06397/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On  3 October 2018                            |                              |


                                   Before

                              The Hon. LADY RAE
                  Sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr J Sarker, Counsel instructed by M-R Solicitors

                      REASONS FOR FINDING ERROR OF LAW

   1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 4  July
      2018 whereby it allowed AA's appeal against the respondent's  decision
      to make a deportation order on the basis  of  his  human  rights.  The
      Appellant's application for asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  was
      dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal judge and not appealed further.

   2. For the purposes of this decision, we shall hereinafter refer  to  the
      Secretary of  State  as  the  respondent  and  AA  as  the  appellant,
      reflecting their positions as they were in the appeal before the First-
      tier Tribunal.
Background

   3. The appellant, whose date of birth is 20 January 1985, is a citizen of
      Bangladesh.  On 29 June 2004 he applied for  entry  to  the  UK  as  a
      sector-based work permit holder.  That was refused.  The decision  was
      appealed successfully. He was issued with a twelve-month work visa  on
      27 September 2005.

   4. In September 2009 the appellant was arrested  as  an  illegal  entrant
      during an enforcement visit to an Indian restaurant.  On  30  November
      2009, at Luton Crown Court, the appellant was convicted of  possessing
      false documents with intent.  He was convicted in  the  name  of  "RK"
      with a date of birth of 16 July 1983.   The  offence  is  recorded  as
      "with intent knowingly possess false/improperly obtained another's  ID
      document." He was sentenced to 12 months imprisonment.  The sentencing
      remarks disclose that the appellant  was  in  possession  of  a  false
      passport and national insurance card.  The sentencing Judge stated, "I
      take the view that you have acquired this counterfeit passport at some
      point to gain entry to this country and certainly in order  to  remain
      here."  He also recorded that the appellant lied repeatedly.

   5. On 18 August 2010 a deportation order  was  signed  against  him.   He
      appealed that decision but his appeal "under immigration  law  and  on
      asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds" was  refused
      on 26 October 2010.

   6. In January 2012 the appellant's name was placed on the police national
      computer as an absconder as a result of his failure to report.

   7. In January 2014 the appellant submitted an application  for  leave  to
      remain but this was  refused  in  May  2014.   In  November  2017  the
      appellant was detained under immigration powers.  On 4  May  2018  the
      respondent refused the appellant's second protection and human  rights
      claim.

   8. The matter  comes  before  us  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
      tribunal erred in law in allowing the appellant's appeal  against  the
      deportation order of August 2010.
Relevant factual background

   9. The First-tier Tribunal judge appears to have accepted the evidence of
      the appellant and his partner.  She records that the appellant met his
      partner three years prior to the date  of  the  Tribunal  hearing  and
      established  a  relationship  approximately  six  months  after   that
      meeting.  His partner has 4 children from her previous marriage.  They
      are aged between 6 and 13.  The partner and her children  are  all  UK
      citizens.  The partner has ongoing medical  problems  and  appears  to
      have suffered  some  mental  health  difficulties  subsequent  to  the
      breakup of her marriage. The children have  experienced  a  "difficult
      few years" after their parents' separation and one of them,  child  C,
      has emotional and  behavioural  problems  which  commenced  after  the
      marriage ended. The youngest child F has  eye  problems.  The  natural
      father  of  the  children  has  been  convicted  of  offences  against
      children, not his own, and is  only  permitted  supervised  access  to
      them. The judge accepts that the appellant assists in their day to day
      care, "including taking them to school, shopping, cooking  and  taking
      the younger boys to the park." [paragraph 91] There is no finding that
      he plays a crucial role in their upbringing.
Submissions

  10. Mr Bramble for the respondent  adopted  the  grounds  of  appeal.   In
      short, it was submitted that the circumstances of the children,  their
      relationship with the appellant and the role of the appellant  do  not
      meet the test of undue hardship.   Secondly  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      judge has failed to consider the public interest in  deportation  when
      assessing undue hardship.  In particular she failed  to  consider  the
      nature of the offence which triggered the deportation decision, namely
      one which "undermines the very foundations of an effective immigration
      control".  The appellant's role as described in paragraph  91  of  the
      decision does not equate to a crucial role and falls far short of  the
      "unduly harsh consequences".

  11. Mr Sarker for the appellant submitted that it was  apparent  from  the
      findings that the judge had had  regard  to  public  interest  in  the
      assessment made.  It was "inbuilt" into the decision.   In  any  event
      there  were  sufficient  circumstances  disclosed,  particularly   the
      difficulties the children  experience,  which  would  meet  the  undue
      harshness test.
The First-tier Tribunal decision

  12.  In  her  determination  the  judge  has  referred  to  the   relevant
      immigration rules and statutory provisions.  We note however that,  at
      paragraph 40, she appears to have misinterpreted rule 398  in  stating
      that  the  test  in  the  present  case   is   one   of   "exceptional
      circumstances" as appear in 398(c) whereas the relevant  provision  is
      398(b).  As will become clear in our decision nothing turns  on  that.
      In any event later in the determination the judge correctly identifies
      that the test is whether it would be unduly harsh for the  appellant's
      partner's children to be separated from the appellant by reason of his
      deportation.  The judge acknowledges that the  appellant  cannot  meet
      the exception to deportation on the  ground  of  family  life  with  a
      partner (rule 399 (b)).

  13. Having summarised the law  and  the  evidence  the  judge  turns  from
      paragraphs 76 onwards to make "findings and conclusions".  The nub  of
      the judge's decision is contained in paragraph 93 and  the  notice  of
      decision.   Paragraph  93  states:-"I  therefore  find   that   having
      considered the particular circumstances of this  case,  the  appellant
      does meet the requirements of the  exception  to  deportation  on  the
      basis of family life with a child. "We are unclear whether  the  judge
      is referring to one child or all of the children.    It  is  also  not
      entirely clear precisely what those  "particular  circumstances"  are.
      The preceding paragraph, 92, commences "In this case there  are  other
      factors which, in my opinion, takes this case out  of  the  ordinary."
      The  judge  then  describes  the  difficulties  experienced   by   the
      appellant's partner and children  after  the  divorce.   There  is  no
      mention of the appellant's relationship  with  the  children  in  that
      paragraph.  At paragraph 91  the  judge  refers  to  the  case  of  AJ
      Zimbabwe [2016] EWCA Civ 1012 from which she concludes that "there has
      to be some additional feature or features  affecting  the  nature  and
      quality of the relationship".  It would appear that, having identified
      the requirement to identify "additional features" she  has  failed  to
      indicate what those additional  features  are.   What  are  identified
      quoad the appellant's relationship with the children is  contained  in
      paragraph  91.   In  our  view,  there  are  no  particular   features
      identified in the determination which would lead us to the  conclusion
      that the relationship between  the  appellant  and  his  partner's  is
      anything more than  a  normal  one.    Accordingly  the  circumstances
      disclosed are insufficient to meet Exception 2  in  terms  of  section
      117C (5) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  In  our
      view the judge has erred in law.

   1. Secondly, other than acknowledging the conviction  of  the  appellant,
      his immigration history and the relevant provisions  applying  to  the
      case we have difficulty in identifying  where  in  the  decision,  the
      First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  considered  the  public  interest  in
      deportation.  In our view therefore, in coming to the conclusion  that
      deportation would be unduly harsh on a child or children the judge has
      failed to have regard to the  public  interest  in  deportation.   The
      judge has thus erred in law.

   2. As is almost always the case  in  appeals  involving  deportation  the
      evidence that might make  deportation  disproportionate  concerns  the
      consequences of removal on other people other than the appellant.  The
      appellant has  relied  on  evidence  concerning  children  whose  best
      interests are a prime consideration. In these  circumstances  we  have
      decided that the appeal  should  be  heard  again  but  in  the  Upper
      Tribunal.
Decision
   3. Having concluded that the First-tier Tribunal made material errors  of
      law we shall allow the respondent's appeal and set aside the decision.
   4. We are of the view that the decision will require to  be  re-made  but
      should be made before the Upper Tribunal at a date to be fixed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of  court  proceedings.  We  make
this  order  because  the  evidence  necessarily  discloses  details   about
children whose privacy should be respected.



Signed                                  Date 20 May 2019

The Honourable Lady Rae sitting as a Judge of the Upper Tribunal.




