
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06924/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 February 2021                           |On 5 March 2021               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     AI
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Lay
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




 1. The appellant, a Kurdish male citizen of Iran who  was  born  in  1989,
    appeals to the Upper Tribunal against  a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Ian Howard) promulgated on 4  February  2020.  By  that
    decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal
    against a decision of the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his  human
    rights/international  protection  claim  following  the  making  of   a
    deportation order.

 2. The appellant had been convicted of  several  offences  whilst  in  the
    United  Kingdom.  In  particular,  he  was  sentenced   to   7   years'
    imprisonment following conviction on 21 December 2015  for  rape  of  a
    female over 16 years of age.

 3. The appellant had claimed international protection previously  and  his
    appeal against the subsequent refusal had been dismissed by the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2011. Judge Howard took the findings of fact  of  that
    Tribunal as the starting point for his own  analysis  (see  Devasseelan
    [2002] UKIAT 00702*). The 2011 Tribunal had found the appellant  to  be
    an wholly unreliable  witness.  Judge  Howard  found  likewise,  having
    considered all the evidence including the appellant's oral testimony at
    a hearing at Harmondsworth on 29 November 2019. The  judge  upheld  the
    application by the Secretary of State of section 72 of the 2002 Act (as
    amended). That part of his decision is not challenged on appeal.

 4. The appellant challenges the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  on  one
    ground. The appellant asserts that the judge failed  to  have  adequate
    regard to relevant country guidance, namely HB  (Kurds)  Iran  (illegal
    exit: failed asylum seeker) CG [2018] UKUT 430 (IAC).  The  appellant's
    claim of having been accused of smuggling for a Kurdish  militia  group
    had been rejected by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  a  finding  which  the
    appellant does not challenge. However, the  appellant  argues  that  he
    gave oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in  which  he  stated
    that he was opposed to the  Iranian  regime  because  it  discriminated
    against Kurds. The appellant queries whether the judge made  any  clear
    finding in respect of that statement or acknowledged that a Kurd  which
    had spent 10 years in the United Kingdom 'in an atmosphere of  freedom'
    would have 'grown in cultural and political awareness.'  The  appellant
    relies on HB at headnote [10]: The Iranian authorities demonstrate what
    could be described as a 'hair-trigger' approach to those  suspected  of
    or perceived to be involved in Kurdish political activities or  support
    for Kurdish rights. By 'hair-trigger' it means that the  threshold  for
    suspicion is low and the reaction  of  the  authorities  is  reasonably
    likely to be extreme. [the emphasis added by the  grounds  of  appeal].
    The appellant acknowledges that he would not be  at  risk  as  a  'mere
    failed asylum seeker' as the judge found at [48].  However,  given  the
    'hair trigger' attitude of the Iranian authorities, he submits  it  had
    been necessary for the judge  to  consider  all  the  evidence  of  his
    claimed opinions.

 5. I find that the ground of appeal is without  merit  for  the  following
    reasons. First, the judge did consider all the evidence, including  the
    appellant's oral testimony in which he  stated  his  distaste  for  the
    Iranian government on account  of  past  discrimination  of  Kurds.  At
    [24(viii)],  the  judge   records   that   the   appellant   'describes
    discrimination as a Kurd while growing up.' At sub-paragraphs (ii)  and
    (iii), the judge notes that the appellant 'does not support the Islamic
    Republic of Iran as they, as a state, persecute the Kurdish population'
    and 'he would not speak out against the state for their persecution  of
    the Kurds for fear of being  killed.'  At  [36],  the  judge  made  the
    comprehensive finding that the 'appellant is not a  credible  witness.'
    That finding has not been challenged. It follows that the judge did not
    accept anything which the claimed to be true,  including  the  all  the
    appellant's claims summarised by the judge at [24]. The appellant  was,
    therefore, accurately characterised for the purposes of the  assessment
    of risk on return as nothing more than a failed Kurdish asylum  seeker,
    a status which, without  any  additional  or  aggravating  factor,  the
    grounds accept does not expose the appellant to risk.

 6. Secondly, even if the judge should have made more detailed findings  on
    the appellant's oral evidence (which  I  do  not  accept  that  he  was
    obliged to do) it clearly follows from his comprehensive  rejection  of
    the appellant's credibility that he would inevitably have rejected  any
    claim that the held opinions in respect of the Iranian government  that
    would expose him to risk on return or render him  a  refugee  by  being
    compelled to alter his behaviour under the  principle  set  out  in  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31. Moreover, if any error  did  occur,  it  is  not
    material; if I were to remake the decision in the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, I  would  reach  the  same
    finding. If I were to find an error of law (which I do  not),  I  would
    not set aside the decision.

 7. Thirdly, I am satisfied that, even though the judge does not  refer  in
    terms to HB , his decision is wholly in accordance  with  that  country
    guidance. Mr Lay, who appeared for the appellant before the  First-tier
    Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, acknowledged that there may be a 'fine
    line'  dividing  a  returning,  failed  Kurdish  asylum  seeker  and  a
    returning, failed Kurdish asylum seeker 'with views' that  the  Iranian
    government is ill-disposed to its Kurdish population.  In  my  opinion,
    the line is perhaps so fine that it may not exist at  all;  it  is  not
    speculative to assume that there are,  in  all  probability,  very  few
    returning failed Kurdish asylum  seekers  who  are  supporters  of  the
    current Iran regime. Ultimately, the judge's view  that  the  appellant
    was a failed, Kurdish asylum seeker and nothing more and that he should
    assess the objective risk posed  by  returning  him  to  Iran  on  that
    factual basis was correct in law. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.








    Signed                              Date 26 February 2021




    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
