
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06139/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                           |On 04 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                            THE HON LORD MATTHEWS
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     Z K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Eaton, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Rodger.  For ease of convenience I shall throughout
    this decision refer to the Secretary of  State  who  was  the  original
    respondent as "the Secretary of State" and to ZK, who was the  original
    appellant as "the claimant".  An  anonymity  direction  has  previously
    been made.

 2. The claimant's immigration history can be set out briefly.  He was born
    in 1979 and is a citizen of the Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  He
    claims to have arrived in this country in 1994 when he  was  around  14
    years old and since that time he has had children in this country.   He
    was granted indefinite leave to remain in the UK as  the  dependant  of
    his mother in 1999.  In 2008 he was convicted of conspiracy to  defraud
    and three counts of handling stolen goods for which he was sentenced to
    eighteen months' imprisonment.  In December of that year a  deportation
    order was signed against him and he was sent notice of the decision  to
    deport him to the DRC.  He lodged an appeal against the decision  which
    appeal was dismissed on 11 June 2009.  Following further challenges  to
    this decision in the High Court he became appeal  rights  exhausted  in
    August 2010.

 3. The claimant did not leave the UK but on 1 November  2011  he  made  an
    application to revoke his deportation order which was refused in August
    2012.  His appeal against this decision was dismissed and he was appeal
    rights exhausted in respect of this appeal in September 2013.

 4. Then in December  2013  the  claimant  made  a  claim  for  asylum  but
    following screening and asylum interviews, that claim was dismissed  in
    September 2015.  That claim was  certified  under  Section  96  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002; a human rights claim  was
    certified under Section 94B of that Act.  A subsequent application  for
    judicial review of this decision was rejected, permission being refused
    on the papers.  The application was renewed orally on 28 July 2016  and
    on being refused again it was also certified as being  totally  without
    merit.

 5. Again, the claimant did not leave the country but on 4 November 2015 he
    made further submissions with regard to his deportation in which it was
    claimed that his removal would be in breach of the  Refugee  Convention
    and also the  ECHR.   These  fresh  submissions  were  considered  (the
    Secretary of State currently not taking the view that they  should  not
    be entertained as fresh submissions) but refused on 13  June  2017  but
    the claimant was entitled to appeal against this decision which he did.
     The appeal was then heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Rodger
    sitting at Taylor House on 30 July 2018 and in a decision  and  reasons
    promulgated shortly thereafter on 17 August 2018, Judge Rodger  allowed
    the appeal on asylum grounds and also under Articles 3  and  8  of  the
    ECHR.  The Secretary of State now appeals against this  decision  leave
    having  been  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Lambert  on  10
    September 2015.

 6. Some of the assertions advanced before Judge Rodger on  behalf  of  the
    claimant had been considered in his previous appeal but the judge  paid
    careful regard to the guidance given in  Devaseelan  and  also  to  the
    obvious scepticism to be felt towards a claim in  which  as  the  judge
    stated at paragraph 59 "He is likely to have been motivated by a desire
    to place himself within the category of risk as set out in the  country
    guidance case" relating to the DRC.  The claimant was claiming to  have
    been engaged in various sur place activities on behalf  of  APARECO,  a
    well-known opposition group within the DRC.  In this  capacity  he  had
    taken part in various television and other programmes which  were  said
    to have been broadcast widely.  In support of  his  appeal  he  adduced
    evidence from Mr Seddon an expert with regard to the DRC.

 7. Having considered this evidence Judge Rodger accepted that the claimant
    would be at risk on return  to  the  DRC  essentially  because  of  his
    activities in this country carried out post 2015.

 8. Before this Tribunal, on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Jarvis
    stated as follows:

         "The difficulty the Secretary of State faces is that  the  grounds,
         so far as I can see, do  not  identify  a  material  error  in  the
         judge's assessment and Mr Seddon's expert evidence.

         In any event, Mr Seddon's evidence is not an essential core element
         of the applicant's sur place claim.  At paragraphs 24 and 25 of the
         First-tier Tribunal judgment, there is reference to  transcript  of
         speeches or dialogues which  the  claimant  has  had  in  a  public
         context significantly criticising the DRC authorities and I do  not
         consider  that  the  Secretary  of  State  can  get  very  far   in
         criticising the judge's acceptance of that evidence at paragraph 66
         where the Secretary of State has not  otherwise  shown  that  those
         transcripts were not from publicly available material.

         That this material was  publicly  available  was  confirmed  by  Mr
         Seddon in his evidence (see paragraph 64 of the First-tier Tribunal
         decision) and accordingly the Secretary of State cannot argue  that
         the judge was not entitled to draw the conclusions which the  judge
         did  from  both  the  unchallenged  transcript  evidence  and   the
         viewpoint of Mr Seddon.

         In any event, the Secretary of State does not in  this  case  argue
         that the DRC authorities actively distinguish between opportunistic
         and genuine expressions of defiance and so ultimately the  question
         of the credibility of the claimant's motivation was not material to
         the assessment of risk on return".

 9. Mr Jarvis then explained to the Tribunal that  he  could  not  formally
    apply to withdraw the grounds of appeal and concede the appeal  because
    this being a deportation case he would require higher authorisation  to
    do so, but he accepted that there were sufficient difficulties with the
    Secretary of State's case that effectively it would  be  pointless  for
    him to pursue the grounds.

10. We are grateful to Mr Jarvis for taking  what  we  consider  to  be  an
    entirely responsible and proper course of action  within  this  appeal.
    Although it would have been open to Judge Rodger  to  have  come  to  a
    different conclusion if that is what Judge Rodger had considered to  be
    appropriate on the evidence, the decision is nonetheless  thorough  and
    detailed and the reasoning is clear.   There  is  in  our  judgment  no
    material error of law within that decision so far  as  the  asylum  and
    Article 3 claims are concerned and it follows that this appeal  by  the
    Secretary of State must be dismissed.





Notice of Decision

The Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Rodger  is  dismissed,  the  consequence  being  that  Judge  Rodger's
decision, allowing the claimant's appeal, is affirmed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper                 Tribunal                  Judge                  Craig
              Date: 27 December 2018






