
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/06849/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 8 November 2018                    |On 21 November 2018                |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 A K KATASI
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This decision is to be read with:

      i)  The  respondent's  decision  dated  3  July  2017,  refusing   the
         appellant's claim on protection and other grounds.

     ii) The appellant's grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge J C Grant-Hutchison,  promulgated  on  11
         May 2018.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 25 May 2018.

      v) The grant of permission by FtT Judge Keane, dated 22 June 2018.

     vi) The respondent's rule 24 response, dated 6 September 2018,  to  the
         grant of permission.

 2. Mr Forrest submitted further to the grounds along these lines:

      i) The rule 24 response suggested that any error in  relation  to  the
         immigration history of the appellant's husband was immaterial,  but
         that was not supportable.

     ii) The judge's reasoning fell into three main themes, but  these  were
         all inter-connected, all going to the sexuality of the  appellant's
         husband and her association with him, so the  error  could  not  be
         isolated.

    iii) This was clear from the judge's  opening  on  the  first  theme  at
         paragraph 12, "In my view there is a problem for the appellant  ...
         from the start", which suggested her  mind  was  made  up  at  that
         point, and infected all that followed.  That could be read  as  the
         end as well as the beginning of the decision.

     iv) It was an unwarranted leap for  the  judge  to  take  it  that  the
         appellant's claim had failed  because  he  did  not  establish  his
         sexuality.

      v) While the judge had been entitled to decide as she did  within  the
         second and third themes, those  could  not  be  isolated  from  the
         error, to support her overall conclusion.

     vi) The case should be remitted to the FtT.

 3. Having considered also the submissions for the respondent, I find  that
    the decision did not involve the making of any error on a point of law.

 4. At highest for the appellant, the judge might have gone  a  little  too
    far at paragraph 12 in finding that the  appellant's  husband  had  not
    shown that he is gay.  It was clear  that  he  had  not  made  out  his
    protection claim, but conceivably either  that  was  advanced  on  some
    other basis, or he might have shown he was gay,  but  nevertheless  not
    have been at risk in Uganda.

 5. Those points are theoretical rather than real.  If there was much truth
    in the account given by the appellant, it is  not  realistic  to  think
    that her  husband  might  have  advanced  a  claim  not  involving  his
    sexuality.  It is equally unlikely that he might have failed to show  a
    protection need, yet she had a  good  claim,  starting  from  the  same
    foundation.

 6. The judge does identify a problem for the appellant "from  the  start",
    but judges must deal with matters  in  some  order.   The  sequence  of
    treatment is logical.

 7. There is no error in the resolution of theme one, arising from the fact
    that the appellant's husband failed to establish a need for protection,
    at paragraph 12.

 8. The second theme is the finding that the appellant is a witness of poor
    credibility at paragraph 13 (a) - (h).  None of those 8 sub-passages of
    reasoning have been said to contain  error.   Some  of  them  are  very
    strong.

 9. The  third  theme,  paragraphs  14  -  21,  is  the  treatment  of  the
    appellant's documentary evidence,  including  the  commentary  on  that
    evidence of an expert instructed on the appellant's behalf.  Again,  no
    errors are suggested.  The documentary evidence did not  just  fail  to
    support her case, it seriously undermined it.

10. Even if there had been some error in theme one, the reasoning in themes
    two and three is powerful; either alone might have been the end of  the
    appeal.  Taking  all  three  themes  together,  the  rejection  of  the
    appellant's case is overwhelmingly justified.

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

            [pic]
            8 November 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




