

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06765/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:       |
|On 7 December 2018                  |On 8 January 2019                     |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                              MISS PRINCESS [D]

                          (Anonymity NOT DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                       DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The claimant is a  national  of  the  Ivory Coast  and  was  born  on
5 October 1997.  She applied for asylum in  the  United Kingdom  (UK)  on
5 January 2017.  On 3 July 2017 the Secretary of State refused to grant her
international protection.  She appealed.  In a decision which  was  sent  to
the parties on 14 November 2017, the  First-tier Tribunal  dismissed  her
appeal.  In a decision dated 28 June 2018, I set aside the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal and directed that there should be a complete  rehearing
of the appeal, before me, in  the  Upper Tribunal.   I  did  so  because  I
thought the adverse credibility assessment made by the  First-tier  Tribunal
was tainted by legal error. The rehearing took place  on  7 December 2018.
The claimant was not represented at that hearing and I will say  more  about
that below.  She did have with her two McKenzie Friends who  were,  as  they
made clear to me, principally in attendance in order  to  provide  her  with
moral support. They did not actually play a role in the hearing and did  not
seek to do so. The Secretary of State was represented by Mr McVeety who  is
a Senior Home Presenting Officer.  At the  hearing  I  heard  oral  evidence
from the claimant herself and also from her mother [AT], who  is  also  from
the Ivory Coast but who resides  lawfully  in  the  UK.   Both  gave  their
evidence with the assistance of a  French  speaking  interpreter  whom  they
appeared to understand throughout the course of the proceedings.  After  the
evidence had been given I received oral  submissions  from  Mr McVeety  and
then, after a short break to enable her to martial her  thoughts  and  speak
to her McKenzie Friends, the  claimant  herself.   I  attempted  to  ensure,
throughout the proceedings, that  the  claimant  was  not  disadvantaged  in
consequence of her lack of legal representation.

2.    What follows is an explanation as to why, in remaking the decision,  I
have decided to dismiss the claimant's appeal from the Secretary of  State's
decision of 3 July 2017.

3.    I have not  directed  anonymity  in  this  case.  Such  had  not  been
directed by the First-tier Tribunal  nor,  does  it  appear,  had  it  been
requested by those then representing her.   Such  was  not  requested  at  a
hearing before me which was concerned  with  the  question  of  whether  the
First-tier Tribunal had erred in law  or  not,  and  which  took  place  on
8 June 2018 at a time when the claimant was still  represented.   No  such
direction was subsequently sought.

An adjournment?

4.    There was, as I say, a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before  me)
on 8 June 2018 after which I made my decision of 28 June 2018 setting aside
the First-tier Tribunal's decision.  The claimant had legal  representation
at that hearing.  However, when the matter next came before me which it  did
on 5 October 2018, she was no longer represented.  It became apparent that
her former solicitors had  ceased  to  trade  on  14 September 2018.   She
explained  to  me  that  she  had  made  attempts  to   obtain   alternative
representation but had  not  been  successful.   I  decided,  therefore,  to
adjourn the proceedings rather  than,  at  that  stage,  to  hold  the  full
rehearing of her appeal.  I expressed the hope that she  would  be  able  to
find alternative representation.

5.    The case was, once again, listed for a full rehearing  to  take  place
on 7 December 2018.  The claimant, however, was still unrepresented.   She
explained, and I accept,  that  she  had  made  appropriate  and  determined
efforts to secure alternative representation but had  not  been  successful.
She asked me if I  would  consider  a  further  adjournment  to  enable  her
further time to do so.  I gave the matter consideration but  I  decided  not
to adjourn.  In considering the application I took into  account  principles
of fairness and natural justice and the content of rule 2 of  the  Tribunal
Procedure  (Upper Tribunal)  Rules 2008  (the  overriding  objective).   I
decided not to adjourn because it was not apparent to me that, if I were  to
do so, the claimant would  be  able  to  secure  alternative  representation
given her unsuccessful efforts to date.  I also took into account  the  fact
that her appeal was not one which  was  legally  complex  and  I  took  into
account what I thought would be my ability to  conduct  the  proceedings  in
such a way as to ensure or significantly  reduce  any  disadvantage.   There
was also some force in the view that it would be in nobody's  interests  for
matters to drag on with ensuing uncertainty for the  parties.   I  explained
my decision to the claimant and she indicated that, in those  circumstances,
she was ready to proceed.

The law in brief

6.        In order to demonstrate entitlement  to  international  protection
(which is what she seeks) the claimant must show that, upon  return  to  her
home country, she would be at real risk of:

      (a)   being persecuted for one of the five  reasons  set  out  in  the
1951 Refugee Convention;

      (b)   being treated in such a way as to give rise to entitlement to  a
           grant of humanitarian protection;

      (c)   be treated in  such  a  way  as  to  bring  about  a  breach  of
           Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR).

7.    Matters are to be assessed on the basis of how they stand at the  date
of the rehearing before me.

The claimant's case

8.    The claimant's account  of  the  events  underpinning  her  claim  for
asylum may be found in the record of her substantive asylum  interview  (the
date of it is not entirely clear from the documentation in front of  me);  a
written statement of 8 August 2017; a written statement of 4 October 2018
and, of course, her oral evidence to me.  She told me that  she  could  not,
in fact, recall the content of her earlier written  statement  but  I  have,
nevertheless, taken it into account because it  had  been  prepared  by  her
then legal representatives, had been signed  by  her  with  an  accompanying
indication that its content had been interpreted to her in  French,  and  it
had been submitted by  her  then  representatives  on  her  behalf  for  the
purposes of  her  appeal  before  the  First-tier Tribunal.   I  shall  now
summarise the claimant's account below.

9.    The claimant previously lived with  her  father  and  her  stepmother,
(who at one time she thought was her natural mother) in  Abidjan.   At  some
point during her later childhood she learnt that, in fact, her  real  mother
had left the family home when she was a very young child  and  had  gone  to
Europe.  She says that, prior to coming to the UK, she really did  not  know
anything more than that about her mother or  her  mother's  location.   When
she was aged 17 years she was informed that, once she attained the  age  of
18, she was to be married.  She was not given  a  choice  about  that.   Her
father explained to her that he had made the decision and he was not  to  be
dissuaded.  She subsequently  learnt  that,  in  consequence  of  her  being
forced to marry, she would  also  be  required  to  undergo  female  genital
mutilation (FGM).  Her then intended husband was an  older  man  and  was  a
wealthy plantation owner.  He  was  based  in  Bondoukou  which  is  a  city
located in the north-eastern part of the Ivory Coast, some  420 kilometres
north-east of Abidjan.  He had two other wives.  She  was  taken  there  and
was kept in a room in his family compound pending  the  intended  FGM.   But
before that took place she went through  a  marriage  ceremony.   She  says,
though, that she was then able  to  flee  and  that,  having  done  so,  she
travelled back to Abidjan.  She did not return to her family  but,  instead,
obtained assistance from a Non-Governmental Organisation (NGO) known as  the
Don't Forget Them Association which was located in a  district  of  Abidjan
known as Abobo.   Her  family  were  located  in  a  different  district  of
Abidjan.  She says that the NGO provided  assistance  to  and  accommodation
for homeless persons and victims of a range  of  unfortunate  circumstances.
She explains that she lived at the  NGO's  premises  in  Abobo,  along  with
others who had also been homeless, and that whilst there she  was  at  least
partially trained as a seamstress.  She also began to  play  football.   She
became adept at football  to  the  extent  that,  to  her  credit,  she  was
selected to play in an international tournament known as the Homeless World
Cup which was held in Glasgow in July 2016.

10.   In order for the claimant to go to  Glasgow  to  participate  in  that
tournament it was, of course, necessary for her to obtain a Visa.  She  was,
indeed, granted a  Visa  as  a  sportsperson.   She  claims  that  the  Visa
Application Form (VAF) was completed by a member  of  the  NGO's  staff  and
that she had no involvement in its completion.  In any event,  she  came  to
the UK and  she  says  that  she  did  play  in  various  football  matches.
However, she  decided  she  would  not  leave  the  UK  and  return  to  the
Ivory Coast.  That was, she says, because she feared being subjected to FGM
and feared being harmed by her husband and her father.  She met a woman  who
lived in Sheffield and that woman was able to trace her mother who  had,  in
fact, been living in London.  Having entered the UK  on  10 July 2016  the
claimant made her claim for asylum on 5 January 2017 (as indicated above).
She says that if she is returned she will be harmed by  her  father  or  her
husband or both; that she would not be able to obtain  protection  from  the
authorities in the Ivory Coast and that, as a single woman, she  would  not
be able to take advantage of  an  internal  flight  alternative  within  the
Ivory Coast.  So, she asserts, she is a refugee.

The respondent's position

11.   The respondent, as was made clear in  a  lengthy  decision  letter  of
3 July 2017, did not believe that the claimant had given a truthful account
of events.  So, it  was  concluded  that  she  was  not  at  risk  of  being
subjected to FGM or otherwise being harmed by anyone  in  the  Ivory Coast.
Further, even if her account was accepted as being truthful, it was  thought
the authorities in the Ivory Coast would be willing  and  able  to  protect
her.  Further still, even if  that  were  not  so,  she  would  be  able  to
relocate safely to a different part of the Ivory Coast and it would not  be
unreasonable or unduly harsh to expect her to do so.  Before me, Mr McVeety
said all that was accepted as being truthful in the  account  was  that  she
had come to the UK in order to participate in a football tournament  (though
nationality has  never  been  disputed).   He  did  not  address  me  as  to
sufficiency of protection or internal flight and that is  because  his  view
was simply that there was no risk because the account was not true.

My credibility assessment

12.   Since the account is disputed and since I cannot properly decide  this
appeal without my making relevant factual findings, it  has  been  necessary
for me to consider whether or  not  I  am  able  to  accept  the  claimant's
evidence as being truthful.  In undertaking that assessment,  I  have  taken
into account the oral evidence I  have  heard  and  the  written  statements
referred to above.  I  have  also  taken  into  account  the  various  other
documents which have been provided to me and which comprises  the  Secretary
of State's bundle prepared for the First-tier Tribunal  hearing;  a  bundle
and a supplementary bundle prepared by the claimant's  then  representatives
for the purposes of the First-tier Tribunal  hearing;  a  document  listing
persons selected for the Ivory Coast Homeless World Cup women's  team  (the
claimant is named in that list); a report prepared by  the  Immigration and
Refugee Board of Canada which deals with the question of whether  women  are
able to live alone in  the  Ivory Coast;  and  a  bundle  prepared  by  the
claimant herself and which she had submitted to the Upper Tribunal.  I have
considered all of that evidence as one composite  whole.   I  have  reminded
myself that I should be cautious  in  rejecting  as  incredible  an  account
offered by an inexperienced and anxious  asylum  seeker.   I  have  reminded
myself of the lower standard of  proof  (sometimes  called  "the  real  risk
test") which is  applicable  in  cases  where  international  protection  is
sought.  I have given anxious scrutiny to all issues before me.  But  having
done so I have felt compelled to conclude that I am not able to  accept  the
claimant as a credible witness.  What follows is my reasoning as  to  why  I
am unable to do so.

13.   The claimant came to the UK, as noted, on 10 July 2016.  She did not
claim asylum until 5 January 2017.  The delay in claiming is, on the  face
of it, extensive.  Delay in claiming is sometimes said to  fall  within  the
scope of section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants,
Etc) Act 2008.  That section requires certain specific considerations to be
taken into account when assessing credibility but it  does  not  necessarily
require disbelief.  But irrespective of what that  section  says,  delay  on
the part of a person who claims to be at risk  if  returned  is  capable  of
damaging credibility in circumstances where it is  not  properly  explained.
The claimant was asked about delay in her substantive asylum interview  (see
questions 106, 107, 108, 109, 110 and her answers).  She relies, in effect,
upon a combination of her not being in London where it was necessary  to  go
to make the claim, her not knowing London, her having been  mistakenly  told
to go to the Immigration Authorities in Sheffield, and  an  appointment  for
her to attend at Croydon to make her claim being secured  for  her  but  not
until 5 January 2017.  She gave what seemed to me to  be  largely  similar
indications in her oral evidence.  But I do not find that to be  persuasive.
 It seems to me that if she  were  genuinely  in  fear  of  persecution  the
imperative to seek protection in a country which she knew had the  power  to
give her such protection, would  have  effectively  compelled  her  to  have
acted more determinedly and more speedily than she did.  The  delay  is  not
my primary credibility concern but it is a concern of some  substance.   The
delay does, in my view, cause some damage to her credibility.

14.   The claimant asserts that after she fled from her husband's  home  she
went to the NGO in Abidjan.  She says that  she  lived  at  the  NGO  for  a
period of one year (see question 72 of the substantive asylum interview and
her answer).  She confirmed, when cross-examined before  me,  that  she  had
been living at the NGO's premises for one year prior to coming  to  the  UK.
In her VAF (there is a copy of it  in  the  respondent's  bundle  which  was
prepared for  the  purposes  of  the  First-tier Tribunal  hearing)  it  is
indicated that she had been living at her current address, that is  the  NGO
address,  for  some  two  years  and  five  months.   That  is   potentially
significant because if she had indeed been with the NGO for that  length  of
time prior to the Homeless Word Cup, then she could not have been  taken  to
her husband's home and effectively forced to marry when she  says  she  was.
Her account is to the effect that the forced  marriage  and  her  subsequent
escape from her husband's family would all have taken  place  shortly  prior
to her commencing to live at the NGO's premises.  So, as  McVeety  puts  it,
the time line does not work.  The claimant does not  say  that  the  timings
she has given are wrong.  What she says is that she had nothing to  do  with
the completion of the VAF and that a factually incorrect  indication  as  to
how long she had been living at those premises has been given.  I am  afraid
I do not believe her.  It seems to me most unlikely  that  a  VAF  would  be
completed on behalf of the  claimant  without  some  check  or  verification
being carried out with her as to the accuracy of the  information  contained
within it.  After all, she would have been readily at hand for such a  check
to have been made. It also seems to me unlikely that  if  a  member  of  the
NGO's staff was completing that form, that a  mistake  about  such  a  basic
detail as the length of time the claimant had been living there  would  have
been made. It seems unlikely such an organisation would not  at  least  keep
basic records of that sort and, even failing  that,  one  might  expect  the
staff to know such details or, indeed even failing that, to check  with  the
claimant herself.  I think the claimant has  created  her  account  and  has
then been taken by surprise at what from her  perspective  would  have  been
the unexpected production of a copy  of  the  VAF.   That  has  caused  her,
through necessity if she  wishes  to  maintain  her  claim,  to  attempt  to
falsely distance herself from the content of the VAF.

15.   The claimant says that she knew virtually nothing in terms  of  detail
about her natural mother until  the  two  were  reunited  in  the  UK.   She
maintained  that  that  was  the  position  under  cross-examination.    The
claimant's mother confirmed in oral evidence  that  she  had  been  born  on
10 July 1974.  In the VAF her date of birth is given as 7 July 1974.  That
is, of course, not quite correct but it is almost so.  Given the  claimant's
consistent insistence that she  knew  no  detail  about  her  mother  it  is
difficult to see how it could be that the VAF recorded her mother's date  of
birth in a way which was so  close  to  being  correct.   The  claimant  was
unable to explain this.  But she maintained her position that  she  had  had
nothing to do with the VAF.  If she is  telling  the  truth  about  that  it
means the person who did complete the VAF had either  guessed  her  mother's
date of birth and happened to very nearly get it right or had  accessed  the
information from some other source.  But I cannot  think  what  that  source
might have been. It seems most unlikely the NGO  would  have  contacted  her
father to get the information if the claimant fears him and did not, as  she
claims, want him to discover her whereabouts. I prefer  the  view  that  the
information was obtained from the claimant herself (albeit that she  got  it
slightly wrong) but that she does not wish to acknowledge this  because  she
realises it  creates  difficulties  with  respect  to  her  credibility  and
contradicts her claim she had nothing to do with the VAF's completion.

16.   The claimant has said that, even whilst living at the  NGO's  premises
in Abobo, she was fearful that her father, who was living in the same  city,
might find her.  She told me, at the hearing, that the NGO does  have  other
branches in other parts of Ivory Coast.  But she  also  said  she  had  not
asked to be transferred.  When I enquired as to why not, she said  that  her
husband might be able to find her elsewhere because he has  plantations  and
has links with a lot of people who cultivate land  throughout  Ivory Coast.
If the claimant was truly fearful of encountering her father I believe  that
she would have asked the NGO to transfer her to another of  its  sites  away
from Abidjan.  I do not find her  rather  vague  contentions  regarding  her
husband's connections to constitute a plausible explanation as  to  why  she
would not think it worth do that if what she says  about  her  fear  of  her
father is true.

17.   When I set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision I  suggested,  in
my decision of 28 June 2018, that the parties might wish to consider trying
to obtain some evidence from the NGO for the rehearing.  The  claimant  told
me that she had not made such an attempt because the NGO  would  regard  her
as having betrayed them by not returning to the Ivory Coast.   Perhaps  the
NGO might take that view.  Perhaps not.  But if what the  claimant  says  is
true about the VAF not having been completed by her, it  is  something  that
the NGO might be in a position to verify.  It might also be  in  a  position
to verify that she was, if this is true, only living  at  its  premises  for
one year rather than two years and  five  months.   Perhaps  an  attempt  to
obtain evidence from the  NGO  would  have  been  unsuccessful.   But  I  am
concerned that the claimant has not even  tried,  seemingly,  at  any  stage
throughout these proceedings.  I believe that that is  because  her  account
is not true in a number of material respects and she fears that  information
from the NGO, if obtained, might confirm that. So, she has decided to  leave
well alone.

18.   The claimant says the woman from  Sheffield  was  able  to  trace  her
mother and that, prior to her having done so, she did  not  even  know  that
her mother was in the UK.  Of course, coincidences do happen.  But  it  does
seem surprising that the claimant would happen to end up  in  the  UK  where
her mother also just happened to be.   Another  possible  interpretation  of
events might be, I suppose, that the claimant having got the opportunity  to
participate in  the  football  tournament,  and  who  already  knew  of  her
mother's presence in the UK, took an informed  decision  to  stay  here  not
because she fears persecution  but  because  (entirely  understandably)  she
wishes to live with her mother.  The link between the two is said to be  the
woman from Sheffield.  But that person was not before  me,  was  not  before
the First-tier Tribunal and, it appears, has not been asked to provide  any
form of letter or witness statement addressing her role in uniting  the  two
of them.  At least, no such letter or witness statement has  been  provided.
The claimant does not have solicitors now but she has had solicitors in  the
past.  I think if this part of her account were true then there  would  have
been some evidence from the woman from Sheffield or at  least  some  attempt
(which I would have been told about) to get it.

19.   I do accept that the background  country  material  demonstrates  that
FGM is something which is sometimes inflicted upon women and  girls  in  the
Ivory Coast.  It is, of  course,  a  most  appalling  practice.   But  that
material (and I do not think this has  ever  been  disputed)  does  tend  to
suggest that, for the most part, if such is to be performed  at  all  it  is
done at a very young age indeed.  As such, the  claimant's  contention  that
she was to be subjected to the practice at the age of  18 years  would  not
seem to reflect the usual way of things.  I do not  take  that  as  a  point
against the claimant  with  respect  to  credibility  but  it  is,  perhaps,
something which limits any credit her account gets from the mere  fact  that
FGM is sometimes carried out in her home country.

20.   Despite my general misgivings about the claimant's credibility,  I  am
minded to accept that she has had support from an NGO as  she  claims.   She
was not challenged as to  that  particular  matter  before  me.   Her  being
selected to play in the Homeless World Cup does tend  to  suggest  that  she
has been or was once homeless which, in turn, supports the  contention  that
she has been assisted by the NGO and accommodated by  them.   But  the  mere
fact that she has been homeless or at  least  threatened  with  homelessness
such as to cause an NGO to take her in, does not mean that the  account  she
has offered with respect to her claim for international protection is  true.
 There are many reasons other than those connected  with  a  risk  of  being
subjected to FGM or being forced into a marriage,  which  might  lead  to  a
person becoming homeless or threatened with homelessness.

21.   I have also had to assess the credibility  of  the  claimant's  mother
who gave evidence before me and who provided  a  letter  on  the  claimant's
behalf.  Since she  was  not  and  does  not  claim  to  have  been  in  the
Ivory Coast  when  the  events  underpinning  the  claimant's  claim   for
international protection were said to have taken place,  the  value  of  her
evidence is, for that reason, limited in any event.  But  she  did  say,  in
oral evidence, that she had received a call from the Ivory Coast Embassy in
London to say that the woman in Sheffield had contacted them and that  they,
in  turn,  had  contacted  her  (that  is  the  Embassy  had  contacted  the
claimant's mother). But, as I say, nothing has been heard from  the  claimed
woman in Sheffield and, on the material before me, I do not accept that  she
exists.  So, I think that the claimant's mother, in saying  that,  was,  for
understandable reasons  since  she  would  no  doubt  wish  to  support  her
daughter, attempting to mislead.  I believe that, in  fact,  the  claimant's
mother would have known that the claimant was arriving in Glasgow  and  that
the two had made their own arrangements to stay together in the  UK  without
being linked by the woman in Sheffield.

22.   It follows, from the above, that I have not been able to  accept  very
much at all of the evidence upon which the claimant has sought to  rely.   I
shall now set out my relevant factual findings.

Findings of fact

23.   I make these findings:

      (a)   The claimant is a national of the Ivory Coast.

      (b)   The claimant has previously been supported and housed by an  NGO
in Abidjan.

      (c)   Whatever the reasons why the claimant found it necessary  to  be
           supported by the NGO, it was not linked to forced marriage or to
           any threat of having FGM inflicted upon her.

      (d)   I find that the claimant is a footballer  and  was  selected  to
           play for the Ivory Coast Women's Team in the 2016 Homeless World
           Cup which took place in Glasgow.

      (e)   I find that she did, indeed, participate in that tournament.

      (f)   I find that at the time arrangements were being  made  to  bring
           her to the UK to participate in the tournament, she was in touch
           with her mother in the UK.

      (g)   I find that the claimant decided to remain in the UK, after  the
           tournament, not, through fear of persecution,  ill-treatment  or
           serious harm but through a desire to settle in the UK  with  her
           mother.  I make no criticism of her for that.  Her  wish  to  do
           that is understandable.

      (h)   I find that  the  claimant  was  not  forced  to  enter  into  a
           marriage in Ivory Coast as claimed or at all.

      (i)    I  find  that  the  claimant  was  not  threatened  with  being
           subjected to FGM as claimed or at all.

Conclusion

24.   I have, I am afraid to say, comprehensively  disbelieved  the  account
offered by the claimant.  In those circumstances I  conclude  that  she  has
failed to  show  that,  if  returned  to  the  Ivory Coast,  she  would  be
persecuted  for  any  1951 Refugee  Convention  reason.   Since   I   have
disbelieved the account I also conclude that she has  not  demonstrated  she
is entitled to humanitarian protection or that, if returned,  she  would  be
subjected to treatment which would breach  Article 3  of  the  ECHR.   That
being so, it is not necessary for me to go on  to  consider  sufficiency  of
protection or internal flight.  On my findings she does not need  protection
and does not need to attempt to relocate.

25.   I have not dealt with Article 8 of  the  ECHR.   Article 8  was  not
raised by the claimant when she sought to appeal the  Secretary  of  State's
decision.  It has not subsequently been raised  at  any  stage.   I  do  not
regard it as being before me.  It  may  be  that,  in  those  circumstances,
particularly if she feels that for some reason  her  relationship  with  her
mother is of unusual depth, that  she  might  care  to  consider  making  an
application based upon Article 8 outside of  the  Immigration Rules.   But
that, of course, is entirely a matter for her or for any advisors she  might
obtain in the future. I would simply add  that  I  do  not  think  there  is
anything  in  my  findings  or  conclusions  which  would  mean   any   such
application cannot succeed.

26.   In remaking this decision, then, I dismiss the claimant's appeal  from
the Secretary of State's decision of 3 July 2017.

Decision:

The claimant's appeal is dismissed.

I make no anonymity direction.



Signed:                      Date: 18 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

Since no fee is paid and since no fee  is  payable,  there  can  be  no  fee
award.



Signed:                      Date: 18 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

