
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06881/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 April 2019                     |On 30 May 2019                       |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    b s d
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, instructed by Crowley & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  we  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting  the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea who was born on 16 May  1981.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 November 2016 with a visit visa with
    leave valid until 29 March 2017.

 3. On 14 November 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.  He claimed to  fear
    persecution on account of his  political  opinion  if  he  returned  to
    Guinea.  He claimed that he had been arrested  and  detained  on  three
    occasions when he was ill-treated.  In particular, he claimed  to  fear
    an individual ("M C") who worked in the Ministry of Foreign Affairs and
    with whom he had previously worked in the civil service.

 4. On 15 May 2018, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 5. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  She made  an
    adverse credibility finding and rejected the appellant's account  which
    was the basis of his claimed well-founded fear of persecution on return
    to Guinea.

 6. The appellant sought, and was granted,  permission  to  appeal  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane) on 3 October  2018.   The  respondent
    did not file a rule 24 response.

 7. At the hearing, Mr Mills conceded that there were  difficulties,  based
    upon the appellant's grounds, with the judge's reasoning that  led  her
    to make an  adverse  credibility  finding.   In  particular,  Mr  Mills
    accepted there were  difficulties  in  paras  38,  39  and  40  of  her
    determination.  He indicated that he did have submissions  to  make  on
    the other matters raised  in  the  grounds  but  if  the  Tribunal  was
    satisfied that the errors in  38,  39  and  40  were  material  it  was
    unnecessary to do so.  We indicated that we did consider the errors  in
    paras 38, 39 and 40 to be material to the judge's  adverse  credibility
    finding.

 8. The judge's reason for adverse credibility finding are set out at paras
    35 - 44.  At para 38 the judge said this:

         "38. The Appellant has claimed  that  on  three  occasions  he  was
             arrested and detained and on each  occasion  he  was  severely
             beaten to the extent that on one occasion he was  hospitalised
             and that he was left with serious scars on  his  body,  hands,
             face and back.   The  Appellant  was  represented  by,  in  my
             experience and opinion, a very experienced and competent  firm
             of solicitors who invariably produce medico-legal reports  for
             their clients in cases such  as  these.   There  was  no  such
             report about his scarring before me and I do  not  accept  his
             evidence as credible that they did not discuss the  option  of
             such a report being carried out with  him  as  it  would  have
             hugely assisted his case if it had come back as  positive.   I
             find the lack of such a report has a negative  impact  on  his
             credibility."

 9. It was, in our judgment, impermissible for the judge to  consider  that
    the absence of a medico-legal report had a  "negative  impact"  on  the
    appellant's credibility because in her "experience  and  opinion"  such
    reports   were   invariably   produced   by   the   appellant's   legal
    representatives in cases such as the present.  There may be any  number
    of reasons why a medico-legal report was not produced  in  relation  to
    the appellant.  Whatever was the "experience" of the judge in  relation
    to the appellant's legal representatives, it could not found an adverse
    inference against him that in this particular appeal one had  not  been
    produced.  The appellant  simply  did  not  have  the  benefit  of  any
    supporting medico-legal report and nothing further  could  be  inferred
    from its absence.

10. At para 39, the judge again fell into error.  There she said this:

         "39. The Appellant also claims that although he was arrested  three
             times he was not charged on any occasion but was released  and
             went straight back to work.  Again, I do not find this  to  be
             credible.  If he was flouting the law so blatantly that he was
             arrested three times then it makes no sense that  he  was  not
             charged with any criminal offences and placed before a court."

11. There was no evidential basis for the judge's stated  reason  that,  in
    effect, it was improbable in Guinea that  if  the  appellant  had  been
    arrested three times, he was not charged with any offence  and  brought
    before a court.  The judge does not refer to  any  background  evidence
    which  would  support  this  "implausibility"  reasoning  and,  in  its
    absence, what the judge says is not self-evident and, in our  judgment,
    amounts to irrational reasoning.

12. Then, at para 40 the judge deal with the appellant's claim  to  fear  a
    person of some importance in Guinea called "M C":

         "40. The Appellant claimed that most of his issues were to do  with
             a man that he worked with in the civil service, called {M  C].
             He states in his witness statement that this man is a  General
             Inspector  for  the  Ministry  of  Foreign  affairs  and  that
             although he works for the Presidency he is  not  a  government
             minister.  He said that the [M C] that the RL refers to  is  a
             different man altogether.  I find that if  this  man  were  as
             high up in the ministry as the Appellant claims  he  would  be
             able to produce some evidence to the Tribunal  that  this  man
             exists but he has not been able to do so."

13. The difficulty with the judge's reasoning is that the appellant did put
    before the judge evidence that the "M C" he claimed to fear did  exist.
    The judge refers to it at para 20 in the  context  of  the  submissions
    made on behalf of the appellant when she refers to the submission that:
    "There is proof of his existence as he is named in an email before  the
    court (page 55)."  Indeed, at page 55 of the appellant's  bundle  there
    is in translation a letter (at pages 56 and 57 of the bundle) -  it  is
    not an email - purporting to come from an official in the  Ministry  of
    Foreign Affairs in Guinea identifying "M C" as a senior official in the
    Ministry of Foreign Affairs.  The judge was, therefore, wrong to reason
    that the appellant had not been "able to produce" any evidence as to  M
    C's existence.

14. These errors are, in our judgment,  material  to  the  judge's  adverse
    findings.  Central to the  appellant's  claim  was  that  he  had  been
    arrested and  detained  on  three  occasions  and  that  he  feared  an
    important person, "M C", in Guinea.  The judge did not  accept  any  of
    these matters principally for the reasons she gave in  38  -  40  which
    were directly concerned with that  aspect  of  his  claim.   Whilst  we
    accept that the judge gave a number of other reasons  for  disbelieving
    the appellant's account, her reasoning at paras  38,  39  and  40  were
    significant and we are  not  satisfied  that,  in  their  absence,  her
    credibility finding would necessarily or inevitably have been the same.
     The errors which were acknowledged by Mr Mills were, as a consequence,
    material to her adverse credibility finding  and  to  her  decision  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal.  Her  decision  cannot,  as  a  result,
    stand and we set it aside.

Decision

15. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

16. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and in the  light
    of  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice  Statement,   the
    appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson.






                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                 29 May 2019





