

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06045/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                 |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated       |
|On 9 August 2017                    |On 11 August 2017                     |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     JL
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Mr Sill, Counsel
For the respondent:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to her asylum claim.

Summary of asylum claim

       2. The appellant is a citizen of the  Democratic  Republic  of  Congo
          ('DRC') and claims that she is at risk of persecution for  reasons
          relating  to  her  late  brother's  connections  with  Jean-Pierre
          Bemba, the leader of an opposition party ('MLC') seen by  the  DRC
          government as a threat to President Kabila.


       3. The appellant has provided a detailed account of what  she  claims
          happened in the DRC  in  inter  alia,  her  asylum  interview  and
          witness statements.  In a report dated 1 November 2016, Dr  Muzong
          Kozi, an Associate Fellow of  Chatham  House,  gave  comprehensive
          reasons to support his  view  that  the  appellant's  evidence  is
          consistent with the background evidence and that she will  face  a
          real risk of persecution  because  of  her  connections  with  her
          brother, a person perceived to have  close  connections  to  Bemba
          and the MLC, and who was detained and killed for reasons  relation
          to this.

Procedural history

       4. The appellant appealed against the respondent's decision  dated  3
          June 2016 refusing her  asylum  claim.   The  respondent  did  not
          accept the appellant's account was credible and was  not  prepared
          to  accept  any  aspect  of  it,  save  for  her  nationality  and
          identity.  Her appeal took place at an  oral  hearing  before  the
          First-tier Tribunal on 13 November 2016.  After a period  of  some
          3  months  and  one  day,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  signed   its
          decision, which was then promulgated the day after on 15  February
          2017.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  on  all
          grounds.


       5. In a decision dated 24 March 2017 Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge  Macdonald  granted  permission  to  appeal  observing  that
          whilst delay per se cannot be regarded  as  a  material  error  of
          law, there may be merit in the other  grounds  in  particular  the
          failure to make a clear factual finding in relation  to  important
          information.

       6. The respondent has submitted a rule 24 notice dated 3  April  2017
          in which it was submitted that the First-tier Tribunal's  findings
          were open to it.  Attention was drawn to the  appellant's  ability
          to re-enter the  DRC  and  attend  her  mother's  funeral  without
          facing any adverse attention from the authorities.

Hearing

       7. Mr Sill relied upon and amplified his grounds  of  appeal  and  Mr
          McVeety relied  upon  the  rule  24  notice.   I  refer  to  their
          submissions in more detail below.


       8. At the end of the hearing I reserved  my  decision,  which  I  now
          provide with reasons.

Error of law discussion

       9. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Sills accepted  the  period  of
          over three months delay in signing the decision did not in  itself
          give rise to  a  material  error  of  law  but  that  it  must  be
          considered as a relevant factor alongside  the  other  grounds  of
          appeal, which he submitted  supported  the  proposition  that  the
          necessary degree of anxious  scrutiny  to  all  the  evidence  was
          missing.  I accept that on  appeal,  the  Upper  Tribunal  may  be
          readier to infer evidence has  been  overlooked  where  there  has
          been delay - see R (Ghorbani) v SSHD [2004] EWHC  510  (Admin)  at
          [11],  but  that  all  the  circumstances  of  the  case  must  be
          carefully considered.

   1) Country expert report

      10. The First-tier Tribunal has clearly considered  Dr  Kodi's  report
          at  [64]  to  [68].   These  paragraphs  set  out  the  First-tier
          Tribunal's views as to discrete aspects  of  Dr  Kodi's  evidence,
          yet  there  is  no  overall  analysis   or   assessment   of   his
          qualifications or expertise or an indication of the weight  it  is
          prepared to attach to the report or Dr Kodi's  opinions.   At  the
          beginning of his report  under  the  heading  'Qualifications  and
          expertise'  Dr  Kodi  sets  out  an  impressive  educational   and
          employment record  including  employment  in  a  senior  role  for
          Amnesty International and  Transparency  International.   He  also
          sets out the dates of research missions he has carried out in  the
          DRC since 2007, the most recent one having taken  place  in  June-
          July 2014.


      11.  When  setting  out  its  findings  of  fact  under  the   heading
          'consideration' from [74] to [91] the  First-tier  Tribunal  makes
          no reference to Dr Kodi's evidence  whatsoever.   It  is  implicit
          from this and some of the findings made (for example at  [85]  and
          [86] the First-tier Tribunal appears  to  reject  Dr  Kodi's  view
          that the appellant is at risk by reason of being a  family  member
          of a MLC-supporting soldier)  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has
          decided to attach little or  no  weight  to  Dr  Kodi's  evidence.
          There is no clear reasoning for this, save for the  criticisms  of
          the report at [64] to  [69].   This  reasoning  contains  material
          errors of law.

      12. First, the First-tier Tribunal has failed  to  take  into  account
          the full ambit of  Dr  Kodi's  claimed  sources  and  evidence  to
          support the views set out in the report. At  [64]  the  First-tier
          Tribunal observes that Dr Kodi is reliant upon reports dated  2008
          in respect of the arrest of  people  considered  to  be  close  to
          opposition parties and reference to actions against MLC members  /
          supporters focuses on Equateur province, the north and  north-west
          region of the country rather than Kinshasa.



              i) The  First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  fail  to  take  into
                 account the fact that the 2008 reports at footnotes 1-6  of
                 the report are cited to support the arrests and  expulsions
                 that took place in 2007 when tensions  between  Kabila  and
                 Bemba  supporters  came  to  a  head.   This  is  necessary
                 background  information  for  this   appeal   because   the
                 appellant claimed that her brother was caught up  in  these
                 tensions as a Bemba supporter and fled Kinshasa for  Congo-
                 Brazzaville in early 2008, a fact the  First-tier  Tribunal
                 appears to accept at [84].




             ii) The First-tier Tribunal's findings  are  inconsistent  with
                 the acknowledgment at  [65]  that  after  Congo-Brazzaville
                 forcibly returned many DRC citizens to  the  DRC  in  April
                 2014, the DRC authorities searched  for  and  arrested  MLC
                 supporters like the appellant's brother.  Reports from 2015
                 are cited in support  of  this  at  footnotes  7-9  of  the
                 report.



            iii) The First-tier Tribunal failed  to  take  into  account  Dr
                 Kodi's own  research  carried  out  during  the  course  of
                 research missions particularised in the report -  see  [12]
                 and footnote 14 of the report.


      13. Second, the First-tier Tribunal has failed to  address  Dr  Kodi's
          explanation for why the detention of rank and file members of  the
          opposition parties, such as the MLC,  and  those  associated  with
          them is not documented by local  and  international  human  rights
          organisations -  they  are  held  incommunicado  and  it  is  very
          difficult to obtain  corroboration  albeit  Mrs  Eve  Bazaiba  has
          highlighted the situation - see [13] of the report.


      14. Third, the First-tier Tribunal has not accurately directed  itself
          to  the  country  background   evidence   and   country   guidance
          consistent with Dr Kodi's evidence.  The finding at [68]  that  Dr
          Kodi's evidence does not "sit well  with  the  country  of  origin
          information report or some of the background  reports  upon  which
          he has relied" is not particularised but the  First-tier  Tribunal
          has effectively found Dr Kodi's evidence to be  inconsistent  with
          other background evidence regarding the authorities' treatment  of
          low level opposition  members  and  those  associated  with  them.
          Earlier in the decision  at  [18]  the  First-tier  Tribunal  said
          this:

                 "At the current country guidance  position  appears  to  be
                 that leaders, spokespersons or those officeholders or those
                 having a significant political profile may be at  risk  but
                 that  there  is  no  evidence  that  simple  members  of  a
                 political party will by reason of that alone be at risk."


      15. This  is  not  an  accurate  reflection  of  the  current  country
          guidance or background  reports.   The  CPIN  DRC:  Opposition  to
          Governments dated 8 November 2017 (which appears to be the  source
          for the information set out at [70] to [73] rather than  the  COIR
          DRC dated September 2015) states this at 3.1.3:

                 "Opposition party leaders and / or high  profile  activists
                 in  the  DRC  who  have  come  to  the  attention  of   the
                 authorities  and  who  are  considered  a  threat  to   the
                 government  may  be  subject  to  treatment  amounting   to
                 persecution or serious harm.  Low-level activists and party
                 members are unlikely to  be  at  risk  of  such  treatment.
                 However the risk a person  may  face  will  depend  on  the
                 prevailing political climate, their profile and activities,
                 and whether there are likely to be perceived  as  a  threat
                 to, and attract the attention of, the authorities in such a
                 way that amounts to a real risk of persecution  or  serious
                 harm."

      16. BM and Others (Returnees  -  criminal  and  non-criminal)  DRC  CG
          [2015] UKUT 00293 (IAC) addresses the likely  position  on  return
          to Kinshasa airport for foreign national offenders, failed  asylum
          seekers and APARECO (UK) members.   It  finds  that  APARECO  (UK)
          members at risk include persons who are, or are perceived  to  be,
          leaders, office  bearers  or  spokespersons.   The  headnote  also
          states this:


                 "As a general rule, mere rank and file members are unlikely
                 to fall within this category. However, each  case  will  be
                 fact sensitive, with particular attention directed  to  the
                 likely knowledge and perceptions of DRC state agents."


      17. There is a clear theme in the  country  background  evidence  that
          rank and file members are not at risk as a general rule  but  that
          each  case  will  be  fact  sensitive  and  will  depend  on   the
          prevailing political climate, their profile  and  activities,  and
          whether there are likely to be  perceived  as  a  threat  to,  and
          attract the  attention  of,  the  authorities.   This  calls  into
          question the  First-tier  Tribunal's  finding  that  there  is  no
          evidence that simple members of a political party may be  at  risk
          at [18] and its summary of the country guidance at [85] and  [86].




      18. In addition,  the  suggestion  at  [85]  that  family  members  of
          activists are not  at  risk  on  the  basis  that  the  background
          reports only specifically identify that demonstrators and  members
          of opposition parties  may  be  at  risk  is  unsupported  by  the
          evidence.  The First-tier Tribunal  has  apparently  accepted  the
          nature and extent of human rights abuses set  out  at  [8]  of  Dr
          Kodi's report.  This makes  reference  to  the  victims  including
          children.  It is difficult to see how  they  would  be  any  other
          than family members of government opponents.

      19. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  approach
          to the expert report contained errors  but  submitted  that  these
          are not material because at the end of the day the  appellant  was
          able to re-enter Kinshasa after  the  death  of  her  brother  and
          mother, and attend her state-sponsored  mother's  funeral  without
          incident.  This leads  me  to  assess  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
          approach to the appellant's evidence.

   2)  Findings on the appellant's account

      20. Mr McVeety acknowledged that the First-tier Tribunal has not  made
          any clear credibility  finding  regarding  the  detailed  evidence
          provided by the appellant.  The findings at [74 to  [83]  comprise
          a series of doubts regarding the appellant's evidence.   No  clear
          findings are reached although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
          aspects of the appellant's evidence.  At [84] and [87] the  First-
          tier Tribunal accepted that the appellant "may have had a  brother
          that was materially involved in the MLC" but finds that  there  is
          no evidence that she has been involved in any political  activity.
            It is difficult to discern with any precision  what  the  First-
          tier  Tribunal  has  expressly  accepted  or   rejected   in   the
          appellant's account.  The adoption of the "even  if"  approach  at
          [90] regarding what happened to the mother  and  nephew  does  not
          follow a rejection of the evidence relating to them.

      21. When the decision is read as a whole it appears  that  the  First-
          tier Tribunal was prepared to assume that the appellant's  account
          regarding the death of her  brother,  mother  and  nephew  at  the
          hands  of  the  DRC  authorities  for  reasons  relating  to   her
          brother's MLC connections is reasonably  likely  to  be  true  but
          that the appellant herself is of no adverse interest because:  she
          readily  returned  to  the  DRC  [79];  her  claim  to  be   under
          surveillance is  all  dependent  upon  information  received  from
          Major Jorma [81] which may not be a "true representation of  fact"
          because he wanted her  to  become  involved  with  him  [88];  the
          appellant was not arrested at the highly  public  funeral  of  her
          mother at [82] and [83]; she was not  involved  in  any  political
          activity [84] and [86] and was not  involved  with  her  brother's
          political activities in any way [89]. There was detailed  evidence
          available  to  the  First-tier   Tribunal   from   the   appellant
          addressing each of these concerns.  This  evidence  has  not  been
          addressed and no reasons have been provided for rejecting it.

              i) The appellant had problems after she returned  to  the  DRC
                 for her mother's funeral (Q105).


             ii) The  ANR  (which  the  Respondent's  guidance  states  were
                 increasingly used  as  a  secret  police)  were  after  her
                 because she let  her  brother  stay  at  her  house  /  had
                 meetings there and they wanted her to give  them  names  of
                 attendees, he had given her documents for the MLC, the  ANR
                 believed she had gone to London to meet opposition  parties
                 there (see Q19, Q108 and Q115 and screening interview).

            iii) The appellant received a warning from  Christian  that  the
                 ANR wanted to question her and she heard that  people  were
                 looking for her at home and work.  She was also  suspicious
                 that her phone was  being  monitored.   After  she  left  a
                 friend's home the friend's husband was  arrested  (see  the
                 appellant's witness statement dated  5  April  2016).   The
                 appellant's evidence that she believed that  the  ANR  were
                 looking for her was not solely based upon information  from
                 Major Jorma.

             iv) Christian was killed and family members injured  in  a  car
                 accident during the funeral procession.  Family members  of
                 the appellant's brother  were  therefore  targeted  at  the
                 funeral (see appellant's witness statement).


      22.  It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          regarded  the  appellant  not  to  be  at   risk   "whatever   the
          circumstances" as indicated at [89].  If the  First-tier  Tribunal
          was prepared to treat the evidence at its highest,  the  appellant
          provided detailed evidence  that  she  was  at  risk  because  the
          authorities perceived that she had  knowledge  of  and  /  or  was
          linked to her brother's and  nephew's  political  activities,  and
          could therefore be distinguished from her brother's wife  and  her
          other brothers.

Conclusion

      23. When the errors identified above  are  considered  together  I  am
          satisfied that the First-tier  Tribunal's  findings  regarding  Dr
          Kodi's  report  and  the  appellant's  evidence  are  inadequately
          reasoned, and the First-tier  Tribunal  has  materially  erred  in
          law.


Disposal

      24. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.  This is because completely fresh findings  of  fact  in
          relation to detailed evidence are necessary.

Decision

      25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      26. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.



Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
10 August 2017

