
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06178/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 13 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                            Ahmed Ali Saeed Kuzam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Not present or represented
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Ahmed Ali Saeed Kuzam, was born on 1 January 1984 and is
    a male citizen of Yemen.  By  a  decision  dated  26  April  2018,  the
    Secretary of State refused the appellant international protection.   He
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Foudy) which, in a  decision
    promulgated on 28 July 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now
    appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant did not attend the Upper Tribunal initial hearing at  the
    Civil  Justice  Centre,  Manchester  on  6  November  2018.   The  file
    indicates that he was served on  5  October  2018  at  his  last  known
    address in Bolton, Lancashire.   There  was  nothing  on  the  file  to
    indicate that the notice of hearing failed to reach the appellant.  The
    appellant  was  previously  represented  but  he  no   longer   has   a
    representative.  I am  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has  not  given
    any/any satisfactory reason for his failure to  attend  and,  in  those
    circumstances, I proceeded with the  hearing  in  the  absence  of  the
    appellant.

 3. It is fair to say that the judge found the appellant's evidence at  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be confusing.  First, the appellant's claim that
    he was from Rada'a contradicted by the  documents  in  the  appellant's
    second bundle (which indicated he came from Rida) whilst his claim that
    Rada was in the north of Yemen was not supported by objective  material
    which, as the judge noted, indicated that "Rada is a fortified town  in
    the central south of Yemen in the governorate of Al Bayda."  The  judge
    concluded [19] because the appellant does not come from North Yemen  he
    would be able to return to his home area.

 4. The manuscript grounds of appeal were rejected by Judge Keane who found
    (as do I) that the grounds are "no more than a  disagreement  with  the
    findings of the judge."  However, Judge  Keane  went  on  (because  the
    appellant was not represented) to  consider  whether  there  any  other
    arguable errors of law in the decision.  Judge Keane  appears  to  have
    been concerned that the judge "had regard to her own preconceptions  as
    to what constituted reasonable conduct" considering the credibility  of
    the appellant's account.  I have to say  I  am  a  loss  to  understand
    exactly what that may be intended to mean.  In any event,  Judge  Keane
    appears to have failed to take adequate notice of the guidance  of  the
    Upper Tribunal in AZ (error of law: jurisdiction;  PTA  practice)  Iran
    [2018] UKUT 00245 (IAC);

         (3) Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal should be granted on
         a ground that was not advanced by an applicant for permission, only
         if:

             (a) the judge is satisfied that  the  ground  he  or  she  has
             identified is one which has a strong prospect of success:  (i)
             for the original appellant;  or  (ii)  for  the  Secretary  of
             State, where the  ground  relates  to  a  decision  which,  if
             undisturbed, would breach the United  Kingdom's  international
             Treaty obligations; or (b) (possibly) the ground relates to an
             issue of general importance, which the Upper Tribunal needs to
             address.

 5. I am well-aware that the appellant was not represented at the  time  he
    submitted his grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  However,  Judge
    Keane has not clearly indicated that he considered that the  additional
    ground of appeal, which had not been argued but  which  he  identified,
    stood a strong prospect of success an, if so, why. I  cannot  see  that
    the point raised by judge Keane is 'obvious'  (see  R  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department ex parte Robinson [1998] QB 929).   Given
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge struggled to find any  coherence  in
    the appellant's contradictory evidence and that the appellant  appeared
    to claim that he came from a region of Yemen  which  was  not,  as  the
    judge noted, "where the appellant claims it to be", I cannot  see  that
    Judge Foudy arguably erred in law by concluding that the appellant  had
    failed to discharge the burden of proving his  case  to  the  necessary
    standard. The First-tier Tribunal decision is, in my  opinion,  legally
    sound and the appeal is dismissed.

 6. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 7 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 7 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
