
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06550/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2018                     |On 30 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   mr c j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Joseph, Counsel, instructed by Turpin & Miller
                    Solicitors (Oxford)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    In   accordance   with   the   request   made   by   the   appellant's
    representatives, a copy of this determination will be sent to them  and
    not the appellant.

2.   This case concerns an appellant who is a national of  Afghanistan.   He
    arrived in the UK in August 2009 and claimed  asylum.   His  claim  was
    refused.  He appealed.  His appeal was dismissed on 25 June  2012.   He
    lodged further submissions in January 2014 which were  refused  with  a
    right of appeal on 20 January 2014.  He again appealed  unsuccessfully.
    The First-tier Tribunal who dismissed his appeal on that  occasion  was
    Judge Whiting.  Following further submissions lodged on 9 January 2017,
    the respondent made a decision on 4 July 2017 refusing to grant  asylum
    and humanitarian  protection,  again  with  a  right  of  appeal.   The
    appellant's appeal came before Judge Real of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (FtT) who, in a decision sent on 23 August 2017, dismissed his appeal.

3.   The appellant's written grounds of  appeal  are  lengthy  and  identify
    nine errors in the judge's decision which can be summarised as:

    (i)  incorrect application of  Devaseelan  principles  resulting  in  a
         failure to conduct a fresh assessment of risks to the appellant;


    (ii) perversely concluding that the  appellant  had  not  made  serious
         attempts at suicide;


    (iii)    failure  to  accept  that  the  new  evidence  demonstrated  a
         significant change in respect of the appellant's mental health than
         was the position before Judge Whiting;


    (iv) failure to grasp  that  the  appellant's  removal  to  Afghanistan
         itself and the living conditions in Afghanistan would create a real
         risk of suicide;


    (v)  erroneously concluding that the objective evidence showed that the
         appellant would have access to psychiatric treatment and  inpatient
         facilities in Afghanistan;


    (vi) wrongly rejecting as speculative the submission that the appellant
         would be at risk on return by virtue of "ranting and raving in  the
         street about terrorism and Islam" in front  of  Allied  forces  and
         Taliban at checkpoints;


    (vii)    failure to  consider,  when  assessing  risk  on  return,  the
         appellant's inability  to  look  after  himself  without  extensive
         support;


    (viii)   failure to  separately  or  adequately  consider  whether  the
         appellant's health and the conditions in Afghanistan which  if  not
         amounting to breaches under Articles 2 and  3  of  the  ECHR  still
         amounted to very significant obstacles for  the  purposes  of  para
         276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules; and


    (ix) commensurate failure to properly consider the appellant's  Article
         8 circumstances outside the Rules.


4.   I heard very apposite oral submissions from  both  representatives,  Mr
    Josephs amplifying the written grounds and Mr Richard's developing  the
    respondent's Rule 24 response.

5.   I observe at the outset that a number of judges have been  involved  in
    the appellant's case, both in the context of statutory appeals  and  on
    judicial review.  I note that when sitting in  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    March 2018 I granted permission to apply for  judicial  review  against
    the   respondent's   decision   refusing   to   accept   his    further
    representations as a fresh claim.  Subsequently,  following  a  consent
    order, his submissions were accepted as a fresh claim.

6.   Following on from this observation, it is fair to say that on the  part
    of all the judges involved there has been very careful attention to the
    appellant's circumstances and recognition that his was a complex case.

7.   A third observation I would make is that cases in which it  is  alleged
    that there is a high risk of suicide on return to third countries  pose
    considerable difficulties for judicial fact-finders.  The leading  case
    giving guidance on such cases remains the Court of Appeal decision in J
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ  629,  but
    there have been a number of other relevant authorities since.   At  the
    same time, all relevant authorities highlight the point that  cases  of
    this type are highly fact-sensitive.  For example,  in  Y  (Sri  Lanka)
    [2009] EWCA Civ 362, of crucial  importance  was  the  fact  that  both
    appellants had been ill-treated when in Sri Lanka.

8.   I would begin with two general remarks  about  Judge  Real's  decision.
    The judge was careful to treat the appellant as  a  vulnerable  witness
    and to apply the Joint Presidential Guidance Note of 2010.  The judge's
    decision also makes clear  that  she  took  into  account  all  of  the
    documentation which was copious and  required  reference  back  to  all
    proceedings since 2008.

9.   My second remark constitutes my main reason for rejecting  ground  (i),
    which contends that the judge did not apply the  Devaseelan  guidelines
    appropriately in terms of the factors relevant to deciding  whether  to
    depart from the  previous  findings  of  fact.   In  particular,  I  am
    satisfied that Judge Real did consider the previous  findings  of  fact
    made  by  Judge  Whiting  and  the   more   recent   medical   evidence
    holistically: that is made clear by the judge in para 29 which states:

         "29. In  order  to  update  and  summarise  the  position,  I  have
             highlighted only a  number  of  key  documents  in  which  the
             Appellant's condition has been assessed, but I have considered
             the totality of the medical evidence  within  the  Appellant's
             bundle which documents both the past  and  recent  history  in
             relation to his  mental  health,  and  I  find  this  contains
             records of  concerns  and  behaviours  that  continue  to  the
             present."


10.   I  am  also  satisfied,  moving  to  ground  (ii),  that  the  judge's
    assessment that the appellant had not made serious attempts at  suicide
    was within the range of  reasonable  responses.   Arguably,  the  judge
    erred in portraying the attempts as "further manifestations of suicidal
    ideation",  terminology  which  might  suggest  there  were  not   even
    attempts.  But it is quite clear that the judge took cognisance of  the
    attempts at suicide made by the appellant.  Issue  is  taken  with  the
    judge's assessment that they were not serious, by reference to the fact
    they involved attempts to hang himself and walking in  front  of  cars,
    but on the evidence  before  the  judge  none  of  these  attempts  was
    witnessed; reports about them were based  on  the  appellant's  claims.
    The gravamen of the judge's concern regarding these attempts  was  lack
    of corroboration,  coupled  with  the  lack  of  evidence  of  injuries
    accompanying them.  In relation to the most recent risk  assessment  by
    Mr Skitt dated 17 July 2017,  the  judge  noted  that  that  assessment
    itself commented that there is "no real evidence" of the attempt by the
    appellant to hang himself (see para 30).

11.  The judge was clearly  aware  that  the  medical  reports  included  an
    assessment by Dr Adams that on the appellant's return there was "a high
    suicide risk" (see para 33) and properly understood that the  issue  of
    risk was essentially for her to  assess  based  on  all  the  evidence,
    including background country evidence.  The judge gave a  sound  reason
    for arriving at a different conclusion.

12.  I consider, for similar reasons, that ground (iii) amounts  to  a  mere
    disagreement with the judge's assessment that, whilst there had been  a
    deterioration in the appellant's mental health  since  Judge  Whiting's
    decision, there had not been a significant change.   It  is  true  that
    whereas when the appellant's case was before  Judge  Whiting  the  only
    diagnosis (from Dr Briffa) was of  "severe  depression";  before  Judge
    Real  there  was  now  a   clear   diagnosis   of   bipolar   disorder,
    schizoaffective  disorder,  psychosis,   acute   depression,   suicidal
    ideation and PTSD.  But even before Judge Phillips in  2012  there  was
    evidence that the appellant had been sectioned and  had  mental  health
    issues; before Judge Whiting there was  evidence  of  three  documented
    episodes of acute  psychotic  illness  and  of  suicidal  ideation  and
    historic attempts at self-harm (although without  resultant  scarring).
    Further, whilst there was before Judge Real, now a 9-year history,  the
    pattern of the appellant being sectioned at least once a year in the UK
    was one that went back a number of years.

13.  Clearly there were some differences in the  appellant's  situation,  in
    particular the fact that whereas at the date of  hearing  before  Judge
    Whiting the appellant  was  living  alone  in  standard  accommodation,
    before Judge Real he had been placed in 24 hour supported accommodation
    and referred to the assertive outreach team in March 2017,  this  being
    the highest level of support in the community that is possible.   Judge
    Real was clearly aware of such differences and was entitled to conclude
    that whilst this was part of the evidence indicating his condition  had
    deteriorated since Judge Whiting's decision, it did not do so "starkly"
    (para 31).

14.  Ground (iv) alleges a failure to grasp  that  the  appellant's  removal
    itself and the living conditions in Afghanistan  would  create  a  real
    risk of suicide.  Once again, I consider this ground a mere reiteration
    of submissions made to the judge.  The judge clearly  did  address  the
    likely impact of the removal itself, as well as the country  conditions
    the appellant was likely to face: that is the clear purport of paras 32-
    34.  The judge was entitled in  making  her  assessment  to  take  into
    account that the appellant's history of repeated deteriorations in this
    mental health has not led to any serious attempt on his own life.   The
    judge did not "conflate" the issues of how the appellant  was  managing
    in the UK and how he would manage in Afghanistan.

15.  Ground (v) contends that the judge's decision not to depart from  Judge
    Whiting's assessment that there would be effective mechanisms to reduce
    the risk of the appellant coming to harm in  the  form  of  psychiatric
    treatment and  inpatient  facilities  ignored  the  evidence  that  the
    appellant would be  unable  to  access  any  of  the  limited  services
    available.  Reference was made to D6, D7, D10-11, D23  of  the  bundle.
    However, this ground effectively submits that the judge was obliged  to
    base herself solely on the appellant's evidence.  The  evidence  before
    the judge included that identified by Judge Whiting at paras  53-55  in
    which the respondent had undertaken to ensure not just that during  the
    appellant's physical  removal  he  would  be  accompanied  by  suitably
    qualified experts if necessary,  but  (i)  that  following  arrival  in
    Afghanistan he would  receive  help  and  support  from  the  Migration
    Delivery Office and/or the  Returns  Liaison  Officer  and  that  these
    officials liaise with public mental health hospitals in Kabul; and (ii)
    that the respondent would ensure he was returned with a supply  of  any
    prescribed medication, together with a letter from  IRC  medical  staff
    for future clinicians.

16.  Judge Real stated at para 34:

         "34. The  Reasons  for  Refusal  cite  sources  for  inpatient  and
             outpatient psychiatric care in Kabul, albeit limited, and this
             has not been  the  subject  of  particular  challenge  by  the
             Appellant.  No new information  has  been  put  before  me  in
             relation to the Appellant's journey  to  Afghanistan  and  the
             measures that will be in place on  arrival.   I  am  satisfied
             that there are effective mechanisms to reduce risk in the form
             of psychiatric treatment and inpatient facilities, and I  find
             no reason to depart from the  findings  of  Immigration  Judge
             Whiting on this issue."


17.  In light of the evidence before Judge Whiting regarding access to post-
    arrival assistance, evidence unchallenged by the appellant's subsequent
    evidence, Judge Real was entitled to assess matters regarding access in
    the same way.  The fact that the appellant on the evidence before Judge
    Real struggles to take care of basic personal  functions  and  managing
    his finances, was a matter properly considered  by  the  judge  in  the
    context of the evidence that the appellant  would  not  on  arrival  be
    abandoned or left to his own devices, but  would  receive  professional
    help from persons used to dealing with cases of returnees with suicidal
    ideations. A  further  neutral  factor  that  Judge  Real  (like  Judge
    Whiting) found would  reduce  risk  of  self-harm  on  return  was  the
    appellant's belief that he would go to hell if  he  committed  suicide.
    That finding was consistent with the medical evidence.

18.  For similar reasons, I would reject ground (vii)  which  contends  that
    due to his inability to look after himself the appellant would  end  up
    living in an IDP camp or on the street.

19.  I see nothing in ground (vi).  The evidence regarding  the  appellant's
    episodes in  the  UK  of  "ranting  and  raving  in  the  street  about
    terrorism" did not indicate that the appellant was  oblivious  that  he
    was in the UK.  It was entirely open to the judge  to  consider  merely
    speculative the argument that he  would  replicate  the  same  type  of
    behaviour in Afghanistan (a Muslim country with a national government),
    and position himself at Allied forces or Taliban checkpoints.

20.  Grounds, (vii) and  (viii),  maintain  that  the  judge  discounted  or
    failed to consider that the circumstances the appellant would  face  on
    return to Afghanistan (even assuming they did not amount to breaches of
    Articles 2 and 3 ECHR) would  amount  to  very  significant  obstacles.
    Reference is made to "the prevailing circumstances in Afghanistan,  the
    lack of family support and the appellant's mental  health",  especially
    in view of the recent evidence the judge had from Mr  Skitt  about  the
    appellant's inability to look after himself.

21.  In my judgement, such grounds  merely  repeat  disagreements  with  the
    judge's findings of  fact  on  such  matters  as  the  availability  of
    effective mechanisms to reduce risk on return.  The appellant's lack of
    family in Afghanistan (and indeed the fact  that  he  had  never  lived
    there) were matters that have been closely considered by  all  the  IAC
    judges who have had conduct  of  proceedings  involving  the  appellant
    since 2012.  Judge Whiting noted that the appellant remained in contact
    with his mother and father.  Although they  were  not  in  Afghanistan,
    this meant he was not an orphan.  The appellant was an adult  (aged  23
    before Judge Real) and so was not in the position of  an  unaccompanied
    minor or someone slightly older than 18.   In  such  circumstances  the
    previous judges were entitled to focus on his private life rather  than
    his family life, circumstances on return to  Afghanistan  and  in  this
    respect  the  fact  that  in  addition  to  his  native  Farsi  he  had
    understanding of Dari, Pashtu and Urdu and spoke Uzbek-Turkish when  he
    was growing up, was properly treated as a factor likely to mean he  did
    not have communication problems on return.  He  clearly  had  religious
    and cultural ties with Afghanistan through his parents,  both  of  whom
    had lived in Afghanistan.  It was Judge Whiting's conclusion at para 80
    that  there  was  "a  clear  expectation  that  [the  appellant]  could
    integrate within Afghanistan...".  Judge Real's assessment at  para  41
    that  [as  far  as  concerns  factors  relevant  to  very   significant
    obstacles] "I find these factors unchanged"  was  entirely  within  the
    range of reasonable responses, as was her conclusion at  para  42  that
    what was known about the appellant's mental health had to  be  assessed
    in light of her earlier finding about the availability  of  psychiatric
    facilities.

Notice of Decision

22.  For the above reasons I conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
    err in law and her decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 April 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
