
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06260/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 October 2018                 |On 9 November 2018                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                  saman [m]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard, Solicitor from Fountains Solicitors,
Walsall
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 5 January 2018, the Upper Tribunal issued my error of  law  decision
    in relation  to  the  proceedings  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   For
    convenience, I reproduce that decision.

    DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW

    1.   The appellant appeals with permission  against  the  decision  and
         reasons statement of First-tier Tribunal Judge RD Taylor  that  was
         promulgated on 4 May 2017.

    2.   Judge Taylor made a number of findings,  which  are  unchallenged.
         At the end of paragraph 15, Judge Taylor rejects  as  "deliberately
         fabricated" the appellant's claim that he feared reprisals  because
         of his father's past involvement with the Ba'ath Party in Iraq.  At
         paragraph 16,  Judge  Taylor  found  the  appellant  could  not  be
         expected to return to his home village, near Kirkuk but outside the
         Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR), because it was  in  a  contested  area.
         This led Judge Taylor to consider whether there was another part of
         Iraq to which it would be reasonable to  expect  the  appellant  to
         relocate.

    3.   At paragraph 17,  Judge  Taylor  concluded  that  the  appellant's
         inability to speak Arabic meant the appellant would have some  very
         serious difficulties in  relocating  permanently  to  Baghdad.   He
         moved on to consider whether it would be reasonable to  expect  the
         appellant to relocate to the  IKR.   Judge  Taylor  considered  the
         three factors identified in the head notes of  AA  (Article  15(c))
         Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 about the reasonableness of relocation: (a)
         the practicality of travel from Baghdad to  the  IKR  (such  as  to
         Irbil by air), (b) the likelihood of securing employment,  and  (c)
         the availability of assistance from friends and family in the  IKR.
         I mention that these parts of the head notes were not disturbed  by
         the Court of Appeal's judgment in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA  Civ
         944.

    4.   With  regard  to  the  second  and  third  factors,  Judge  Taylor
         concluded that  the  appellant's  lack  of  credibility  meant  the
         appellant  had  not  shown  that  he  would  be  unable  to  secure
         employment or have assistance from friends and family in  the  IKR.
         Those findings have not been challenged and are sound.

    5.   The central ground in this appeal relates  to  the  first  factor.
         Judge Taylor, in paragraph 17, asserts that the  appellant,  "would
         be able to relocate to the IKR via Baghdad."  There is no  evidence
         to support this assertion or any reasoning given.  It must be borne
         in mind that it was not feasible at the time for the  appellant  to
         travel overland to the IKR,  which  Judge  Taylor  implies  in  his
         finding that the appellant could not  relocate  to  his  home  area
         because it was a contested area.  But Judge Taylor had no  evidence
         the appellant would  be  able  to  take  an  internal  flight  from
         Baghdad.  Mr Mills suggested a variety of sources  of  evidence  he
         has gleaned from other cases and other sources.   But  that  misses
         the point in that there was nothing before Judge Taylor on which he
         could base such an assertion.

    6.   It follows that I am not satisfied Judge Taylor  carried  out  the
         necessary assessment on this issue.  This is an error of  law,  and
         the decision needs to be set aside.

    7.   I discussed with Mr Howard and  Mr  Mills  how  the  appeal  might
         proceed. It was agreed that the decision should be  remade  in  the
         Upper Tribunal because of the preserved findings.  There  would  be
         no need to hear evidence from the appellant because the issues that
         need to be considered would rely on objective  country  information
         and not on his testimony.

    8.   There are, of course, two issues that need resolving. The first is
         whether the appellant could be  expected  to  internally  relocate.
         That question is now simply one of whether it would  be  reasonable
         to expect the appellant to travel from Baghdad to  the  IKR,  which
         will depend on the ease of transport  between  those  places.   The
         second issue arises because the decision of  Judge  Taylor  is  set
         aside.  It will be necessary to consider  whether  the  appellant's
         home area remains a  contested  area.   If  it  is  not,  then  the
         question  of  internal  relocation  will  not  arise  because   the
         appellant does not have a well-founded fear of persecution  in  his
         home area other than it was a contested area.

    9.   Mr Howard and Mr Mills mentioned that there is a  pending  country
         guideline case regarding the issue of internal  relocation  to  the
         IKR from Baghdad.  The Upper Tribunal had intended to complete that
         case before the end of 2017.  Mr Mills had  been  involved  in  the
         case early on, having represented the respondent at  the  error  of
         law hearing.  I indicated  that  this  case  may  lag  behind  that
         guidance and both representatives agreed this would be prudent.

 2. In preparation for the resumed hearing, the appellant provided a bundle
    of documents, which included a statement from the  appellant  dated  25
    October 2018, a map showing the location of his home village in  Kirkuk
    Province, the country guidance decision of the Upper Tribunal issued on
    26 June 2018, AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 212, the UK Home Office Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  -
    Iraq: Internal  relocation,  civil  documentation  and  returns  (CPIN,
    published 19 October 2018),  together  with  other  background  country
    information.  The respondent provided no additional evidence.

 3. As previously agreed (see para. 7 of my error  of  law  decision),  the
    appellant was not called to give further evidence.  Mr Howard  accepted
    the appellant's latest witness statement added nothing material to  the
    case, given the findings made by Judge Taylor that are preserved.

 4. After discussing the issues with Mr Howard  and  Ms  Aboni,  and  after
    listening to their submissions, I made  the  following  findings  which
    disposed of the appeal.

 5. First, I am satisfied the appellant's home village (Abu Naim), which is
    some 30 miles south of Kirkuk, is in an area  that  remains  contested.
    This is primarily because I have insufficient  reason  to  depart  from
    existing and binding country guidance.

 6. The Upper Tribunal gave country guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq  CG
    [2015] UKUT 544 that the Province of Kirkuk was a contested  area.   Ms
    Aboni reminded me the respondent's policy position expressed in the  UK
    Home Office Country Policy and Information Note -  Iraq:  Security  and
    humanitarian situation (March 2017) was that the Province of Kirkuk was
    no longer in a contested area.  Despite this  policy  note,  the  Upper
    Tribunal in AAH (Iraq) commented at paragraph 2 that the guidance in AA
    (Iraq) in respect of the contested areas  and  article  15(c)  remained
    good law.  It is noted  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  examining  the
    situation in Iraq in February 2018.  The respondent  did  not  seek  to
    challenge the country guidance regarding contested areas.  Ms Aboni has
    not provided any evidence to show that the situation in  the  contested
    areas has materially changed since  the  guidance  in  AAH  (Iraq)  was
    given.  As a result, I am satisfied the guidance in AA  (Iraq)  remains
    good law and binds me.

 7. The second issue is whether the appellant could obtain a CSID or  other
    suitable document that would facilitate his travel in Iraq (such  as  a
    laissez-passer), which would enable him  to  relocate  to  the  Kurdish
    region.  I recall that Judge Taylor found the appellant had no identity
    documents in the UK and that finding is undisturbed.  It  follows  from
    the CPIN October 2018 that the appellant would not be able to obtain  a
    CSID or laissez-passer from the Iraqi Embassy in London (see paragraphs
    2.7.12 and 2.7.13).

 8. The question, therefore, turns on whether the appellant would  be  able
    to obtain such a document in Iraq.  Ms Aboni  reminded  me  that  Judge
    Taylor found that because he did not find the appellant to be credible,
    he did not accept the appellant had no contacts in Kurdistan or someone
    who could act as guarantor to enable his to settle in that region.  She
    asked me to infer from this that the appellant probably had someone  he
    could contact in Iraq who could obtain a CSID, bearing in mind that the
    appellant admitted to having had a CSID previously (see question 35  of
    the asylum interview).

 9. Although I acknowledge that Judge Taylor found the  appellant  to  lack
    credibility, I  find  it  would  be  speculative  to  infer  from  that
    conclusion that the appellant has someone in Iraq who  could  help  him
    obtain a CSID.  Ms Aboni suggested a family member may have  taken  his
    CSID with them when they left their home area but  that  suggestion  is
    pure speculation.  There is no reason to suppose that a  family  member
    would  take  the  identity  documents  of  someone  else.    The   only
    substantive evidence I have is that there are significant  difficulties
    for anyone to obtain a CSID from a contested area.  That  is  the  best
    evidence I have.   It  is  objective,  and  forms  part  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal's country guidance, as recorded as  paragraph  2.6.12  of  the
    CPIN October 2018.

10. I conclude the evidence indicates that it is reasonably likely that the
    appellant would not be able to obtain a CSID in Iraq.

11. The final question is whether it would be unreasonable  to  expect  the
    appellant to relocate in Iraq.  Judge Taylor found, and his finding  is
    not disturbed, that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to
    live in Baghdad because he does  not  speak  Arabic.   I  add  to  that
    finding that he would not be  able  to  obtain  a  CSID.   The  country
    information indicates that a person without a CSID cannot  be  expected
    to travel without risk to their  life  and  freedoms  within  Iraq  and
    therefore the appellant would  be  unable  to  travel  to  the  Kurdish
    region, as explained by the Upper Tribunal in AAH (Iraq).

    For these reasons, therefore, I find the appeal is allowed because  the
    e appellant is entitled to humanitarian protection.

Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge RD Taylor contains legal error and is set aside.
I remake the  decision  and  allow  the  appeal  because  the  appellant  is
entitled to humanitarian protection.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date         30 October 2018

         Judge McCarthy
         Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal


