
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/06694/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On May 4, 2018                            |On May 11, 2018                  |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                            MR REZAN HAJI KHALID
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is a Syrian national and he arrived in the United Kingdom
    on February  23,  2017  and  claimed  asylum  the  following  day.  The
    respondent refused his application on  July  6,  2017  and  grounds  of
    appeal were lodged by the appellant on July 13, 2017.  His  appeal  was
    then listed before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Siddiqi on November
    27, 2017 and in  a  decision  promulgated  on  December  19,  2017  she
    dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 3. The appellant lodged, through his former solicitors, grounds of  appeal
    on January 2, 2018 arguing procedural unfairness and that the Judge had
    wrongly stated  that  his  linguistic  behaviour  was  consistent  with
    Kurdish linguistic community SEK when in fact the report  said  it  was
    consistent with Kurdish linguistic community SK.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted primarily on the procedural unfairness
    point on the basis that the Judge had arguably erred by not granting an
    adjournment to enable the appellant  to  obtain  an  expert  report  to
    counter the respondent's own report.

 5. The appellant was unrepresented at the hearing before me and Mr McVeety
    informed me that the appellant's expert had had an appointment at their
    offices on March 19, 2018. Four days later the  appellant's  solicitors
    informed the Tribunal that they  were  no  longer  instructed  in  this
    matter.

 6. I  asked  the  appellant,  through  the  interpreter,  whether  he  had
    discussed the reasons why his solicitors were  no  longer  representing
    him and he confirmed that he had. I asked him whether he was  aware  if
    the expert had provided a report about his documents and  he  confirmed
    that the expert had.

 7. The appellant told me that his former solicitors had informed him  that
    the report confirmed that his documents were forgeries  which  was  the
    same conclusion reached by the respondent's expert.

 8. The first ground of  appeal  concerned  the  fact  the  Judge  had  not
    adjourned the case to enable the appellant to obtain an expert  report.
    Whilst I accept the appellant's  representatives  had  not  helped  the
    appellant by  arranging  a  report  in  time  the  fact  a  report  had
    subsequently indicated  that  the  documents  were  forgeries  was  not
    something to be overlooked.

 9. Whilst I could have accepted there was procedural unfairness  when  the
    Judge refused to adjourn  the  case  I  was  satisfied,  based  on  the
    appellant's disclosure about his own report, that  such  an  error  was
    immaterial to the outcome of the case.

10. If I had found an error on this point then as her findings had not been
    challenged I am satisfied I would have come to the same conclusion.

11. The second ground of appeal related to the fact the appellant  did  not
    produce the disputed documents at  the  hearing  but  this  ground  was
    aligned with the first ground of appeal.

12. The final ground of appeal centred on the linguistic report and it  had
    been argued the Judge had identified the  wrong  linguistic  behaviour.
    Having read the linguistic report I am satisfied that ground is  wholly
    misconceived and the Judge's finding on this issue is what is contained
    in the report itself.

13. In the circumstances  I  indicated  to  the  appellant  that  whilst  I
    accepted that the Judge should have adjourned the appeal  to  enable  a
    report to be obtained I concluded there was no material  error  because
    he himself had confirmed that his own expert report, according  to  his
    solicitors who had withdrawn from the case immediately after, supported
    the contents of the respondent's own report.  There  was  therefore  no
    material error

    DECISION

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.  I uphold the decision.

Signed                              Date     04/05/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.

Signed                              Date     05/04/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
