
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06970/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2019                |On 24th December 2019                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                     E B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Harding (instructed by Sentinel Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    the Decision of Judge Lucas in the First-tier Tribunal, promulgated  on
    6th September 2019 after a hearing on 21st August 2019.

 2. The judge heard a protection claim by a  woman  from  Albania  who  had
    claimed that she had travelled with her husband to Italy using her  own
    passport.  In Italy her husband went to work in Milan, and  she  stayed
    with a cousin elsewhere in Italy.  It is  said  that  she  then  sought
    assistance from a stranger who arranged  work  for  her  loaned  her  a
    significant amount of money which financed her trip  to  the  UK.   She
    says that this person forced her into prostitution  to  repay  him  and
    that she was kept under locked conditions.  This same person  sent  her
    to the UK and her forced labour was to  continue  but  she  managed  to
    escape from the lorry in which she was travelling.

 3. Upon arrival in the UK she was  befriended  and  helped  by  a  Kosovan
    woman.  She has since had a child, the  father  of  whom  she  has  not
    revealed.  She claimed to be at risk on  return  to  Albania  from  her
    family and of being trafficked or re-trafficked.  She claimed that  and
    that she would not be able to survive as a woman  in  Albania  with  an
    illegitimate child.

 4. The judge rejected her claim in its entirety.   It  is  asserted  today
    that the judge erred in basing his findings on plausibility rather than
    finding her incredible and that  in  so  doing  he  had  expected  this
    Appellant to behave as someone in the UK  might.   It  is  argued  that
    rendered the Judge's findings flawed and reliance was  placed  in  that
    respect on the case of HK [2006] EWCA Civ  1037.    Complaint  is  also
    made that the judge erred in failing to assess the risk categories that
    faced this Appellant on return.

 5. I do not find that the grounds establish an error of  law  material  or
    otherwise.

 6. The judge's findings occupy a large portion of the Decision and Reasons
    starting at paragraph 47 and concluding at  paragraph  64.   The  judge
    noted that there  had  been  an  adverse  Decision  from  the  National
    Referral Mechanism, namely that she had not been trafficked.  The judge
    clearly recognised that  there  was  a  different  standard  of  proof,
    because he said so, but nevertheless shared the  view  of  the  NRM  in
    finding that she had not been trafficked.

 7. At paragraph 49 the judge noted the dearth of evidence  in  this  case,
    other than the Appellant's own testimony.  He noted that there  was  no
    evidence that  she  had  been  married  before  she  left  Albania  and
    travelled to Italy; no evidence that she lived in Italy for the  period
    in question  notwithstanding  such  evidence  would  have  been  easily
    obtainable because she had lived with a relative in Italy.   There  was
    no evidence from, either in the written testimony  or  live  testimony,
    from the complete stranger who supposedly befriended  her  in  the  UK.
    That evidence would have been readily available but was not.

 8. The judge specifically said, at paragraph 50,  that  the  evidence  was
    neither plausible nor credible.  He rejected the  claim  stating  that,
    having taken the trouble to travel to Italy with her husband,  the  two
    then separated, he to Milan and her to a different part of Italy with a
    relative.  He noted there was no evidence that she had  actually  lived
    in Italy at all and again noted the complete absence  of  any  evidence
    from the cousin.  He rejected the Appellant's claim that she was unable
    to, or not in contact with her cousin.  There was  no  reason  why  she
    could not have contacted him.

 9. The judge found implausible, as he is entitled to,  that  having  lived
    with and been supported by a cousin in Italy who was assisting her  and
    could have assisted her to find employment, she apparently  went  to  a
    complete stranger  and  got  herself  heavily  into  debt.   The  judge
    concluded that the purported relationship with this person  simply  did
    not happen and on the basis of the evidence I cannot fault that.

10. The judge also did not find it plausible or credible that, if  she  was
    being trafficked as described, that she would have been given a  mobile
    phone by the trafficker or that  she  could  have  escaped  in  he  way
    claimed. He found that her trafficker would not have provided her  with
    a mobile phone ,which she would then have used  for  purposes  such  as
    calling for help.

11. The fact that she was apparently befriended  by  a  charitable  Kosovan
    woman who took her in and accommodated her without question, the  judge
    also disbelieved in no small part because there was a complete lack  of
    evidence from this woman.  She had  apparently  gone  on  a  pre-booked
    holiday  to  Kosovo.   Whilst  she  might  have  done  that  there  was
    absolutely no explanation or reason why she could not have  provided  a
    witness statement, if she had provided such an amount of support.

12. Despite a claim that the Appellant was suffering  from  depression  and
    evidence of some medication, there was no other medical evidence before
    the Tribunal.  The judge concluded, on the basis of disbelieving in its
    entirety what the Appellant  was  claiming,  that  there  would  be  no
    difficulty or lack of assistance for  her  on  return  to  Albania  and
    dismissed the appeal.

13. The Decision is carefully  and  fully  reasoned,  and  I  can  find  no
    material error of law.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed [pic]                            Date 23 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed [pic]                            Date 23 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin
