
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06716/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Determination & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 24 October 2018                 |On 31 December 2018                     |
|                                       |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                     JA
                           (Anonymity Order Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Harris of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born in  1997.   He  appealed
    against a decision of the respondent made on 6 June 2016 to refuse  his
    claim for asylum.

 2. The crux of his claim is that he  was  born  and  grew  up  in  Baghlan
    Province.  His father had worked for the Taliban but the appellant  had
    not seen him for many years.  The government drove the Taliban  out  of
    his area and then set up a local  police  force  called  the  Arbakian.
    These local police harassed local families and kidnapped, particularly,
    young people and would threaten and beat them whilst questioning them.

 3. The appellant was kidnapped by them on two occasions and was mistreated
    in their detention.

 4. A month before leaving Afghanistan a government official was killed  in
    the appellant's village and the appellant was once again kidnapped  and
    accused of concealing information about the attack.

 5. On returning home injured  the  appellant's  mother  took  him  to  his
    uncle's house and it was then decided he should leave the country.

 6. His fear is of  the  Taliban  and  of  this  local  police  force,  the
    Arbakian.

 7. The respondent did not believe the appellant's historical account.

 8. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 9. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 12 May 2017 Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal Cooper found as follows: first, it was "reasonably likely
    that [the appellant] was indeed detained and ill-treated on a number of
    occasions by the Arbakian police in his  home  area,  on  suspicion  of
    helping the Taliban" [45].

10. Second, it was "reasonably likely that his mother decided to  take  him
    to his uncle, who in turn decided that it  was  not  safe  for  him  to
    remain there, because of similar  treatment  of  young  people  by  the
    Arbakian police in his own village, and who  consequently  arranged  to
    have him taken out of the country by an agent" [46].

11. Third, it was "reasonably likely that in 2012 the appellant was subject
    to persecution by the Arbakian  police  on  the  basis  of  an  imputed
    political opinion, namely, supporting the Taliban" [47].

12. Fourth, it was "reasonably likely that if the appellant was  to  return
    to his home area in Afghanistan, he could be at risk of persecution  on
    the same basis as before" [49].

13. Finally, he found that  "As  it  is  clear  that  the  Arbakia  militia
    operate,  in  principle,  with  the  blessing  of  the  government   of
    Afghanistan, it follows that the appellant would not be able to look to
    the  government  for  protection."   Thus,  the  judge  concluded  "the
    appellant has a well founded fear of  persecution  in  his  home  area"
    [50].

14. The judge, however, then went on to dismiss the  appeal  on  the  basis
    that internal relocation to Kabul was reasonable for the appellant.

    Error of law hearing

15. The appellant sought permission to appeal on that point.  At the  error
    of law hearing before me on 12 December 2017  the  respondent  conceded
    that the  decision  showed  error  in  the  consideration  of  internal
    relocation.  Specifically, that the First-tier Tribunal failed to  have
    regard to background material relied on by the appellant in respect  of
    Article  15(c)  risk  and  internal  relocation  which  might   justify
    departing from the country guidance.

16. The parties were aware at that time that a new  country  guidance  case
    addressing  precisely  these  issues  was  in  the  process  of   being
    determined and the case was therefore adjourned to the first  available
    date after the release of AS (Safety of Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 118 which was promulgated in March 2018.

17. The credibility findings as set out above were preserved and  the  only
    issue for the Upper Tribunal was internal relocation to Kabul.

18. The last hearing of this matter on 16 May 2018 was adjourned  in  order
    for medical evidence to be obtained.  It had become apparent  that  the
    appellant was suffering from mental health problems and that a  medico-
    legal report was necessary.

19. Thus, the matter came before me again on 24 October 2018.

    Resumed hearing

20. Lodged for the hearing  was  a  bundle  containing  statements  by  the
    appellant (dated 27 July 2018) and his  brother  (7  August  2018),  an
    expert report by Dr Guistozzi (5 August 2018) and a psychiatric  report
    by Dr Sinha BSc, MB ChB, MRCGP (18 October 2018). Mr Clarke lodged  two
    items entitled "response to an  information  request"  on  "psychiatric
    treatment" (6 April 2017) and "psychotherapy and psychiatry"  (18  June
    2018); also, a short WHO note headed "Depression a leading cause of ill
    health and disability: fighting stigma is key  to  recovery"  (9  April
    2017).

21. The appellant did not give evidence. However, I  heard  brief  evidence
    from the appellant's brother, HA.  He adopted his statement.  In cross-
    examination he said he had come to the UK three or four years  ago  via
    an agent.  An uncle had paid.  He had been given a phone number for the
    agent in Afghanistan but had lost it.  A member of the Afghan community
    in Birmingham had told him in April  2017  that  his  mother  had  been
    killed.  He had not used this man to try and contact his uncle; perhaps
    his brother, the appellant, had tried to do so.

22. In submissions, Mr Clarke sought to rely on the refusal letter (dated 6
    June 2016).  He  said  the  brother  HA  lacked  credibility.   It  was
    implausible that they would not have contact  details;  cash  had  been
    paid to get them to the UK.  Nor was  it  clear  why  contacts  in  the
    community had not been used to try and contact family  in  Afghanistan.
    It was notable that the Birmingham contact had not attended or given  a
    statement.  It was an attempt to distance  themselves  from  a  support
    network in Afghanistan.

23. Turning to the reports, Mr Clarke commented first on that by Dr  Sinha.
    It was clear the appellant has vulnerabilities.  However, if it is  the
    case that he has a support  network  in  Afghanistan  such  would  help
    mitigate such vulnerabilities.

24. Mr Clarke  questioned  whether  the  medical  report  was  sufficiently
    robust.  There had only been one examination.  Also, it was  noteworthy
    that in his screening interview  he  was  reported  as  being  healthy.
    Further, if his symptoms were the result of being detained, he was  not
    at risk of being detained in Afghanistan on return.

25. As for Dr Guistozzi's report Mr Clarke noted that the  Tribunal  in  AS
    had made criticisms of him particularly about "black lists."  Also, his
    report for this case was predicated on profile and the  risk  of  round
    ups.  In the appellant's case he does not have a political profile  and
    there has been no evidence of round ups since  2013.  In  addition,  Dr
    Guistozzi's comment that the appellant had likely been targeted because
    of his family background had not been his evidence.  He  had  not  seen
    his father since 2001.   Mr  Clarke  noted  further  that  some  of  Dr
    Guistozzi's citations were elderly and his conclusions based on minimal
    sources.  There was a lack of information from human rights  groups  or
    NGO's.  Looked at overall his report was inadequate.

26.  Ms  Harris  sought  essentially  to  rely  on  her  detailed   written
    submissions (24 October 2018). Whilst it was correct to state that that
    there had been some criticism  of  Dr  Giustozzi  in  AS  much  of  his
    evidence  was  accepted;  his  report  merited  significant  weight  in
    particular  his  detailed  analysis  of  mental  health  provision   in
    Afghanistan. Although it  is  clear  there  is  some  provision  it  is
    inadequate to the demands upon it. Also, it would require the appellant
    to seek to access it. His unwillingness to do so in the UK did not bode
    well for him if returned particularly in light of the  stigma  attached
    to mental health. Such would also hinder him in other  aspects  of  his
    life such as trying to get work and accommodation.

    Consideration

27. In SSHD v AH (Sudan) and Ors (2007) UKHL 49 it was stated that the test
    to determine whether internal relocation was available was the test set
    out in Januzi v SSHD (2006) UKHL 5,  namely  that  the  decision  maker
    should decide whether, taking account  of  all  relevant  circumstances
    pertaining to the claimant and his country it would  be  reasonable  to
    expect him to relocate or whether it would be unduly  harsh  to  expect
    him to do so. The test was one of great  generality.  In  applying  the
    test enquiry had to be directed to  the  situation  of  the  particular
    claimant; very little was excluded from consideration  other  than  the
    standard of rights protection which  a  claimant  would  enjoy  in  the
    country where protection was sought. Baroness Hale said  that  all  the
    circumstances of  the  case  had  to  be  assessed  holistically,  with
    specific refence to personal circumstances including  past  persecution
    or fear thereof, psychological or health conditions, family and  social
    situations and survival capacities, in the context of the conditions in
    the place of relocation, including basic  human  rights,  security  and
    socio economic conditions, and access to health  care  facilities:  all
    with a view to determining the impact on the claimant  of  settling  in
    the proposed place of relocation and whether the claimant could live  a
    relatively normal life without undue hardship.


28. In considering this matter I look first at the Country Guidance in  AS.



29. The following were explained to be the relevant factors  for  a  single
    man relocating to Kabul:

         "230.    Our findings above show that it is not generally unsafe or
         unreasonable for a single healthy man  to  internally  relocate  to
         Kabul.  However, we emphasise that a case-by-case consideration  of
         whether internal relocation is reasonable for a  particular  person
         is required  by  Article  8  of  the  Qualification  Directive  and
         domestic authorities including Januzi and AH (Sudan).   When  doing
         so, we consider that there are a number of specific  factors  which
         may be relevant to bear in mind.  These  include,  individually  as
         well as cumulatively (including consideration that the strength  of
         one factor may counteract  and  balance  the  weakness  of  another
         factor):


          i) Age, including the age at which a person left Afghanistan.


         ii) Nature and quality of connections to Kabul and/or Afghanistan.


        iii) Physical and mental health.


         iv) Language, education and vocation and skills.


         231.     We consider age as a relevant factor given  that  we  have
         not seen any reason or evidential basis to depart from the specific
         guidance given in AA (unattended children)  Afghanistan  CG  [2012]
         UKUT 00016, which was supported in evidence before us as to greater
         risk to or vulnerability of minors.  There is no bright  line  rule
         at the age of 18 when a person in the United Kingdom is  considered
         to be an adult (there are different views as to becoming  an  adult
         and in particular as to achieving manhood in Afghan  society  which
         is not specifically linked to age but more to marital status) where
         such issues fall away overnight but are more  likely  to  gradually
         diminish.


         232.      We  also  consider  the  age  at  which  a  person   left
         Afghanistan to be  relevant  as  to  whether  this  included  their
         formative years.  It is reasonable to infer that the older a person
         is when they leave, the more likely they are to be  familiar  with,
         for example, employment opportunities and living independently.


         233.     Although we find  that  it  is  reasonable  for  a  person
         without a support network  or  specific  connections  in  Kabul  or
         elsewhere in Afghanistan to internally relocate to Kabul, a  person
         will be in a more  advantageous  position  if  they  do  have  such
         connections depending on where they are, the financial resources of
         such people and their status/connections.  We have in mind that the
         availability  of  a  support  network  may  counter  a   particular
         vulnerability of an individual on return.


         234.     In our conclusions, we refer throughout to a  single  male
         in good health as  this  is  the  primary  group  of  people  under
         consideration in this appeal and  reflects  the  position  of  this
         particular appellant.  It is uncontroversial that a person  who  is
         in good health or fit and able is likely to have better  employment
         prospects particularly given the availability of low  or  unskilled
         jobs involving manual labour in Kabul.  We were not  provided  with
         any specific evidence of the likely  impact  of  poor  physical  or
         mental  health  on  the  safety  or  reasonableness   of   internal
         relocation to Kabul but consider it reasonable to infer  that  this
         could be relevant to the issue and the specific  situation  of  the
         individual would need to be carefully considered."

30. In this case there are, as indicated, two reports before me, a  medico-
    legal report by Dr Sinha and the country report by Dr Guistozzi.

31. No criticism was made by Mr Clarke of Dr Sinha's  specialist  expertise
    and experience in giving a professional opinion.   Mr  Clarke  accepted
    that the report showed that the appellant clearly has  vulnerabilities.
    I find the report to be a careful, detailed and measured analysis.  The
    DSM symptom based criteria are referred to  and  applied.   Whilst  the
    doctor did, indeed, see the appellant only once, it is  clear  that  he
    had other information before him including a psychiatric  report  dated
    14 May 2018 by a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist who  found  that  the
    appellant "showed symptoms of PTSD,  mental  and  behavioural  disorder
    secondary to the use of multiple psychoactive substances  and  specific
    needle phobia." [16]

32. There is also a letter dated 23 October 2018 from his Probation Service
    Officer, Ms Johnson (the appellant having been sentenced to  10  months
    custody in January 2018 for failing to provide a specimen.)  She refers
    to an assessment made on 17 October  2018  by  their  Senior  Assistant
    Psychologist who said of the appellant: "... it is clear that  [he]  is
    suffering  with  symptoms  of  PTSD  and  bereavement.   He   disclosed
    witnessing and experiencing severe trauma in Afghanistan ...   He  also
    reported that he has not dealt with the loss of  his  mother  in  April
    2017 ..."  It was evident to the Probation Service Officer that he  had
    recently self-harmed.  She considered that he needed  to  be  sectioned
    due to his mental health state. He refused to go to his GP or hospital.

33. At  paragraphs  [43]  and  [44]  of  his  report  under  "Mental  State
    Examination" Dr Sinha  finds  that  the  appellant  shows  symptoms  of
    "severe depressive disorder" and currently meets  the  criteria  for  a
    diagnosis of PTSD.  Under "Opinion" (from [54]) he goes on  to  confirm
    at [56] that the appellant has a  "cluster  of  symptoms  indicating  a
    severe depressive disorder" and that [57] a  "diagnosis  of  depressive
    disorder  is  clinically  compatible  with  [appellant's]  history   of
    kidnapping, mistreatment, sexual abuse, having to flee the  country  in
    fear and his mother dying."  He observes that the clinical  picture  is
    that his level of depression is "severe."

34. And at [58] that  he  has  "trauma  related  symptoms,  and  meets  the
    criteria for a diagnosis of PTSD."

35. Further, [60] noting that the appellant had reported suicidal thoughts,
    the doctor gives the opinion that he "could potentially develop further
    significant risk of suicide if he felt certain that he was going to  be
    returned to Afghanistan." At [62],  "[he]  has  the  following  factors
    which are  important  in  assessing  risk  of  suicide  and  which  are
    recognised as increasing a patient's  suicide  risk:  i.  "[he]  has  a
    clinical picture of depressive disorder and PTSD, ii [he] has expressed
    hopelessness about his future. Research on hopelessness has  identified
    hopeless thoughts as the biggest risk  factor  in  predicting  suicidal
    behaviour in individuals with depression."

36. Dr Sinha concludes in this section [64] that  the  appellant's  "stated
    history is a medically plausible  explanation  of  his  current  mental
    state."

37. In further analysis the  doctor  finds  scars  to  be  "consistent"  or
    "highly  consistent"  with  his  account   of   being   mistreated   in
    Afghanistan.

38. Dr Sinha also gives reasons [81-82] for concluding that  the  appellant
    was  not  feigning  or  exaggerating  his  psychological  symptoms   or
    distress.

39. In comments under "Risk on Return" [89] the doctor is concerned that if
    faced with  removal  or  is  removed  his  "subjective  fear  of  being
    persecuted  would  be  're-traumatising'  and  could   exacerbate   his
    depression   and   PTSD."   He   needs   [92]   "ongoing    assessment,
    pharmacological and psychological treatment for his depression."

40. Dr Sinha concludes  with  his  "Summary"  [101]  that  the  appellant's
    diagnosis is of "severe depressive  episode  and  PTSD"  and  that  his
    psychological  state  needs  monitoring  because  if  his   'stressors'
    increase his symptoms are likely to worsen  and  could  exacerbate  his
    depression and PTSD.

41. I see  no  reason  why  I  cannot  rely  on  Dr  Sinha's  analysis  and
    conclusions.  I  find,  accordingly,  that  the   appellant   has   the
    significant mental health problems  indicated.  His  concerns  are,  as
    indicated,  given  support  by  the  letter  of  the  Senior  Assistant
    Psychologist and the frank comments  made  a  few  days  later  by  the
    Probation Service Officer, Ms Johnson.

42. I would add for the sake of completeness that I  find  no  significance
    that the appellant did not  mention  health  problems  in  a  screening
    interview. That brief "screening interview for children" took place  in
    September 2012 when the appellant was aged 15. There was  one  question
    asking if he had any medical conditions or disabilities (3.1) to  which
    he said he did not apart from  when  he  was  travelling  when  he  got
    "nightmares and scared at night." As a child who had  only  arrived  in
    the UK a few weeks before, such a response to a single question on  the
    matter in a brief interview,  I find to be wholly understandable.

43. Dr Sinha did not comment  on  the  availability  and  accessibility  of
    healthcare in Afghanistan as it fell outside his field of expertise.

44.  The  report  of  Dr  Guistozzi  provides  several  insights  into  the
    appellant's particular circumstances in the  context  of  a  return  to
    Kabul. As Mr Clarke noted some of the expert's comments were not  based
    on the appellant's evidence, for example, he was not  detained  because
    of the family background, (he had not seen his father since  2001)  (cf
    [7] of report); he is not at risk of detention due to political profile
    as he does not claim to have a political profile; there is no  evidence
    of round ups since about 2013 (cf [9]). However, I note  the  following
    which I consider of relevance, and which apart from the number of heath
    care professionals in Kabul which he said was  out  of  date,  was  not
    greatly challenged by Mr Clarke:

45. At [24] The cost of living in Kabul is several times more than the cost
    in  the  provinces.   Unskilled  work  is  the  most  widely  available
    employment but due to the massive unemployment  rates  of  35-56%,  the
    appellant's chances of getting  work  will  depend  upon  his  physical
    strength.

46. A significant amount of the report concerns healthcare. At  [27]  "[the
    appellant] would not  receive  a  level  of  mental  health  care  even
    remotely comparable to what he could receive in the UK.  Outside a  few
    cities, the provision of mental health care in  Afghanistan  is  almost
    non-existent ...  In 2012 the Kabul health hospital still only  has  60
    places, although the number of psychiatrists operating there  has  gone
    up to 6 (from 2  in  2010).    Plans  to  expand  facilities  with  the
    building of new hospitals were never implemented...by 2017  the  number
    of partially trained doctors [in mental health care] had gone  up  from
    70 to 101"

47. At [28] "If we consider that according to the World Health Organisation
    as of 2010 about 60% of Afghans suffer from  various  forms  of  mental
    health problems, it is obvious that the chances  of  having  access  to
    care for the average Afghan patient with mental health  conditions  are
    slim indeed."

48. Dr Giustozzi  goes  on  to  explain  the  difficulties  with  obtaining
    medications and to point out that particular therapies  for  PTSD  will
    not be available outside of the only  mental  health  hospital  in  the
    country.

49. At [34] "Individuals will be considered by the  Afghan  health  service
    for mental health care assistance  if  they  present  themselves  to  a
    clinic or hospital of their own will or  are  brought  there  by  their
    relatives ... It will not be the case, therefore, of the health service
    proactively reaching out to [appellant] and he will  need  to  actively
    seek medical health care.  His needs will be assessed against those  of
    the large number of people who suffer from mental health conditions ...
    It is unlikely that he would then receive more than  cursory  attention
    by the medical staff at the country's only mental health hospital."

50. At [36] "One  additional  risk  would  be  for  [appellant]  to  suffer
    marginalisation; people would tend to avoid him if it was evident  that
    he suffers from mental health problems, a fact which would compound his
    difficulties in seeking accommodation and employment."

51. At [37] "Individuals with symptoms  of  mental  illness  are  therefore
    likely  to  suffer  discrimination  and  face  increased   difficulties
    obtaining accommodation,  employment  and  jobs  in  a  new  area.   An
    attempted suicide could also lead to internment  and/or  discrimination
    as suicide is looked upon very negatively in all Muslim countries."

52. I do not find the  two  brief  Home  Office  responses  to  information
    requests greatly to assist. They appear to confirm that while there are
    psychiatric facilities in Kabul, the more recent (18 June 2018) stating
    one centre offers treatment for PTSD, and there is inpatient  treatment
    by a psychiatrist at a public facility attached to the  university  and
    that various medicines are available, such does not take away from  the
    clear evidence of very limited facilities for the very many in need.

53. I see no reason why I  should  not  attach  significant  weight  to  Dr
    Guistozzi's evidence on these matters.

54. In line with  the  relevant  factors  identified  in  AS  I  find:  the
    appellant is now 21 years old but in September 2012 when he arrived  he
    was only 15 years old.  He is by definition, a  "vulnerable  adult"  in
    terms of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010.   In  terms
    of AS this is relevant because it means that he is less likely to  have
    been familiar with employment opportunities in Afghanistan and  he  had
    not been living independently there (per AS at [232]). He  has  limited
    education and does not appear to have vocational skills.

55. On the issue of a support network there I found  the  evidence  of  his
    brother to be not wholly satisfactory, there being a  vagueness  as  to
    how and through whom he  learned  of  their  mother's  death  in  2017.
    However, having noted both Dr Sinha's comments (at [57]) and  those  of
    the Senior Assistant Psychologist's referred to in Ms Johnson's letter,
    namely, that the effect of  bereavement  following  the  death  of  his
    mother was an  additional  factor  in  the  appellant's  mental  health
    problems, I am prepared to accept that the evidence on this matter  was
    reasonably likely to be true.  Also, that the whereabouts of the  uncle
    are unknown. The consequence is a lack of a support network  such  that
    he is likely to have increased difficulty in finding accommodation  and
    employment initially.

56.  Also, he is likely to be significantly hindered by his  mental  health
    problems, not only personally but because of the social stigma referred
    to by Dr Guistozzi.  That there is such is also evident  from  the  WHO
    article dated April 2017, lodged by Mr  Clarke,  headed  "Depression  a
    leading cause of ill health and disability: fighting stigma is  key  to
    recovery." It states that according to recent WHO estimates "more  than
    a million Afghans suffer  from  depressive  disorders  while  over  1.2
    million suffer from anxiety disorders. Actual figures are likely to  be
    much higher."

57. That article goes on to state that the "Ministry of Public  Health  has
    recently trained over 700 professional  psychological  counsellors  and
    101 specialised mental health doctors.  Of these, 300 are currently  in
    government-run  health  centres  while  the  others  are  working   for
    different health NGO's."  The Minister adds that they  "need  to  fight
    the stigma and discrimination  associated  with  depression  and  other
    mental health problems and ensure all people have access when they need
    it." Whilst the figures (as Mr Clarke pointed out) appear to update and
    improve somewhat those older figures given  by  Dr  Giustozzi,  it  is,
    nonetheless, apparent that the problems of provision for mental  health
    and the stigma surrounding it remain enormous.


58. Whatever the availability of mental health  care  in  Kabul,  Dr  Sinha
    states (at [91]) that the appellant's subjective fear of  returning  to
    Afghanistan means that even if there is treatment to access,  his  fear
    is likely to exacerbate his depression and PTSD symptoms to the  extent
    that  the  effectiveness  of  any  psychological  treatment  would   be
    interfered with.  Dr Guistozzi points to the difficulty of  the  person
    concerned  needing  to  be  the  one  approaching   the   health   care
    professionals for assistance. In that regard  I  note  the  appellant's
    unwillingness, despite his clear ill health  (including  that  observed
    most recently by Ms Johnson, the Probation Service  Officer  which  led
    her to the view that he should be sectioned) to  approach  the  medical
    authorities in the UK for help.

59. For the reasons stated, looking at the  totality  of  the  evidence  in
    respect of this individual, I consider that it would be unreasonable or
    unduly harsh for the appellant to relocate to Kabul.

60. The appeal, accordingly, succeeds.

Notice of Decision

61. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.
    The decision is set aside and remade as follows:

    The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds


An anonymity order is made. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs
otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. Failure to comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                             Date: 21 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway


