

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/06958/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Glasgow
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 1st February 2018                                                  On
9th April 2018



                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR R E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                              Appellant

                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr McGowan of Quinn, Martin and Langan.
For the respondent     Mr Miles Mathews, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Introduction

   1. The appellant is a national of Iran born in June 1974.


   2. He made a claim for protection in April 2015 which was refused. His
      appeal was heard by First tier Judge Bradshaw on 30th October 2015 and
      dismissed in a decision promulgated on 9th December 2015. His claim
      was that he was taking part in the Char Shanbeth Souri celebrations
      when he was encountered by the Basiji and detained. After being
      released he left Iran. The judge found that the celebrations were
      legal but where opposed by certain factions including the Teheran
      police. The judge concluded that his extended detention and abuse was
      implausible given the country information about how the authorities
      view the celebrations. The judge also commented on his failure to
      produce evidence to support his claimed detention which he said had
      been sent to his family. The judge's conclusion was that the account
      had been fabricated.

   3.  He then made further submissions in March 2017 which were refused in
      July 2017. These related to a claimed conversion to Christianity which
      was rejected as not being genuine. His appeal against that decision
      was heard by First tier Judge David Clapham SSC at Glasgow on 15
      September 2017. In a decision promulgated on 31 October 2017 it was
      dismissed.


   4. The appellant was given permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on
      the basis it was arguable First-tier Judge Clapham made a material
      misdirection of law. The original claim had been based upon imputed
      political opinion. The second claim was based upon a claimed
      conversion to Christianity after the appellant started attending
      church shortly after his previous appeal. First-tier Judge Clapham did
      not find the appellant credible and referred to Judge Bradshaw's
      determination as his starting point. However the two appeals were
      dealing with separate issues.

Consideration

   5. Judge Clapham had to deal with the difficult issue of deciding the
      genuineness of the appellant's conversion. His account was that he met
      another Iranian in Glasgow who was evangelising. He spoke to her and
      she introduced him into the Tron church, where he was welcomed.


   6.  In the reasons for refusal letter it was accepted that if the claims
      were true he would be entitled to protection. He had provided letters
      of support from church members and it was accepted he went to the
      church on a regular basis. It was also accepted that he was baptised
      on 23 October 2016. However, the genuineness of his conversion was an
      issue and it was pointed out that he had joined the church shortly
      after his appeal on the earlier claim.

   7. Church members give evidence supportive of the appellant's conversion.
      The judge pointed out that his attendance could be explained as a wish
      to support his claim and did not necessarily mean the beliefs were
      genuinely held. The judge accepted he attended church and did various
      activities for the church. This was confirmed by the witnesses.
      However, the judge did not find their evidence indicated how the
      genuineness of his beliefs had been tested.

   8. At para 55 the judge referred to the low standard of proof applicable.
      At paragraph 56 the judge stated:

         `Given the low standard of proof, if the evidence in front of me
         were simply the evidence of the Appellant and the evidence of the
         witnesses from the church, it might be that it could be argued that
         the low standard of proof would allow the Appellant to succeed.
         However, there is a difficulty for the Appellant in that he has
         already had an appeal which was heard by Judge Bradshaw. Judge
         Bradshaw said that he had considered all of the evidence and had
         had the opportunity of observing and listening to the Appellant.
         Judge Bradshaw did not accept that the Appellant's account of what
         happened to him at the time of the alleged incident including his
         subsequent arrest was true. Judge Bradshaw said that an account had
         been provided by the Appellant to improve his chances of success in
         his claim for asylum. Judge Bradshaw concluded that the appellant
         had fabricated his account of his difficulties with the authorities
         in Iran to improve his chances of success in his claim for asylum.'


      He went on to say at para 57:


         In view of the fact that Judge Bradshaw's determination has to be
         my starting point, I conclude that I am not able to accept the
         evidence of the Appellant about his Christian conversion. If the
         appellant was not credible before why should he be credible now?
         The submission of Mr McGowan of course was that Judge Bradshaw's
         determination related to an entirely different scenario but in my
         view, what is key, it is the negative credibility findings and I do
         not doubt that the church witnesses gave their evidence a good
         faith but overall I found the evidence of the church witnesses to
         be lacking in depth and substance. The church leaders were ready to
         accept the appellant's profession of genuineness but such
         profession of faith may well be self-serving... '


   9. Devaseelan -v- SSHD [2002] UKIAT 000702 at para 37 stated :


         The first Adjudicator's determination stands (unchallenged, or not
         successfully challenged) as an assessment of the claim the
         Appellant was then making, at the time of that determination. It is
         not binding on the second Adjudicator; but, on the other hand, the
         second Adjudicator is not hearing an appeal against it. As an
         assessment of the matters that were before the first Adjudicator it
         should simply be regarded as unquestioned. It may be built upon,
         and, as a result, the outcome of the hearing before the second
         Adjudicator may be quite different from what might have been
         expected from a reading of the first determination only.


      SK (guidance on application of Devaseelan) Serbia & Montenegro [2004]
      UKIAT 00282 points out that Devaseelan deals only with the situation
      where a human rights claim is made by someone whose asylum appeal has
      already failed and a credibility and factual matrix been found by the
      first Adjudicator:


Conclusions

  10. The decision of Judge Clapham has to be read in its entirety and the
      comments at paragraph 56 read in context. This is clearly not a pure
      Devaseelan situation as the two claims are quite separate. It does not
      follow that an appellant who has been found to lack credibility in one
      claim is not to be believed in a different claim. If para 56 is read
      carefully Judge Clapham is not saying that the appeal would have
      succeeded but for the earlier decision. Rather, he states `it might be
      that it could be argued...' The judge clearly appreciated, by
      referring to the comments of Mr McGowan, that this was not a pure
      Devaseelan point. What the judge was addressing was whether the
      conversion was genuine or was merely an external appearance to further
      the appellant's claim. In this context, the timing was significant. To
      an extent, albeit limited, a previous negative credibility finding was
      a factor but not determinative to the overall assessment. The judge
      has appreciated this.


  11. The judge carefully considered the evidence of the church members.
      Whilst they supported the appellant's external profession the judge
      did not find they went to the key issue of testing the genuineness of
      what he professed. The judge has set out in detail from paragraphs 48
      onwards his assessment of their evidence and the overall claim. I do
      not agree that the judge was imposing to high a standard in trying to
      assess this difficult issue.

  12. My conclusion therefore is that a material error of law has not been
      established.

Decision

   A material error of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Clapham has not been established. Consequently, that decision dismissing
   the appellant's appeal shall stand


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
 2nd April 2018

