
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-CJ-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06292/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019 and 11 March 2020  |On 21 April 2020                     |
|Extempore decision                   |                                     |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AR
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AR, is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born on 21 June 1986.  On
    21 June 2017, the Secretary of State refused his claim for  asylum  and
    humanitarian protection.  The appellant claimed to be at risk from  the
    government of Sri Lanka on account of his  suspected  LTTE  connections
    and sur place political activities in this country.  The appellant  has
    had two appeals against that refusal decision dismissed by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, most recently by Judge Wylie in a decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 3 July 2019.

 2. Following a hearing on 8 October 2019, I found  that  the  decision  of
    Judge Wylie involved the making of an error of law and set it aside  in
    its entirety with no findings preserved.  Given that  this  matter  had
    already been before the First-tier Tribunal on two separate  occasions,
    I considered that it was appropriate for the matter to  be  reheard  in
    this tribunal rather than to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    My error of law decision is in the Annex to this decision.

 3. At the outset, I should note the helpful and  realistic  indication  on
    the part of Mr Bramble that the Secretary of State did not  oppose  the
    appellant's appeal, in light of the materials he now  relies  upon.   I
    set out my reasons for accepting that concession, below.

Immigration History

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom by  plane  on  25  December
    2016 and claimed asylum the same day.

Procedural Matters

 5. At the hearing before me, the appellant attended  and  participated  in
    the proceedings with the assistance of an interpreter in Tamil.  At the
    outset, I established that the appellant and interpreter were  able  to
    understand one another and communicate through each other.

 6. A significant feature of the appellant's case before  me  involves  the
    experiences that he claims to have suffered at the  hands  of  the  Sri
    Lankan government on a number of occasions, prior to his departure  for
    this country.  His  case  is  that  those  experiences  have  left  him
    experiencing a range of significant and detrimental health  conditions,
    most notably post-traumatic stress disorder.   Pursuant  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010,  I  took  into  account  the
    considerable vulnerabilities of the appellant at the hearing before  me
    and in particular in relation to my assessment  of  his  evidence  when
    considering the concession made by the Secretary of State.

Appellant's Case and Reasons for Refusal Letter

 7. At [3] to [5] of my error of law decision I  outlined  the  appellant's
    case in the following terms:

         "3.  It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant fought for
             the LTTE during the Civil War in Sri Lanka, and  that  he  was
             detained and mistreated  from  September  2009  to  July  2010
             following cessation of hostilities.  The appellant's  case  is
             that he returned to work as a fisherman following his  release
             in 2010, but that he was  rearrested  in  September  2011  and
             detained for a week, and  that  he  was  again  detained  from
             September 2015 to December 2016.  This detention was  said  to
             have been catalysed by the appellant returning to an LTTE arms
             dump with a friend.  Although the appellant claims that he did
             not retrieve anything of significance during  the  visit,  his
             case  is  that  he  was  later  falsely  implicated   by   the
             authorities in the discovery of some gunpowder at  a  friend's
             house, leading to his subsequent detention.

         4.   He claimed he was able to escape from  detention  through  the
             payment of a bribe facilitated by  his  uncle,  and  that  the
             services of an agent were used  to  enable  the  appellant  to
             depart from the  country  on  a  flight  without  encountering
             difficulties at the airport.  His uncle arranged for an  agent
             to  provide  him  with  travel  documents,  leading   to   him
             travelling to the United Kingdom shortly after his escape from
             detention.  He claimed asylum immediately upon arrival.

         5.   The appellant's brother also fought for the  LTTE  during  the
             Civil War.  He has  been  recognised  as  a  refugee  in  this
             country following his own successful appeal before the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

 8. The respondent did not accept the appellant to have provided a credible
    account of his most recent claimed detention experiences but did accept
    that he had been detained and mistreated in 2009 and 2010 following the
    cessation of hostilities upon the end of the civil war.  The respondent
    also accepted in the refusal letter  that  the  appellant  had  been  a
    member of the LTTE.

Legal Framework

 9. The burden is on the appellant to establish  that  applying  the  lower
    standard of proof he meets the requirements of the Refugee or Person in
    Need of International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 ("the
    Qualification  Regulations").  The  appellant  must  establish  to  the
    reasonable likelihood standard that he falls within the  definition  of
    "refugee" contained  in  Article  1(A)  of  the  Geneva  Convention  as
    incorporated into domestic law by Regulation 2(1) of the  Qualification
    Regulations.

The Hearing

10. At the hearing before me the appellant adopted  his  witness  statement
    prepared  for  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  a  subsequent  statement
    prepared for the hearing before me.

Discussion

11. I find that the appellant has a well-founded fear of  being  persecuted
    on account of his suspected LTTE connections in Sri Lanka.  In reaching
    this finding I take into account the following matters.  First, I  take
    into account the analysis of the Secretary  of  State  in  the  refusal
    letter of  21  June  2017.   There  the  respondent  set  out  why  she
    considered the appellant to  have  given  a  credible,  consistent  and
    plausible account of his detention and mistreatment by the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities in late 2009 and early 2010.  In addition,  at  an  earlier
    hearing before the Frist-tier Tribunal,  the  respondent  accepted  the
    appellant to have been a member of  the  LTTE  during  that  time.   In
    isolation, those findings would be unlikely to merit a finding at  this
    stage, some ten years after the civil war  ended,  that  the  appellant
    continues to suffer a well-founded fear of being persecuted.

12. However, in  light  of  the  additional  evidence  that  the  appellant
    provided ahead of his appeals before the First-tier Tribunal and before
    this tribunal, I find that the totality  of  the  evidence  adduced  on
    behalf of the appellant demonstrates that he  does  now  have  a  well-
    founded  fear  of  being  persecuted.   Mr  Bramble's  concession   was
    realistic and entirely appropriate.

13. The scarring that  the  appellant  displays  upon  his  body  has  been
    outlined in the report of  Dr  Andreas  Izquierdo-Martin.   Mr  Bramble
    highlighted several extracts of this report which led to his concession
    before me.  At [5.5.1] the appellant  is  described  by  Dr  Martin  as
    bearing scars consistent with being burnt with a hot  cigarette  during
    his detention.  Those scars and the pattern of them were, according  to
    Dr Martin, "highly  consistent"  of  the  unwilling  and  intentionally
    caused injuries with a hot round object.  Similarly, scar number 4,  at
    [5.5.2],  is  said  to  have  been  caused  after  the  appellant   was
    repetitively  kicked,  hit  with  gun  butts  and  beaten  with   blunt
    implements such as sticks during his detention.   Dr  Martin  wrote  at
    [5.6] of his report that dating the scars is not  a  "precise  science"
    and it  is  not  usually  possible  to  give  anything  other  than  an
    approximate range of time.  He concluded that in the  appellant's  case
    the scars were without any doubt older than six months.

14. The appellant's scarring lends credibility to his overall account.  The
    medical evidence does not permit a distinction to be drawn between  the
    two different phases of the appellant's torture  narrative.   In  other
    words, it is not clear whether the  scarring  is  attributable  to  his
    first (accepted, by the Secretary of State) account of torture, or  his
    latest (initially rejected) second account.

15. The appellant also relied on a report of  Dr  Dhumad.   At  [16.2],  Dr
    Dhumad concluded that the appellant suffers from post-traumatic  stress
    disorder and that the cause of those symptoms was  most  likely  to  be
    attributed to the appellant's torture experiences in Sri Lanka.

16. One of the  reasons  that  the  previous  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were that the appellant had not given a  credible  account  of
    his claimed torture and being the subject of the authorities' continued
    interest in Sri Lanka was because he had managed to leave  the  country
    unhindered through the airport.

17. Mr  Bramble  realistically  accepts  that  the  background  information
    considered in GJ and Others (Post-civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
    [2013] UKUT  00319  (IAC)  was  that  the  prevalence  of  bribery  and
    corruption in Sri Lanka  enables  barriers  which  would  otherwise  be
    placed in the way of an individual's departure from the country  to  be
    lifted.  For example, see the summary of  Professor  Good's  report  at
    [113] which was in these terms:

         "Corruption and bribery were widespread; release through payment of
         a bribe was extremely common."

18. At [262], the Upper Tribunal accepted Professor  Good's  evidence.   In
    addition, the Tribunal analysed the report of Dr Smith at  [128]  which
    described bribery and corruption as "prevalent".   The  Upper  Tribunal
    also considered the evidence of Anton Punethanayagam, a  respected  Sri
    Lankan attorney  (see  [143]).   His  evidence  was  that  bribery  can
    facilitate the departure of even wanted persons  through  the  airport,
    see the following extract from [28] of his evidence which was quoted at
    [146] of GJ:

         "It is possible to leave the country using bribery with the help of
         an agent.  The security officers and immigration  officers  at  the
         international airport are no exception to  the  widespread  bribery
         and corruption in Sri Lanka.  It is always possible for a person to
         use influence or bribery to get through the airport  without  being
         detained  as  an  LTTE  suspect.   I   have   been   contacted   by
         approximately 30 clients who managed to flee the  country  via  the
         international  airport  whilst  in  the  adverse  interest  of  the
         authorities and I provided evidence in their asylum  cases  in  the
         UK,  Canada,  France,  Norway  and  Australia.   Therefore  leaving
         through the airport either  with  his/her  own  passport  or  false
         identity does not necessarily indicate a lack of  interest  on  the
         part of the authorities."

19. For my own part I note that the appellant  claimed  asylum  immediately
    upon his arrival in this country.  Not only is such conduct the absence
    of an adverse credibility factor pursuant to Section 8  of  the  Asylum
    and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.)  Act  2004,  but  in  my
    view, it is a positive credibility factor of the sort  which  tends  to
    reflect the behaviour  of  a  person  genuinely  seeking  international
    protection.

20. Since the appellant's arrival in this country, he  has  engaged  in  an
    extensive range of sur place activities.  He has  joined  a  number  of
    anti-Sri Lankan unitary state protests organised by  the  Transnational
    Government of Tamil Eelam.  At pages 160 and 161 of his bundle, he  has
    provided  a  letter  of  support  from  Mr  Sockalingam  Yogalingam,  a
    prominent leader in the Tamil diaspora, dated 23 May 2019.  That letter
    outlines the different protests which the  appellant  has  attended  in
    order to demonstrate  against  the  post-conflict  unitary  Sri  Lankan
    state.  At page 164 of the bundle, there is a copy of  the  appellant's
    TGTE identity card.  There are a number of photographs of the appellant
    demonstrating at events taking place in this country outside  prominent
    locations such as No 10 Downing Street.

21. Drawing this analysis together, the question for  my  consideration  is
    whether the appellant's account of the subsequent  detention  incidents
    is something which I can ascribe significance to, when assessed to  the
    lower standard.  I see no reason not to.  Although the  refusal  letter
    raised some purported inconsistencies in the answers the appellant  had
    given in his extensive and lengthy asylum interview, in  my  view  when
    this evidence is considered in the round to the lower standard,  taking
    into account his vulnerabilities and mental  health  conditions,  those
    are not inconsistencies which have the effect of totally depriving this
    appellant's account of any credibility whatsoever.   By  contrast  they
    are the sort of inconsistencies  which  one  would  readily  expect  to
    feature in any account given by  someone  fleeing  persecution  at  the
    hands of the state of their  nationality.   It  is  common  for  people
    experiencing vulnerability of the sort experienced by this appellant to
    have difficulty in recalling precise details or  precise  dates  giving
    consistent accounts of minor details on every occasion.   I  find  that
    the evidence of the sur place activity in this  country  is  such  that
    when combined with the continued interest that the authorities  in  Sri
    Lanka plainly have in the appellant is such that he would be placed  at
    a real risk of being persecuted on account of his  suspected  political
    opinion.  In the headnote to GJ one of  the  indicative  risk  criteria
    factors was as follows:

         "Individuals who are, or are perceived  to  be,  a  threat  to  the
         integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,  or  are
         perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-conflict
         Tamil  separatism  within  the  diaspora  and/or   a   renewal   of
         hostilities within Sri Lanka."

    In light of the interest on the part of the Sri Lankan  authorities  in
    this appellant as recently as 2015 and 2016, combined with the evidence
    of his sur place activities about which he could not be expected to lie
    upon questioning on his return, I find that  he  does  suffer  a  well-
    founded fear of being persecuted on  a  Convention  ground  namely  his
    political opinion.   For  these  reasons  I  find  that  the  appellant
    satisfies the definition "refugee" in the Qualification Regulations and
    this appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

22. In light of these findings it is not necessary for me to  consider  the
    appellant's humanitarian protection claim in the alternative nor is  it
    necessary for me to reach a view on his separate Article 3 ECHR health-
    based claim.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

Anonymity direction maintained.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Stephen H Smith Date 6 April 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make  a  fee  award
of any fee which has been paid or may be payable (adjusted where full  award
not justified) for the following reason.  The  appellant  has  succeeded  in
his appeal, the effect of which has been to recognise his underlying  status
as a refugee.


Signed Stephen H Smith Date 6 April 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06292/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 October 2019                    |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     AR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B. Jones, Counsel, instructed by Jein Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AR, is a citizen of Sri Lanka, born 21  June  1986.   He
    appeals with the permission of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Hollingworth
    against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wylie promulgated on  3
    July 2019, dismissing his appeal against a decision of  the  respondent
    dated 21 June 2017 to refuse his  asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    claim. The appellant claims that he had been detained in Sri Lanka on a
    number of occasions, most recently from 2015 to 2016, and that he  will
    be at risk upon return on account of his role in the LTTE.

 2. The appellant originally appealed against the respondent's decision  to
    Judge Kelly of the First-tier Tribunal. In a decision promulgated on  5
    January 2018, Judge  Kelly  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal.  In  a
    decision promulgated on 11 May 2018, Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Peart
    set Judge Kelly's decision aside, and remitted the case to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. It was in those circumstances that the matter was listed
    before Judge Wylie, and it is that decision  which  the  appellant  now
    challenges before me.

Factual background

 3. It is accepted by the respondent that the appellant fought for the LTTE
    during the Civil War in  Sri  Lanka,  and  that  he  was  detained  and
    mistreated from September 2009 to July 2010 following the cessation  of
    hostilities. The appellant's case is that he  returned  to  work  as  a
    fisherman following his release in 2010, but that he was rearrested  in
    September 2011 and detained for a week, and that he was again  detained
    from September 2015 to December 2016.  This detention was said to  have
    been catalysed by the appellant returning to an LTTE arms dump  with  a
    friend. Although the appellant claims that he did not retrieve anything
    of significance during the visit, his case is that he was later falsely
    implicated by the authorities in the discovery of some gunpowder  at  a
    friend's house, leading to his subsequent detention.

 4. He claimed he was able to escape from detention through the payment  of
    a bribe facilitated by his uncle, and that the  services  of  an  agent
    were used to enable the appellant to  depart  from  the  country  on  a
    flight without encountering difficulties at  the  airport.   His  uncle
    arranged for an agent to provide him with travel documents, leading  to
    him travelling to the United Kingdom  shortly  after  his  escape  from
    detention. He claimed asylum immediately upon arrival.

 5. The appellant's brother also fought for the LTTE during the Civil  War.
    He has been recognised as a refugee in this country following  his  own
    successful appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Judge Wylie did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  having  been
    detained in 2015 to 2016 to be  credible.  The  judge  found  that  the
    medical evidence provided by the appellant did not support  his  claim,
    and that any scarring on  his  body  was  attributable  to  either  his
    accepted periods of detention from  2009  to  2010,  or  from  injuries
    sustained in battle during the war. Similarly, the judge found that the
    post-traumatic stress disorder symptoms displayed by the appellant were
    attributable to his first,  accepted,  detention  experience,  and  his
    experiences of active combat.  His father and sister were  two  of  the
    many thousands who lost their lives during the war.

 7. The judge did not accept that the appellant is  now  a  member  of  the
    Transnational Government  of  Tamil  Eelam  ("the  TGTE").   The  judge
    rejected his case that he will be identified as a significant member of
    the post-conflict, pro-separatist Tamil diaspora upon his  return.   As
    such, found the judge,  the  recent  proscription  of  the  TGTE  as  a
    terrorist organisation in Sri  Lanka  will  not  adversely  impact  the
    appellant.



Grounds of appeal

 8. There are six grounds of appeal:

      a. Ground 1: The  judge  erred  when  attempting  to  distinguish  the
         appellant's brother's successful asylum appeal from the appellant's
         case;

      b. Ground 2: The judge failed to take  account  of  witness  evidence,
         including the evidence Mr S and Mr A, two Sri Lankan witnesses  who
         have each been recognised as refugees in  this  country,  following
         their own successful appeals before the First-tier  Tribunal.   The
         judge also failed to make any or  adequate  findings  concerning  a
         letter from the appellant's mother in support of his claim;

      c. Ground 3:  The judge erred in her assessment of the consistency and
         plausibility of the  appellant's  2015  arrest,  in  particular  by
         failing to have regard to the accepted background evidence recorded
         in GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
         UKUT 00319  (IAC)  that  escapes  from  detention,  and  subsequent
         departure through airports as a wanted person,  are  possible  upon
         the payment of bribes;

      d. Ground 4:  The  judge  erred  in  her  assessment  of  the  medical
         evidence, in that she was critical  of  the  appellant  for  having
         provided detailed accounts of his claimed torture experiences to Dr
         Martin (Consultant in Emergency Medicine) and Dr Dhumad (Consultant
         Psychiatrist), the appellant's scarring and  psychological  experts
         respectively, in circumstances when he had  not  given  a  detailed
         account to his own solicitors  for  the  purposes  of  his  witness
         statements, or to the respondent;

      e.  Ground  5:   The  judge  failed  to  make  an  "explicit"  finding
         concerning the appellant's claimed TGTE membership, in light of the
         membership card he provided, and the  letter  of  support  from  Mr
         Sockalingam Yogalingam, the Deputy Minister of Sports and Community
         Health, TGTE;

      f. Ground 6:  The judge erred in her  assessment  of  the  appellant's
         suicide risk.

Discussion

 9. What took place subsequent to the appellant's  detention  in  2009  and
    2010 holds the key to identifying whether the appellant  will  continue
    to be at risk upon his return. Central to that assessment is whether he
    was detained as claimed from  2015  to  2016.   As  such,  the  judge's
    approach to this issue lies at the heart of this appeal.

10. The grounds of appeal are challenges to the judge's findings  of  fact.
    An appeal to this Tribunal lies only on a point of law.  As such, it is
    necessary for the grounds of appeal to  demonstrate  that  the  judge's
    findings, or reasons for her findings,  concerning  the  2015  to  2016
    detention were irrational,  wholly  unsupported  by  the  evidence,  or
    infected by some other error of  law.   The  criteria  for  challenging
    findings of fact as an error of law are well established: see R  (Iran)
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA  Civ  982  at,
    for example, [9] and [90].

11. I consider the judge's analysis of the 2015 detention incident to  have
    involved an error of law.

12. At [103], the judge said, "the appellant appears  to  have  given  very
    little thought to how his family had been able to arrange  his  release
    and subsequent departure from the country."  At [103], the  judge  made
    the following findings:

         "Within less than three weeks after his escape  from  detention  he
         claims to have been able to travel through the airport  accompanied
         by an agent arranged by his uncle. I do not find it credible  that,
         as a person who had escaped from detention,  he  was  able  to  get
         through the airport without being identified by the authorities. He
         stated that his uncle was a bar owner in Vavuniya, and there is  no
         suggestion that he was a person with influence such as  being  able
         to arrange this in such a short time."

    In reaching the above findings, the judge did not have  regard  to  the
    background evidence as set out in GJ.  In GJ, the Upper Tribunal  heard
    evidence concerning the prevalence of bribery and corruption,  and  the
    role it can play in (i) facilitating escapes from detention;  and  (ii)
    enabling free passage, even for  wanted  persons,  through  Sri  Lankan
    airports.  See  the  summary  of  Professor  Good's  report  at  [113]:
    "Corruption and bribery were widespread; release through payment  of  a
    bribe was extremely common".  At [262],  the  Tribunal  accepted  Prof.
    Good's evidence.  Similarly, in the summary of  Dr  Smith's  report  at
    [128], bribery and corruption are described as "prevalent".

13. The evidence of Anton Punethanayagam, a respected Sri  Lankan  attorney
    (see GJ at [143]), was that bribery can  facilitate  the  departure  of
    even wanted persons through airports.  See the following  extract  from
    [28] of his evidence, quoted at [146] of GJ:

         "28. It is possible to leave the country  using  bribery  with  the
         help of an agent. The security officers and immigration officers at
         the international  airport  are  no  exception  to  the  widespread
         bribery and corruption in Sri Lanka. It is always  possible  for  a
         person to use influence or  bribery  to  get  through  the  airport
         without being detained as an LTTE suspect. I have been contacted by
         approximately 30 clients who managed to flee the  country  via  the
         international  airport  whilst  in  the  adverse  interest  of  the
         authorities and I provided evidence in their asylum  cases  in  the
         UK, Canada, France, Norway and Australia. Therefore leaving through
         the airport either with his/her own passport or false identity does
         not necessarily indicate a lack of interest  on  the  part  of  the
         authorities."

14. At [170] of GJ, the Tribunal recorded that counsel for the Secretary of
    State  had  conceded  that,  "given  the  prevalence  of  bribery   and
    corruption in Sri Lanka, having left Sri Lanka without  difficulty  was
    not probative of a lack of adverse interest in an individual."

15. The judge plainly had had regard to GJ in  her  findings  but  did  not
    refer to the above material evidence when dismissing the possibility of
    the appellant's unhindered  departure  from  Sri  Lanka.  Instead,  she
    expected the appellant himself to have detailed knowledge of the  steps
    his family took while he was in detention. The  test  is  not,  as  the
    judge suggested at [102], whether an appellant had given  "very  little
    thought" to how his family would have facilitated  his  detention.  The
    issue is whether it is reasonably likely that they  did  so  facilitate
    his detention. That was  an  issue  which  fell  to  be  determined  by
    reference to background evidence, which, as set out above, demonstrates
    that bribery and corruption are tried and tested  methods  of  securing
    release from detention in Sri Lanka.

16. It is  trite  asylum  law  that  judges  should  not  bring  their  own
    subjective expectations of  the  likely  conduct  of  an  appellant  or
    persons in another country to their objective analysis of the  evidence
    in a case.  The basis of the judge's knowledge of what would have  been
    likely to take place upon the appellant's escape from detention and the
    likely  processes  at  the  airport  are  not  clear.  Certainly,   the
    background evidence suggests that precisely that sort of  activity  did
    place. If the judge considered that there were grounds to  depart  from
    the extensive background evidence outlined in GJ, then she should  have
    said so, and given reasons.  She did not.

17. As to the extent to which the appellant knew about the steps his family
    had taken while he was in detention, it is  not  clear  why  the  judge
    expected the appellant know about something which took place while,  on
    his case, he was being detained and tortured.  The  judge  had  already
    reminded herself at [50] and [53] that those  fleeing  persecution  may
    have difficulty remembering the events from which they seek refuge, and
    maybe affected by mental health conditions.  However,  having  reminded
    herself of the inherent difficulties  those  in  the  position  of  the
    appellant were  likely  to  experience,  she  has  not  calibrated  her
    operative reasoning to take account of those factors. Instead, she held
    against the appellant his inability to speak about something  he  could
    not reasonably be expected to know, while simultaneously  finding  that
    is account was not credible,  despite  the  balance  of  the  objective
    evidence being that precisely such events took place.  Perhaps what the
    judge meant was that the appellant  should  have  found  out  from  his
    family what steps they took on his behalf; if that was so,  she  should
    have said so, given reasons, and explained why the appellant's lack  of
    knowledge was instrumental in her  dismissal  of  this  aspect  of  his
    claim.

18. The judge was also dismissive of what she described as the "tick  list"
    of torture the appellant had described to  both  medical  experts.  She
    observed that the "tick list" was "often described in cases  of  people
    who have suffered at the hands of the  Sri  Lankan  authorities."   See
    [101]. It is not clear why the judge used this terminology.  The  judge
    appears to have identified the fact that  the  appellant's  claim  bore
    parallels with other claims of torture from  the  region.   That  is  a
    factor  which  supports  the  plausibility  and  credibility   of   the
    appellant's account.  Yet the judge held it as a  factor  damaging  his
    credibility.  The use of the term "tick list" was an inappropriate  way
    to describe the allegations made by a vulnerable appellant who - as was
    common ground - had been tortured  in  the  past  and  had  provided  a
    scarring report which demonstrated extensive injuries.  The terminology
    gave the  impression  that  the  judge  dismissed  his  allegations  as
    fabricated, or trivial, although she did not say so in terms  (and  nor
    could she realistically have done so, given the  scarring  report,  and
    the previously accepted accounts of torture and detention).

19. I consider the above mistakes of fact, and  the  inappropriate  casting
    off of the  appellant's  injuries  as  a  mere  "tick  list",  to  have
    performed a material and tainting role in the judge's overall  analysis
    of the appellant's credibility. The circumstances of his departure from
    Sri Lanka, and his claimed 2015  to  2016  detention  experience,  were
    central to his case.   Although the analysis in  the  judge's  decision
    forms only a small part of her overall reasoning, it was pivotal to her
    rejection of the appellant's case as a whole.

20. I also consider the judge's  findings  concerning  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's claimed TGTE membership to  be  tainted  by  her  erroneous
    approach to the 2015 detention narrative.  Superficially,  the  judge's
    analysis of the letter from Mr Yogalingam and the TGTE membership  card
    did not feature an error of law.  However,  the  risk  profile  of  the
    bearer of such a card could have been markedly different had the  judge
    analysed the 2015 detention incident through the lens of the background
    evidence set out in GJ, and without dismissing the appellant's  torture
    experience as a "tick list" exercise.  As the Court of Appeal noted  in
    UB (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA
    Civ 85 at [24]:

         "...consideration of the risk to the Appellant turns not merely  on
         him showing that he was actually a member of the TGTE,  but  relies
         on his membership being detected on arrival in Sri Lanka. There  is
         no suggestion that this Appellant is on any list of individuals  of
         interest to the authorities in Sri Lanka..."

    Detention for a lengthy period of time as recently as 2016, followed by
    release and flight facilitated by bribery, may well  have  led  to  the
    appellant's TGTE profile being detected  in  Sri  Lanka.   As  such,  I
    consider the judge's findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's  risk
    profile from his claimed TGTE activity to be tainted by her  assessment
    of his flight from Sri Lanka, as set out above.

21. For  the  above  reasons,  I  consider  that  the  overall  credibility
    assessment of the judge was tainted and involved the making of an error
    of law such that it needs to be set aside.  If the appellant  had  been
    (re)detained and tortured in 2015 to 2016,  immediately  prior  to  his
    departure for the United Kingdom,  that  would  have  been  a  material
    factor in the analysis of the appellant's claim as a  person  at  post-
    conflict risk of persecution in Sri Lanka.

22. The remaining criticisms of the judge's reasoning have less merit  and,
    in isolation, would be unlikely to demonstrate that the judge's overall
    findings of fact were irrational.  However, in  light  of  my  findings
    above it is not necessary for me to determine those issues separately.

23. The decision of Judge Wylie involved the making of an error of law  and
    is set aside.

24. Given the matter  has  already  been  heard  twice  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, I consider that the most appropriate course of action is  for
    the matter to be reheard de novo in the Upper Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is allowed.

The decision of Judge Wylie involved the making of an error of  law  and  is
set aside, with no findings of fact preserved.

The appeal is to be reheard in the Upper Tribunal, with a time  estimate  of
3 hours.

The appellant is directed to re-serve a  full  bundle  and  updated  medical
report within 14 days of the resumed hearing.



Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Stephen H Smith   Date 14 October 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


