
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06544/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2020                  |On 12 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     TS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Walker, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Pears (the judge) who, in a  decision  promulgated  on  12
         November  2019,  dismissed  the  appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against  the   respondent's
         decision of 22 June 2019 refusing his protection and  human  rights
         claim and his claim for humanitarian protection.




Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, of Tamil ethnicity,  born
         in 1976. He has a wife and 4 daughters in the country.

      3. I summarise the appellant's protection claim. He had been a  member
         of the LTTE from approximately 1996 and passed  on  information  on
         the movements of the Sri Lankan army to the espionage  wing  whilst
         running a vegetable shop. In December 2013 he was  visited  by  the
         CID who claimed they had information about his involvement with the
         LTTE. The CID officers indicated that they would  be  returning  to
         see him.

      4. The appellant fled Sri Lanka and made his way to Austria  (although
         he planned to go to Canada) where he claimed asylum in  2014.  This
         claim was refused (although in his oral evidence the appellant  was
         unclear of the outcome). The appellant was detained in an open camp
         in Austria and was freed by  an  agent  who  provided  him  with  a
         Malaysian passport and sent him  to  Malaysia.  The  appellant  was
         detained in Malaysia and removed to Sri Lanka. He was  detained  by
         the Sri Lankan authorities and interrogated for 24 hours  and  then
         released. The  appellant  was  able  to  continue  with  his  life,
         including his political involvement, until August 2018 when he  was
         abducted by men from the CID  in  a  white  van  and  detained  and
         interrogated  about  his   involvement   with   the   LTTE.   After
         approximately 40 days  detention  the  appellant  was  released  on
         payment of a bribe. The appellant left Sri Lanka  using  a  fishing
         boat in 2018 and, after  residing  in  India  and  then  travelling
         through other countries, he claimed asylum in the UK on 1  February
         2019.

      5. In the UK the appellant  joined  the  Transnational  Government  of
         Tamil Eelam (TGTE) and attended its annual sports day and  protests
         outside the Sri Lankan Embassy and other events.  He  claimed  that
         the Sri Lankan authorities visited his house, arrested his wife and
         showed her photographs of him at events  and  rallies  in  the  UK.
         Reporting conditions had been imposed on her although the appellant
         had not had contact with his wife for some 2 months  prior  to  the
         date of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

      6. The respondent did not accept that the appellant  gave  a  credible
         account of events that caused him to  leave  Sri  Lanka.  This  was
         based  on   inconsistencies   and   implausibilities   within   the
         appellant's account.

      7. The appellant exercised his right  of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  considered  a
         bundle of documents that included an  18-page  statement  from  the
         appellant, photographs of the appellant in Sri  Lanka,  photographs
         showing the appellant at a protest in  London  contained  in  Tamil
         language newspapers, a psychiatric report by  Dr  Saleh  Dhumad,  a
         letter from the TGTE dated 9 October 2019  and  a  TGTE  membership
         card issued in June 2019 and expiring in June 2024.  The  appellant
         also produced a TGTE 'Ministry of Sports' card indicating he was  a
         catering volunteer on 4 August 2019.

      9. The judge dealt in detail with the evidence given by the  appellant
         in his screening interview and his asylum interview, his statement,
         and his oral evidence. The judge made comments and factual findings
         as he went. The  judge  also  considered  and  commented  upon  the
         psychiatric report and set out  some  of  the  background  evidence
         before  him.  The  judge  recorded  the  submissions  made  by  the
         representatives, referring specifically to the submission  made  by
         the appellant's representative inviting the First-tier Tribunal  to
         give proper consideration to  the  issue  of  external  consistency
         (i.e. the degree to which the appellant's claim was consistent with
         the background evidence).

     10. In the section of his decision headed 'Observations,  Findings  and
         Conclusions' the judge indicated that the appeal proceeded  on  the
         basis that the appellant was a vulnerable individual. The judge was
         unable to find that the inconsistencies in the appellant's  account
         could be explained by his vulnerability. The  judge  accepted  that
         the appellant had connections with Tamils in  the  UK  through  the
         TGTE. The judge pointed out the absence of any statement  from  the
         appellant's brother (who was recognised as a refugee in the UK)  or
         uncle and found that the confusion in the appellant's evidence  was
         not the result of memory problems but of him lying  [73].  At  [74]
         the judge identified 6 elements  that  undermined  the  appellant's
         credibility including  his  evolving  role  within  the  LTTE,  the
         implausibility  of  the  appellant  not  being  arrested  when  1st
         approached by the CID in 2013, the appellant's ability to leave Sri
         Lanka using his own passport, and inconsistencies relating  to  the
         length and time of his detention in 2018.  The  judge  additionally
         commented on the absence of evidence confirming his claimed scars.

     11. The judge rejected the appellant's claim to have been detained  and
         to have needed to exclude Sri Lanka and concluded that he would not
         be perceived as a risk to the unitary state in Sri Lanka  based  on
         his sur place activities.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     12. The written grounds of appeal, as amplified by  Ms  Walker  at  the
         hearing, are threefold. The 1st  ground  contends  that  the  judge
         failed to make relevant findings and failed to  take  into  account
         relevant matters when assessing the appellant's credibility. Ground
         1(a) contends that the judge failed to make a finding as to whether
         the appellant was suffering from depression and PTSD and  that,  if
         there was such a finding,  the  judge  failed  to  take  this  into
         account and failed to apply the Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note
         when making his credibility findings. Ground 1(b) contends that the
         judge failed to consider the issue  of  external  consistency  when
         assessing the appellant's overall credibility and failed to  engage
         with the 7 examples given of the appellant's  consistency  with  GJ
         (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

     13. The 2nd ground contends that the judge failed to properly  consider
         the appellant's sur place claim. The judge failed to  give  anxious
         scrutiny to the material and  country  information  and  failed  to
         reach reasoned findings on whether the appellant's activities  were
         already likely to  be  known  to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  or
         whether, when asked about his  activities  if  returned  as  forced
         returnee, he would come to the adverse attention of the authorities
         at that time. The judge's errors were  particularly  serious  given
         that the appellant had been pictured in Sri Lankan newspapers which
         highlighted the risk of identification and therefore the  risk  and
         return.

     14. The 3rd ground contends that the judge  failed  to  determine  risk
         arising as a result of the appellant's illegal exit.

Discussion

     15. The judge's decision is long and detailed (it runs  to  29  pages),
         although the judge's findings and conclusions covers only 2  pages.
         When reciting the evidence before  him  the  judge  makes  numerous
         asides and comments,  sometimes  criticising  the  quality  of  the
         evidence, sometimes pointing out deficiencies from which  he  draws
         adverse inferences, and sometimes making factual findings  relating
         to elements of the appellant's claim. Adopting this structure  does
         not constitute a legal error, but it does make  the  decision  both
         difficult to follow and difficult to identify the material findings
         and the reasoning supporting those findings.

     16. I do not find any merit in the challenge to the judge's approach to
         the medical evidence (ground 1(a)). It is irresistibly implicit  in
         the judge's findings  that  he  accepted  that  the  appellant  was
         suffering from a moderate depressive episode and from PTSD. This is
         clear from the reference to the acceptance by the  respondent  that
         the appellant was a vulnerable witness [25],  and  from  [26].  The
         judge considered the psychiatric report in detail  ([17]  to  [26])
         and  was   aware   that   the   appellant   had   been   prescribed
         antidepressants and had been referred to 'talking therapies'  [20].
         The judge was entitled to conclude, in light of the  psychiatrist's
         phraseology (that the appellant's presentation was "compatible with
         the experience of the intense fear of  expected  threat  to  life")
         that other events such as the appellant's  claimed  departure  from
         Sri Lanka by boat and his hazardous journey across Europe, and  the
         Sri  Lankan  civil  war  itself,  could  have  accounted  for   the
         diagnosis. The judge was additionally entitled  to  find  that  the
         detail provided by the appellant in his 18-page  witness  statement
         undermined his claim to be losing his memory [44].  The  judge  was
         aware  of   the   psychiatric   evidence   that   the   appellant's
         concentration may be poor,  particularly  under  cross  examination
         [23], but he was rationally entitled to  find  that  the  appellant
         nevertheless had the ability to convey detail (e.g.  [33])  and  to
         take  this  into  consideration  when  assessing  the   appellant's
         veracity.

     17. The decision, read holistically, indicates that the judge did apply
         the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010  throughout  his
         decision. At [45], [50] and [69] the judge demonstrably applied the
         requirements of the Guidance Note when the appellant was giving his
         oral evidence. At [62] the  judge  expressly  stated  that  he  had
         considered the credibility issues in light of the medical  evidence
         and as part of a  holistic  assessment.  Then  at  [70]  the  judge
         specifically  said  he  had  borne  in  mind  the  views   of   the
         psychiatrist's report and whether any of the inconsistencies in the
         appellant's account could be explained by  the  appellant  being  a
         vulnerable person. I am not persuaded that the judge erred  in  law
         in his approach to the medical evidence or by failing to apply  the
         Joint Presidential Guidance Note.

     18. I now consider ground 1(b).  At  [64]  the  judge  referred  to  "7
         examples" contained in his legal representative  skeleton  argument
         of a high level of consistency between the appellant's account  and
         what was said in GJ (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013]
         UKUT 00319 (IAC). I accept that some of  the  examples  demonstrate
         consistency  between  the  appellant's  account  and  the  evidence
         considered in GJ. In particular,  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
         undertaken 3 months of training with the LTTE  is  consistent  with
         the factual accounts in GJ. The  appellant's  claim  to  have  been
         abducted by people in a white  van  is  also  consistent  with  the
         broader country information. The appellant's  claim  to  have  been
         released on payment of a bribe is consistent with GJ (at [170]  and
         [275]), as is his claim to  have  been  able  to  leave  Sri  Lanka
         through the airport in  2013  with  the  assistance  of  an  agent,
         notwithstanding that he may have been a  person  of  interest.  The
         appellant's account of his wife having been  questioned  and  shown
         photographs of his attendance at demonstrations is consistent  with
         the CIG of June 2017. I note  that  the  judge  did  not  make  any
         factual finding in  respect  of  this  particular  element  of  the
         appellant's claim. At no stage does the judge  identify  or  engage
         with the examples of external consistency.

     19. In KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT
         00491 (IAC) the Tribunal emphasised the benefits of judges adopting
         a structured approach to credibility, which includes an  assessment
         of external consistency. The Tribunal was at  pains  to  point  out
         however that the suggested framework  should  not  be  regarded  as
         necessary conditions and were not an exhaustive list. I  note  that
         the  judge  made  a  significant  number  of  adverse   credibility
         findings. The judge found there were  inconsistencies  between  the
         account given by the appellant in his screening interview, where he
         only mentioned being detained for a  few  days  in  2016,  and  his
         account in his substantive asylum interview  where  he  claimed  to
         have been detained for 40 days in 2018 ([27],  [28]  &  [49]),  and
         omissions  relating  to  the  appellant's  claimed  involvement  in
         intelligence  work  ([29],  [36])  and  whether  he  mentioned  his
         detention on return to Sri  Lanka  in  2014  during  his  screening
         interview  [33].  The  judge  found  the  appellant  was   evasive,
         particularly in relation to his passport [30],  and  that  he  gave
         different reasons for not claiming asylum in France. The judge drew
         other adverse inferences based on discrepancies in the  appellant's
         account and these can be located in  between  [27]  and  [59].  The
         judge was unarguably entitled to draw the adverse inferences he did
         and for the reasons he gave. I must nevertheless determine  whether
         the failure by the judge  to  engage  with  those  aspects  of  the
         appellant's evidence that were  externally  consistent  could  have
         made any material difference to his factual  conclusions.  Although
         finely balanced, I cannot say that the judge's adverse  credibility
         findings could not have been different had he  properly  considered
         those aspects of the claim that were externally consistent.

     20. I am persuaded, for the following reasons, that the judge  did  err
         on a point of law in his approach  to  the  appellant's  sur  place
         activities. The judge referred to a letter from  the  TGT  dated  9
         October 2019 [56]. This letter identified some events in which  the
         appellant had a "key role", but this role was not specified. So far
         as the judge was concerned the appellant's involvement appeared  to
         be no more than attending meetings and public  demonstrations.  The
         judge however appeared  to  accept  that  the  appellant  had  been
         involved with the TGTE and that he had been photographed at several
         events, and that one photograph appeared in a Sri Lankan newspaper,
         although the judge expressed concerns  about  the  circulation  and
         reputation of the newspaper [57]. Although the judge  sets  out  an
         extract from the CIG dated from June 2017 relating  to  'proscribed
         organisations', the TGTE does not appear in the extract and  it  is
         not otherwise apparent from the decision that the judge  was  aware
         that the TGTE is a proscribed organisation.

     21. At [76] the judge quotes from GJ in respect of the  knowledge  held
         by the Sri Lankan authorities that many Tamils travelled abroad  as
         economic migrants and that the Sri Lankan authorities' approach was
         based on sophisticated intelligence both within Sri  Lanka  and  in
         the diaspora.  Crucially  however  the  judge  fails  to  make  any
         reference  to  the  TGTE  being  a  proscribed  organisation   when
         assessing whether the Sri Lankan authorities were  likely  to  hold
         details of the appellant's involvement with the  organisation.  The
         Sri  Lankan  authorities  regard  to  the  TGTE  as   a   terrorist
         organisation. There may therefore be a real risk that, due to their
         sophisticated intelligence, the Sri Lankan authorities may hold  or
         have access to TGTE membership lists or details of the members. Nor
         did the judge consider what was likely to happen to  the  appellant
         at the airport in Sri Lanka as someone forcibly returned without  a
         valid passport. If the appellant is questioned by  the  authorities
         he must be expected to tell the truth. If his involvement with  the
         TGTE was simply a ruse to enable him to remain in the  UK  then  he
         would be expected  to  say  so  if  asked.  There  was  however  no
         assessment by the judge of the  likelihood  of  the  appellant  are
         being questioned about any political involvement in the UK  or  the
         reaction by the Sri Lankan authorities if the  appellant  told  the
         truth. I'm consequently satisfied that the judge  did  her  in  his
         approach when determining whether there was a risk to the appellant
         based on his sur place activities.

     22. Given my findings in respect of ground 1(b) and 2, I  am  satisfied
         that the decision as a whole is unsafe, and that the matter must be
         considered a fresh. It is therefore unnecessary for me to determine
         the 3rd ground.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     23. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

24. I have determined that the judge's adverse credibility conclusions  are
    unsafe. The appeal will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so  that
    a new fact-finding exercise can be undertaken.



Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than judge of the First-tier Tribunal Pears.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                                  10 March 2020

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
