

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Numbers: PA/06794/2016
      PA/06792/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester            |Determination Promulgated        |
|On 20 June 2017                |On 21 June 2017                  |
|                               |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     ZH
                                     ZY
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Mr Greer,  Broudie Jackson Canter Solicitors
For the respondent:     Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. The first appellant is the mother of the second  appellant.   They
          are both citizens of Libya.  They claim that if returned to  Libya
          they face a real risk of serious harm for reasons relating to  the
          imputed political opinion, including social  media  posts  by  the
          first appellant's son (and the  second  appellant's  brother),  A.
          They also claim to be entitled to humanitarian protection  because
          of the internal armed conflict taking place in Libya.

       2. These claims were considered and rejected  in  a  detailed  First-
          tier Tribunal decision dated  6  December  2016.   The  First-tier
          Tribunal made several adverse credibility findings  and  dismissed
          the appeals.

       3.  In  succinct  grounds  of  appeal  the   appellant's   solicitors
          submitted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  applied  an   outdated
          country guidance decision and failed  to  take  into  account  the
          voluminous bundle of updated background evidence.

       4. The First-tier Tribunal granted  permission  to  appeal  observing
          that although it made very comprehensive credibility findings,  it
          was an arguable error to fail to apply FA (Libya:  Article  15(c))
          Libya CG [2016] UKUT 413 and to  apply  AT  (Article  15(c);  risk
          categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT 318.

Hearing / error of law

Approach to country guidance

       5. Mr Harrison conceded that it was a clear error of law to apply  AT
          at [48] and to fail  to  consider  FA  at  all.   FA  was  clearly
          available within the appellant's bundle  and  referred  to  within
          the skeleton argument relied upon by the  appellant's  solicitors.
          This error is a significant one because FA expressly  replaced  AT
          in respect of  the  assessment  of  the  Article  15(c)  risk  and
          highlighted the numerous changes in  Libya  since  November  2013,
          when AT was heard.

Robinson obvious errors in relation to credibility assessment

       6. I indicated  a  provisional  view  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
          decision should be set aside completely and remitted to the First-
          tier Tribunal to be remade.  This  is  because  I  identified  two
          errors of law not pleaded within the grounds of  appeal,  applying
          the 'Robinson obvious' principle  derived  from  R  v  SSHD  ex  p
          Robinson [1997] EWCA Civ 3090 - see below.  Mr  Harrison  entirely
          accepted that these constituted obvious errors  of  law  going  to
          the heart of the credibility assessment.

       7. First, the error in applying  outdated  country  guidance  to  the
          assessment of risk also gives rise to  an  error  of  law  in  the
          assessment of the plausibility of  the  account.   The  First-tier
          Tribunal's rejection of the account before her  was  partly  based
          on a rejection of the plausibility of aspects of  it  -  see  [39-
          42].  At [35] the  First-tier  Tribunal  indicated  that  "careful
          consideration" had  been  given  to  the  evidence  including  the
          objective evidence and

                 "it is in the context of the information  contained  within
                 the objective evidence that I have considered the first and
                 second appellant's account and their fear of  returning  to
                 Libya."

       8. In support of their  claim  to  face  persecution  in  Libya,  the
          appellants relied upon an incident in August 2014  when  four  men
          raided their apartment looking for A, as well as A's detention  in
          May 2015 for reasons relating to social media  posts  against  the
          Misrata militia and Islamic brotherhood.    Given  the  timing  of
          these claimed events, it is surprising  that  there  has  been  no
          acknowledgment on the part of the First-tier Tribunal  that  there
          have been numerous  changes  in  Libya  since  AT  considered  the
          background evidence in November 2013.  There  has  therefore  been
          no  clear  consideration  of  the  plausibility  of  the   account
          provided within the correct context -  the  state  of  affairs  in
          Libya in 2014-2015.  Little confidence  can  be  gained  from  the
          First-tier Tribunal's indication at [35] that  all  the  objective
          evidence was considered when it is plain from [48]  that  outdated
          country guidance was applied.   The  country  background  evidence
          was to be found in the  same  bundle  as  FA.   FA  has  not  been
          considered and there is no  specific  reference  to  any  item  of
          background evidence.


       9. This error is demonstrated to be a material one within the  First-
          tier Tribunal's findings of fact.   For  example,  the  First-tier
          Tribunal did not regard it to  be  plausible  that  the  four  men
          would have acted in the manner they  did  when  they  visited  the
          family's apartment or that  the  first  appellant  was  unable  to
          articulate clearly who  she  feared.   This  fails  to  take  into
          account the outbreak of political violence  after  the  June  2014
          elections which led to the "loss  of  central  government  control
          over much of the country's territory and the  emergence  of  rival
          administrations based in Tripoli" - see the Libya CIG  dated  June
          2016 at 6.1.1.

      10. Second, the First-tier Tribunal's approach to the Immigration  and
          Refugee Board of Canada's decision dated 2 November 2015  granting
          A refugee status contains obvious  errors  of  law.   The  Board's
          decision is a comprehensively reasoned document.  Having  heard  A
          give evidence,  he  was  entirely  believed  and  found  to  be  a
          credible   witness.    The   Board   had   documentary    evidence
          corroborating his claim  in  the  form  of  screenshots  from  his
          computer detailing  the  social  media  posts.   This  documentary
          evidence  was  not  available  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  yet
          adverse  inferences  are  drawn  from  this  failure  to   provide
          corroborative evidence, seen  and  accepted  by  the  Board.   The
          First-tier Tribunal rejected the claim  that  A  was  detained  in
          Libya and attached little weight to the  Board's  acceptance  that
          he was.  It is difficult to see why the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
          not approach this decision in  a  similar  manner  to  a  reasoned
          First-tier  Tribunal  decision  involving  a  family   member   in
          accordance with Devaseelan principles i.e.  the  Board's  decision
          is a starting point  for  the  consideration  of  the  appellant's
          claims, but it is not determinative.

      11. The reasons offered for attaching little  weight  to  the  Board's
          decision are also irrational.  The First-tier Tribunal appears  to
          reject this claim because  it  was  not  mentioned  in  the  first
          appellant's 'preliminary information form' but has failed to  take
          into account that the focus of the relevant answer appears  to  be
          upon the reasons that led the first appellant to  leave  Libya  in
          2014.  The first appellant raised the 2015 incident at her  asylum
          interview. The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  failed  to  take  into
          account  the  evidence  provided  within  the  second  appellant's
          asylum interview and statement regarding A's activities.

      12. The First-tier Tribunal has erred in law in its  approach  to  the
          evidence set out above.  The  errors  I  have  focussed  upon  are
          sufficiently wide-ranging and fundamental to lead me to  the  view
          that the conclusion on credibility is vitiated by  errors  of  law
          and unsafe.  The decision must be remade entirely and de novo.

Remittal

      13. As set  out  above,  Mr  Harrison  accepted  that  the  First-tier
          Tribunal's credibility assessment  is  infected  by  two  material
          errors of law and needs to be remade entirely, in the  context  of
          the most up  to  date  country  background  evidence  and  country
          guidance.

      14. I have had regard to para 7.2 of the relevant  Senior  President's
          Practice Statement and  the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual
          findings required in remaking the decision,  and  I  have  decided
          that this is an  appropriate  case  to  remit  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal.

Decision

      15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  a
          material error of law.  Its  decision  cannot  stand  and  is  set
          aside.

      16. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo.





Signed:

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
20 June 2017

