








Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06769/2018



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Manchester                            |                                |
|On 14th June 2019                     |On 09th July 2019               |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     SS

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     And



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Jorro Counsel instructed by Prestige Solicitors


For the Respondent:    Mr Tan Senior Home Officer Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O Williams promulgated on the 24th October 2018  whereby
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    respondent to refuse the appellant's protection claim.

 2. I have considered whether or not it is appropriate to make an anonymity
    direction. Having considered all the circumstances including  the  fact
    that an anonymity direction was made  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  I
    consider it appropriate to make an anonymity direction.

 3. Leave to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baker on 13  November  2018.   Thus  the  case  appeared
    before me to determine whether or not there was a material error of law
    in the decision.

 4. The appellant, date of birth 12 April 1992, is a citizen of Bangladesh.

 5. The appellant had entered the United Kingdom on 30th August 2011  on  a
    student visa valid until November 2014. The  appellant's  student  visa
    was extended until 17 August 2016.

 6. On 16 August 2016 the appellant applied for leave outside the rules  on
    the basis of private life in the United Kingdom. This was refused on 31
    October 2017.

 7. The appellant applied for asylum on 27 November 2017. That  application
    was refused on 17 May  2018.  It  is  against  that  decision  and  the
    appellant was appealing.

 8. In support of her appeal the appellant claimed that :

      a) Her father had run a shipping business but he had died  at  sea  in
         1995 and the father's family had taken over the running and control
         of the business.

      b) When the appellant was aged between 6 and 8 a paternal cousin began
         to abuse her. The abuse continued for several years.

      c) The appellant told her mother about the abuse when she was 10 or 11
         but the mother did not believe her and took no action.

      d) The appellant subsequently repeated the claims  of  abuse  and  her
         mother told her not tell anyone.

      e) Ultimately when the appellant maintained her claims  of  abuse  and
         when she was 15, in or about 2007, her mother believed her. At that
         stage the family, including the appellant and her mother, relocated
         in Bangladesh and the abuse ceased. However there is a  claim  that
         there  was  a  degree  of  antipathy  between  the  appellant,  her
         immediate family and/or maternal family on the  one  side  and  the
         paternal family because of the abuse.

      f) Thereafter there was a land dispute between the appellant's  mother
         and other family members which was pursued through the  Bangladeshi
         courts. It was being alleged that a stranger was seeking to reclaim
         or claim land belonging to either the mother or the family.

      g) The appellant claims that on return she would be at risk  from  her
         father's relatives by reason of  her  having  made  allegations  of
         abuse, from the people seeking to claim land from  the  family  and
         that otherwise as  a  single  woman  without  a  male  guardian  in
         Bangladesh she would be at risk.

 9. To the benefit of the appellant the judge has in paragraph  13  and  in
    paragraph 15 made findings that:-

      a) the appellant had been the victim of sexual abuse in the past; and

      b) That there was a land dispute, between members of  the  appellant's
         family and the paternal side of the appellant's family.

    I see no reason why, given that the judge has correctly approached  the
    facts in respect of those issues and has given valid reasons for making
    the findings of fact that he has, those findings  of  fact  should  not
    stand.

10. I would also note consistent with paragraph 17  of  the  decision  that
    there is no reason not to  maintain  the  finding  that  it  reasonably
    likely that the paternal side of the appellant's family  in  Bangladesh
    cannot be relied upon to provide protection or take the role of a  male
    guardian for the appellant.

11. With regard to the  issues  of  whether  or  not  the  appellant  would
    continue to be at risk from  her  paternal  family  by  reason  of  the
    allegations of sexual abuse in the past  and  the  antipathy  from  the
    paternal family; or otherwise whether she would be at risk by reason of
    the alleged land disputes; or whether otherwise the appellant would  be
    at risk as a lone woman being returned  to  Bangladesh,  the  judge  in
    approaching the issues has sought to apply the asylum standard of proof
    but in doing so has reversed the burden and standard of proof.

12. In paragraph 17 the judge has found that it is  not  reasonably  likely
    that the appellant would be without support from her  maternal  family.
    The judge in giving reasons for that finding has  made  findings  to  a
    reasonable degree of likelihood against the appellant.

13. Similarly in paragraph 20,  the  judge  has  found  that  it  would  be
    reasonably likely that the appellant could live with her  brothers  in-
    laws.  With respect that is not  asking  the  correct  question,  which
    should be whether it was reasonably likely that the appellant would not
    have male support and protection and was it reasonably likely that  she
    could not live with family members. If the answer to that question  was
    that it was reasonably likely that she would not have male  support  or
    that there was a reasonable likelihood that  she  could  not  live  her
    brothers-in-law, the appellant may succeed.

14. It still may be the case to the lower standard  that  there  may  be  a
    reasonable likelihood that the appellant could live with her  brothers-
    in-law but the asylum standard applies to the benefit of the appellant.



15. The same issue could be taken in respect of paragraph 21  where  it  is
    found to a reasonable degree of likelihood  that  the  appellant  could
    live with a maternal uncle. In using  the  asylum  standard  in  making
    findings adverse to the appellant the judge has approached issues  that
    go to the core of the claim to  asylum  by  reversing  the  burden  and
    standard of proof.

16. In applying the standard of a reasonable degree of  likelihood  to  the
    issues in the case the judge has approached the question from the wrong
    standpoint. In so doing he has  effectively  reversed  the  burden  and
    standard of proof. That is a clear error of law and is material to  the
    outcome of the appeal.

17. Whilst the findings of fact set out above should stand, it still to  be
    determined whether or not the appellant  has  proved  to  the  required
    standard that she would be at risk of further  sexual  mistreatment  or
    because of the allegations in the past at risk of mistreatment  because
    of it; that she would be at risk by reason of the land dispute; or that
    she would not have the protection of male members of the maternal  side
    of her family and thus would not be alone woman returning to Bangladesh
    without a male guardian.

18. Accordingly for the reasons set out there are material errors of law in
    the decision. Save for the findings of fact identified  and  preserved,
    it is necessary for a further hearing to determine the remaining issues
    in the appeal.

19. I have considered how best to deal with those issues. I have determined
    that the appropriate course is for the matter to  be  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal and for the case to be list for a  further  hearing
    where evidence on the issues identified can be considered.

    Notice of Decision

20. I allow the appeal to the extent that the decision  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal is set aside.

21. I direct that the case is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    determination  of  the  issues  in  the  case  save  for  the  findings
    preserved.



Signed

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal           Judge            McClure
Date 3rd July 2018




Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed      Date 3rd July 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure



