
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06937/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 31st January 2018               |On: 2nd February 2018                 |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AKM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Warren, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                       Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan whose given date of birth is
    the 1st January 1993.  He appeals with permission the decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  C.  Greasley)  to  dismiss  his  protection
    appeal[1].


    Anonymity


 2. This case concerns a claim for international protection.   I  have  had
    regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders and I
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:

         Unless and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"





    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The  Appellant  claimed  asylum  on  the  13th  May  2016  having  been
    transferred to the UK from Belgium under Dublin Convention procedures.


 4. The substance of his claim is that he is from a village  in  Nangarhar,
    and that he and his family have been caught in the hostilities  between
    the government and the Taliban there. Specifically he asserts  that  in
    the summer months of 2015 an injured Talib was brought to their  family
    home in the night. The Appellant's father allowed the injured  man  and
    his friends to wait for medical assistance in the guest  room  and  the
    Appellant was dispatched to fetch a doctor.  Whilst the  Appellant  was
    away from the house government troops arrived and arrested the Taliban.
    Now the Taliban blame the Appellant, believing that instead of  getting
    the doctor  he  alerted  the  Afghan  army.   A  senior  commander  has
    personally issued a decree saying that the Appellant should be  killed.
    Because he failed to surrender to them they have taken his father.  For
    their part the Army accuse the Appellant and his  family  of  assisting
    the Taliban.

 5. In her letter dated the 28th June 2016  the  Respondent  rejected  this
    account for want of credibility. The central plank of the  Respondent's
    case is that the Appellant was not in Afghanistan during the summer  of
    2015 and so the narrated events cannot have  happened.  The  Respondent
    deduces this from the following chronology:

    26.09.08     Eurodac records show that the Appellant was encountered in
                Greece


    15.12.08     The Appellant was encountered in the back of  a  lorry  at
                Dover Docks. He claimed asylum. The Respondent accepted that
                he  was  a  minor  and  granted  Temporary  Admission.   The
                Appellant was released into the care of Kent Social Services


    29.12.08     Kent Social Services  inform  the  Home  Office  that  the
                Appellant has disappeared from care and he is  listed  as  a
                missing person


    09.06.09     The  asylum  claim  is  treated  as  withdrawn  after  the
                Appellant fails to attend an interview


    16.03.12     The Appellant is listed as an absconder


    20.11.14     Police encounter the Appellant at an address in Tottenham,
                North London. Once enquiries had established that he was  an
                absconder, he escaped and ran away


    21.01.16     The Appellant claimed asylum in Belgium

 6. The  Respondent  notes  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he  returned  to
    Afghanistan some time during early 2012 because his mother was ill. The
    Appellant claims to have travelled to France,  where  he  made  himself
    known to the French authorities  and  agreed  to  be  repatriated.  The
    Respondent rejected this account because it is  not  supported  by  any
    evidence.  Protection was therefore refused.


 7. On appeal the Appellant  produced  various  documents,  accompanied  by
    certified translations, to establish that he was in fact in Afghanistan
    at the material time. These included:

           . Marriage certificate showing that on the 10th August 2014  the
             Appellant (or someone of his name)  married  a  woman  [H]  in
             Hesarak district


           . Community Health Worker identity card  issued  by  the  Public
             Health Directorate on the 2nd March 2013


           . Prescriptions issued to the Appellant (or someone of his name)
             in March 2014


           . A letter from a Commander in the Afghan Army,  who  identifies
             himself as the Appellant's  cousin  and  states  that  he  has
             provided him with support and money  to  get  out  of  Hesarak
             where his life is  in  danger.  The  writer  states  that  the
             Appellant's father  is  missing.  Two  telephone  numbers  are
             provided, as well as a copy of  the  Commander's  Ministry  of
             Defence officer's certificate.


           . A 'night letter' from the  Taliban  ordering  the  Appellant's
             father to surrender the Appellant to them,  dated  27th  April
             2015


           . A second 'night letter', dated  6th  May  2015,  ordering  the
             Appellant's father to attend


           . A letter from the staff of Jokan High School (the  Appellant's
             father's place of work) stating that  the  Appellant's  father
             was taken by the Taliban on the 7th May 2015 and has not  been
             seen since. This document is  signed  by  the  Principal,  the
             Headteacher, four teachers and the Head of Administration


           . A letter from the Maliks of Hesarak District stating  that  to
             their knowledge the  Appellant's  father  was  abducted  by  a
             Taliban  commander  named  Abid  and  there  is  to  date   no
             information about his whereabouts

 8.  These  documents  (and  others)  were  supported  by  four  individual
    verification reports  by  a  Mr  Jawad  Hassan  Zadeh,  a  PhD  student
    researching Afghan legal history at Birkbeck University. Mr Zadeh has a
    postgraduate diploma in document examination  and  has  over  22  years
    practical experience in handling and  assessing  Afghan  documents.  He
    concluded that the documents relied upon by the Appellant were genuine.


 9. The Appellant gave oral evidence himself and called a further  witness.
    British national Mr Shenwari averred that he has a good friend who  had
    known the Appellant in the UK and seen him regularly from 2009. Towards
    the end of 2011 the Appellant told him that he was compelled to  return
    to Afghanistan because his mother was ill. Mr Shenwari did not see  the
    Appellant again until 2016. He received a telephone call from him  that
    year stating that he was in Belgium, and then a further call saying  he
    was being held in immigration detention in the UK.

10. For her part the Respondent produced on appeal the two CID notes  which
    she had relied upon to conclude that the Appellant was in Tottenham  on
    the 24th  November  2014.   The  reliability  of  these  documents  was
    challenged by the Appellant.




    The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal


11. The Tribunal disbelieved the Appellant. It found the CID  printouts  to
    be "reliable and credible" and determined that the Appellant was indeed
    in Tottenham in November 2014. This conclusion could not be gainsaid by
    Mr Shenwari who was unable to say what the specific whereabouts of  the
    Appellant  were  in  that  period.   This  finding  obviously   had   a
    substantial impact on the  Tribunal's  assessment  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to have been in Afghanistan  in  the  relevant  time  frame.  The
    determination  goes  on  to  identify  a  number  of  discrepancies   /
    implausibilities in narrated events. The "three reports"  of  Mr  Zadeh
    attract no weight because the country background  material  shows  that
    forged documents are widely available in Afghanistan,  and  because  Mr
    Zadeh does not specify, when listing his experience,  how  many  Afghan
    documents he has examined over the years, or how many  reports  he  has
    prepared for courts or tribunals.  The Tribunal concludes  that  it  is
    unable to place any weight on the documents produced by the  Appellant.
    In light of its  negative  credibility  findings  and  the  Appellant's
    appalling  immigration  history,  the  Tribunal  finds  no   reasonably
    likelihood that the Appellant faces a real risk of harm in  Afghanistan
    and the appeal is dismissed.




    The Challenge


12. It is submitted on behalf of the Appellant that  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal must be set aside for the following material errors
    in approach:

          i) Failing to give reasons, make findings or take the Appellant's
             submissions into account  when  assessing  the  weight  to  be
             attached to the CID printouts. One of the  documents  did  not
             refer at all to the Appellant. The second one bore a different
             Home Office reference number. The records were based on second-
             hand information and it was not clear how that information was
             gathered.   Counsel  for  the  Appellant  mounted  a  forensic
             challenge on this basis  which  the  determination  failed  to
             address.


         ii) Failing to give reasons, failing  to  take  material  evidence
             into account in respect of the verification  reports  supplied
             by Mr Zadah. The central  reason  given  for  rejecting  those
             reports - and thereby the supporting documents - was that  the
             author  had  not  demonstrated  sufficient   experience;   his
             experience was clearly set out in the reports and had not been
             challenged by the Respondent.


        iii) Failing to  assess  material  matters,  making  irreconcilable
             findings of fact. The  determination  appears  to  reject  the
             Appellant's  account  that  he  left  the  UK,  travelled   to
             Afghanistan and then returned through Europe in  favour  of  a
             conclusion that he has been in the UK the entire time. It also
             appears to accept that having had a recorded presence  in  the
             UK he then claimed asylum in Belgium in 2016.


         iv)  Failure  to  address  Article  15(c)  of  the   Qualification
             Directive.  Specific  submissions  were  made,  and   specific
             evidence adduced on this matter  on  which  the  determination
             contains no findings at all.





    Discussion and Findings


14. The Tribunal begins its analysis of the evidence [at  �62]  by  finding
    that the CID printouts are "reliable and credible" evidence that on the
    24th November 2014 the Appellant was apprehended along with nine  other
    Afghan nationals. The determination reads

         "the computer entry provided to me  describes  that  the  appellant
         simply fled the scene and escaped from the  property  concerned.  I
         have no reason to doubt the reliability and  authenticity  of  this
         computerised documentation and find that this seeks to  expose  the
         appellant's claims that he was in Afghanistan and  mainland  Europe
         between 2011 and 2016 respectively"

15. The grounds take exception to that reasoning. Whilst it was  never  the
    Appellant's case that the CID printouts were not  authentic,  extensive
    submissions were made about their reliability as documents going to the
    matter in  issue.   These  submissions  do  not  appear  to  have  been
    addressed at all in  the  determination.   Having  seen  the  documents
    myself I would have to accept that the Appellant's  forensic  challenge
    was not so fanciful or worthless that it could safely be ignored.


16. There were two documents before the First-tier Tribunal. The first is a
    'screenshot' from the Home Office computer records system  which  bears
    the Appellant's full name and correct port reference number. This shows
    that on the 27th October 2016 a person unknown  entered  the  following
    into the "note text" box:

         "Hi


         I hope that you are well. I have had a look and the only  reference
         details I have is for the following two people  [names  redacted  -
         agreed by Mr Diwnycz not to be the Appellant].


         At the time there were many people in that house which  was  spread
         over 3 floors but one of the males from what I remember was  fairly
         young, tall and slim gave me his details which showed him as wanted
         for immigration but I do not have  any  documents  in  relation  to
         this.


         Many thanks"

    Counsel for the appellant had submitted in relation  to  this  document
    that a) there is no indication as to who wrote that note b) it  nowhere
    on its face identifies the Appellant and indeed it is implicit  in  the
    text that to do so would not be possible c) the note itself is  written
    some two years after the alleged event.


17. The second CID note was produced only on the morning of the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.  This is a note of a telephone call, apparently  made
    on the 20th November  2014,  by  PC  Esmaily  from  Wood  Green  police
    station. This states that "the subject" was encountered at  a  property
    in Tottenham along with nine other  Afghan  nationals,  and  that  once
    enquiries were made, he ran away.  The primary objection to this record
    was that although  it  does  bear  the  Appellant's  name  it  shows  a
    different  port  reference  number  from  that  seen   on   all   other
    documentation (the grounds also point out  that  the  note  appears  to
    predate the claimed event but I think this arises from a mistake by the
    First-tier Tribunal).


18. None of the submissions made by counsel appear to have been  addressed.
    I accept that in the circumstances this amounted to an error of law and
    that grounds (i) is made out. Whether it would be an  error  such  that
    the decision should be  set  aside  depends  on  the  strength  of  the
    remaining grounds.


19. I am satisfied that ground (ii) is certainly made out and that it  goes
    to the heart of the decision.  There were, as set out  above,  numerous
    documents adduced seeking to establish that the Appellant was  in  fact
    in Afghanistan at the  operative  time.  The  determination  summarises
    these documents at paragraphs 34-44; when it  comes  to  assessing  and
    weighing that evidence the conclusions are briefly stated.

20. At paragraph 66  the  Tribunal  notes  the  evidence  that  forgery  of
    documents is commonplace  in  Afghanistan  and  concludes  that  having
    conducted a Tanveer Ahmed assessment no weight can be attached  to  the
    evidence produced.  Ms Warren takes issue with this limited  assessment
    on the grounds that Mr Zadeh expressly  addresses  the  possibility  of
    forgery in respect of the documents he was shown and having conducted a
    detailed analysis and referred  to  academic  research  on  forgery  in
    Afghanistan concludes that the probability of forgery in this  case  is
    "very low".  This leads me to assess the approach taken to  Mr  Zadeh's
    work.

21. Paragraphs 67-68 of the determination address the evidence of Mr  Zadeh
    and give two reasons why it  gives  no  support  to  the  documents  he
    examined. It is convenient if I take each  reason,  and  the  criticism
    thereof, in turn.

22. The first, and apparently central reason, is that the author "makes  no
    mention of the total number of questioned Afghan documents that he  has
    considered". This is simply an error  of  fact.  In  all  four  of  his
    reports (the First-tier Tribunal mistakenly records there to be  three)
    the author sets out his extensive qualifications,  stating  inter  alia
    that he has examined "over 9000 Afghan documents" and that  he  has  in
    numerous cases rejected the authenticity of the evidence  he  has  been
    shown, for instance on grounds of language inaccuracy or inconsistency,
    disguise,  obliteration,  additions  or  alterations  in   photographs.
    Insofar as paragraph 67 apparently questions the expertise of Mr Zadeh,
    before me Mr Diwnycz confirmed that this was not put in  issue  by  the
    Respondent.

23. The Tribunal's second reason is set out at paragraph 68:

         "It is also relevant to my mind that the  author,  in  relation  to
         each of his  three  reports,  one  of  which  deals  with  the  two
         questioned Taliban letters [the 'night letters'] and the other  the
         remaining three confirmation letters [i.e.  the  letters  from  the
         school staff, the Maliks and the Appellant  cousins]  concludes  in
         his report that there are similarities both with the Taliban threat
         letters and the confirmation letters"

    The import of this paragraph appears to be  that  Mr  Zadeh  has  found
    there to be similarities in the five different texts,  the  implication
    being that they are all from the same author. This is again  a  mistake
    of fact. The evidence  of  Mr  Zadeh  is  quite  to  the  contrary.  He
    expressly  states  that  he  has  assessed  the  five   documents   for
    similarities and for possible disguise of one author: "I have  compared
    the written words, the digits, the symbols, the signature patterns, the
    inks used, the margins of the paper, the distance between the  letters,
    between the words and the sentences. I also  assessed  the  handwriting
    for  possibility  of  disguise".  He  concludes  that  there   are   no
    similarities  revealed  in  any  of  the  five  documents,  either   in
    handwriting, word size or spacing; none of the documents  indicate  any
    signs of disguise.

24. I find the reports of Mr Zadeh  to  be  comprehensive  and  of  a  high
    standard. Of the reasons given for declining to place any weight on his
    assessment, two are based on errors of fact and one overlooks and fails
    to take into account his evidence about forgery in Afghanistan.


25. I am satisfied that taken together grounds (i) and (ii) are  such  that
    the determination must be set aside.

26. It follows that I need deal only very briefly with  grounds  (iii)  and
    (iv). The  Tribunal  expressly  rejects,  at  paragraph  62,  that  the
    Appellant was in Afghanistan and Europe between 2011 and 2016. I  agree
    that it is difficult to reconcile that finding with the fact  that  the
    Appellant was in Belgium claiming asylum in 2016,  something  which  at
    least suggests that he was in mainland Europe at that time. Mr  Diwnycz
    conceded that the determination fails to address the  evidence  adduced
    and arguments made in respect of Article 15(c) and that ground (iv)  is
    made out.

27. The parties agreed that  the  extent  of  errors  were  such  that  the
    determination must be set aside in  its  entirety.  There  was  further
    agreement that given the extent of fact finding required  it  would  be
    appropriate to remit this matter for hearing de novo in the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



    Decisions

28. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.


29. The decision must be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

30. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           1st February 2018
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission granted on the 21st September 2017 by First-tier Tribunal
Judge Murray


