

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06876/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |             Decision and Reasons     |
|                                    |Promulgated                           |
|On 23 April 2018                    |             On 27 April 2018         |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                 REBAR JASEM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C McGinley, of Gray & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 February 1991.  He  sought
    asylum in the UK on 7 January 2016.

 2. The respondent refused his claim for reasons explained  in  her  letter
    dated 23 June 2016.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Bradshaw dismissed the appellant's appeal for
    reasons explained in his decision promulgated on 19 January 2017.

 4. The appellant's two grounds of appeal are stated in his application for
    permission to  appeal  dated  30  January  2017,  as  follows  (lightly
    edited):

      1. ... at paragraph 50 the decision notes that the respondent  accepts
      that the appellant is a supporter of the KDP as claimed. In fact,  the
      appellant had provided a number of documents and translations  at  the
      commencement  of  the  substantive  asylum  interview,  including   ID
      documents and membership cards, all contained in annex E of  the  Home
      Office's bundle. The respondent accepted these documents and  evidence
      as reliable and accepted in the refusal decision (paragraph  27)  that
      the appellant  is  Iraqi,  Kurdish  and  a  member  of  the  KDP.  The
      appellant's credibility was enhanced by providing said documents,  the
      reliability of which was accepted by  the  respondent.  The  appellant
      produced further documentary evidence  for  the  appeal  in  a  second
      inventory of productions, referred to in the decision at paragraph 95.
      The judge stated at paragraph 99, "I am of the view that the first two
      documents have been fabricated behalf of the appellant to bolster  his
      chances in his claim for asylum and they are not  genuine  documents".
      The judge has materially erred in making such a finding and has failed
      to provide adequate reasons. It is irrational and erroneous in law  to
      find the documents "are not genuine" and then to  state  in  the  next
      paragraph, paragraph 100:

      "I have no knowledge  of  what  an  official  Kirkuk  Province  police
      document would look like nor what a Supreme Court - Federal  Court  of
      Appeal Kirkuk document would look like ".

      This is an erroneous assessment in law of  such  important  and  vital
      documents ... There was no expert or other  evidence  ...  to  support
      such a conclusion ... The finding is based  entirely  on  speculation,
      which is also erroneous in law.  At paragraph 100 the judge speculates
      that his examination of the said to original  letters  would  indicate
      that they could have been "easily  computer  generated".  This  is  an
      inadequate reason, not based on any evidence that was lodged  and  has
      simply employed speculation... The judge  accepted  at  paragraph  101
      that the letter from the appellant's father "may well be genuine".  In
      all the circumstances,  the  judge  has  failed  to  provide  adequate
      reasons  for  finding  that  the  2  documents   were   not   genuine,
      particularly standing the acceptance of all  the  other  documents  of
      annex E of the Home Office bundle and has failed to explain  why  they
      are not reliable in terms of Tanveer Ahmed ...

      2.  ... at paragraph 104 the judge finds that it is  not  unreasonable
      or unduly harsh for the appellant to be returned to the IKR  ...  This
      is erroneous in law... with reference  to  the  immediately  preceding
      ground of appeal the judge has materially erred in his  assessment  of
      and the evidential weight to be given to  the  2  documents  ...  From
      Kirkuk Province Police and Supreme Court of Appeal  Kirkuk  ...  these
      documents  will  result  in  the  appellant  being  at  real  risk  of
      persecution in the IKR ... and  the  judge  has  materially  erred  in
      finding that it would not be unreasonable  or  unduly  harsh  for  the
      appellant to be returned to the IKR ...

 5. When the case first came before the UT, the respondent  was  given  the
    opportunity to  investigate  whether  the  same  name  appears  on  the
    document at page E9 of the respondent's FtT bundle (a party  card)  and
    on the document at item  2  of  the  appellant's  second  inventory  of
    documents (an arrest warrant); and (if so minded)  whether  the  police
    complaint (item 1 of that inventory) and the arrest warrant are genuine
    documents.  The outcome of  those  enquiries  plays  no  part  in  this
    decision.   Further  translation  of   the   documents   disclosed   no
    significant differences.  The respondent has no information by which to
    verify the police complaint and arrest warrant.

 6. Mr McGinley's submissions were along the  lines  of  the  grounds.   He
    argued  that  production  of  documents  which  were  accepted  by  the
    respondent supported the reliability of the  two  later  documents  and
    that the judge gave no good reason for rejecting them.  The  judge  had
    gone wrong in terms of Tanveer Ahmed by looking for evidence of forgery
    and purporting to make such a finding when it could not  be  supported.
    He accepted that ground 2 was conditional on ground 1,  but  said  that
    ground showed such error of law as to require a remit to the FtT for  a
    fresh hearing.

 7. Mr Matthews submitted that acceptance of the first set of documents did
    not enhance the reliability of further documents. It was commonplace to
    find some evidence reliable, and other evidence unreliable.  The  judge
    had correctly applied the  Tanveer  Ahmed  approach,  deciding  on  the
    documents in context and giving multiple reasons, in  which  no  errors
    were alleged, for finding that the appellant failed  to  establish  his
    case on all the evidence.

 8. I reserved my decision.

 9.  In  submissions  parties  referred,  although  generally  rather  than
    directly, to Tanveer Ahmed.  The  original  case  reference  is  [2002]
    UKIAT 00439 and it is reported at [2002] Imm AR  318  and  [2002]  INLR
    345.  The decision was made by a panel of the AIT comprising Collins J,
    President, Ockelton, Deputy President, and Moulden, Vice President.  It
    has stood the test of time, having been often applied and  approved  by
    the  Courts  and   by   subsequent   tribunals:   see   MJ   (Singh   v
    Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan [2013] UKUT 253 (IAC).

10. Tanveer Ahmed includes the following:

      32. It is for the individual claimant  to  show  that  a  document  is
      reliable in the same way as any other piece of evidence which he  puts
      forward and on which he seeks to rely.

      33. It is sometimes argued before adjudicators or the tribunal that if
      the Home Office alleges that a document relied  on  by  an  individual
      claimant is a forgery and the Home Office fails to establish  this  on
      the balance of probabilities, or even to the higher criminal standard,
      then the individual claimant has established the validity and truth of
      the document and its contents. There is  no  legal  justification  for
      such an argument, which is manifestly incorrect,  given  that  whether
      the document is a forgery is not  the  question  at  issue.  The  only
      question is whether the document is one  upon  which  reliance  should
      properly be placed.

      34. In almost all cases it would be an error to concentrate on whether
      a document is a forgery. In most cases where  forgery  is  alleged  it
      will be of no great importance whether this is or is not made  out  to
      the required higher civil standard. In all  cases  where  there  is  a
      material document it should be assessed in the same way as  any  other
      piece of evidence. A document should not be viewed in  isolation.  The
      decision maker should look at the evidence as a whole or in the  round
      (which is the same thing).

      35. There is no  obligation  on  the  Home  Office  to  make  detailed
      enquiries about documents  produced  by  individual  claimants  ...  a
      decision by the Home Office not to make enquiries, produce  in-country
      evidence relating to particular document or scientific evidence should
      not give rise to any presumption in favour of an  individual  claimant
      or against the Home Office.

      ...

      37. In summary the principles set out in this determination are:


        1. In asylum and  human  rights  cases  it  is  for  an  individual
           claimant to show that a document on which he seeks to  rely  can
           be relied on.

        2. The decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on
           which reliance should properly be placed after  looking  at  all
           the evidence in the round.

        3. Only very rarely will there be the need to make an allegation of
           forgery,  or  evidence  strong  enough  to  support   it.    The
           allegation should not be made without such evidence.  Failure to
           establish the allegation on the balance of probabilities to  the
           higher  civil  standard  does  not  show  that  a  document   is
           reliable.  The decision maker still needs to apply principles  1
           and 2.

11. There was force in the submissions by Mr  Matthews  on  the  extent  of
    reasoning in the decision as a whole:

      Paragraph 58 - 59, appellant's inconsistency of number of  photographs
      taken of him in the hospital;

      60 -  65,  inconsistencies  over  whether  he  ever  saw  any  of  the
      photographs, and what was shown in them;

      72, and 82 - 83, no explanation how the  photograph  in  the  hospital
      taken, why it might be compromising, and how the appellant could know;

      75 - 76, no explanation why  attempt  at  blackmail  not  reported  to
      authorities;

      79 - 80, no explanation why a person who was not a close friend  would
      accompany the appellant to the hospital;

      84, no sense in appellant agreeing to pay large amounts  of  blackmail
      without seeing photographs, or knowing they existed;

      92, inconsistency over when appellant last saw blackmailer;

      97 - 101, final conclusions reached in context and expressly after not
      before considering documents.

12. It was correct, and in the appellant's favour, for the judge to say  he
    had no idea what official police and court documents from Kirkuk  would
    look like.  He did not purport to find  anything  in  their  appearance
    which showed them to  be  unreliable.   There  is  nothing  irrational,
    having said that, in going on to  find  the  documents  unreliable  for
    other reasons.

13. Acceptance of documents produced at the interview stage did not  create
    a presumption of reliability of other documents produced at the hearing
    stage.

14. Mr McGinley submitted that the comment that the documents  "could  have
    been easily computer generated", was part of the reasoning for  finding
    the  documents  fabricated,   and   so   an   error.    However,   both
    representatives agreed that the comment was true in itself,  and  would
    apply to very many documents under modern circumstances.   The  comment
    means no more than that the documents were not necessarily to be  taken
    at face value, and is unexceptionable.
15. The judge did not take this to be one of those relatively rare cases
    where the respondent undertakes to prove forgery.  Where he says that
    the appellant fabricated his account that means simply that he failed
    to prove it, not that the respondent positively established forgery.

16. It is clear in terms of Tanveer Ahmed principles 1 and 2 that the judge
    found the appellant failed to prove these were documents which could be
    relied upon, and he did so after looking at all  the  evidence  in  the
    round.

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

18. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.



            [pic]


            25 April 2018
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




