
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06383/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 November 2019                  |On 27 November 2019                  |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     O H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance and not represented
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


     DECISION PURSUANT TO RULE 40(3)(a) OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER
                            TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

 1. The appellant, a citizen of the Palestinian Authority, appealed to  the
    First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") against a decision  dated  4  May  2018  to
    refuse a protection and human  rights  claim.  The  FtT  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.

 2. In directions sent on 19 November 2019, the parties were provided  with
    a copy of a draft decision in the terms that appear below. We  directed
    that if either party objected to the terms of the draft  decision,  any
    such objection must be notified to the Upper Tribunal and to the  other
    party no later than 2.00 pm on Wednesday 20 November 2019.

 3. We further directed that  in  default  of  compliance  with  the  above
    direction the Upper Tribunal would be likely to promulgate  a  decision
    in the terms of the draft decision without  further  reference  to  the
    parties.

 4. Prior to the hearing on 25 November 2019 neither  party  expressed  any
    dissent from the course we proposed. At the hearing,  Ms  Everett  said
    that she agreed with it. As far as we are  aware,  there  has  been  no
    communication by or on behalf of the appellant on the matter.

 5. Thus, it is agreed between the parties that the grounds  of  appeal  in
    relation to  the  FtT's  decision  reveal  that  it  erred  in  law  by
    proceeding to hear and determine the appeal in the appellant's absence.

 6. It is also agreed between the parties that the error of law is such  as
    to require the decision of the FtT to be set aside and for  the  appeal
    to be remitted to the FtT for a hearing de novo.

 7. In the circumstances, we set aside the decision of the FtT for error of
    law and remit the appeal to the FtT for  a  hearing  de  novo,  on  all
    grounds, before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge  Greasley,
    with no findings of fact preserved.

 8. In remitting the appeal we have had regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the
    Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals.

 9. Pursuant to rule 40(3)(a) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008, no reasons (or further reasons) are required, the  decision
    being made with the consent of the parties.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            dated 25/11/19

