
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA061432016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 July 2017                          |On 21 July 2017               |



                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                KHALIL YASIN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr S Winter (counsel) instructed by Latta & Co,
solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge D H Clapham promulgated on 2 February 2017,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 27 August 1992 and is a national  of  Iraq.  On
1st June 2016 the Secretary of  State  refused  the  Appellant's  Protection
claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge  D  H  Clapham  ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal   against   the
Respondent's decision.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  15  May  2017  Judge  Shimmin  gave
permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant seeks permission to  appeal  against  a  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge D H Clapham promulgated on 2 February  2017,
      dismissing the appellant's appeal against  the  Secretary  of  State's
      decision to refuse international protection.


      2. The grounds requesting permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
      argue that the Judge erred in the assessment of the feasibility of the
      appellant returning to Iraq. It is arguable that the Judge  failed  to
      take full account of the case of AA (article 15c) Iraq CG [2015]  0054
      (IAC) and that failure is material.


      3. Furthermore, it is arguable that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  take
      account of the case of AA in terms of  the  appellant  being  able  to
      travel from Baghdad to the IKR.


      4. I grant permission on the grounds claimed.

The Hearing

6.(a) Mr Winter, counsel  for  the  appellant,  adopted  the  terms  of  the
grounds of appeal. He moved an additional ground  of  appeal  on  the  basis
that the Judge  did  not  make  findings  on  whether  or  not  the  Kurdish
authorities have pre-cleared  the  appellant,  relying  on  headnote  17  at
paragraph 150 of the case of AA (article 15c) Iraq CG [2015] 0054 (IAC).  He
told me that the appellant was born in the  Erbil,  in  the  IKR,  where  he
lived with his family until he was 10 years old. His family  then  moved  to
Mosul, in Ninewah province. He told me that the First-tier Judge  failed  to
recognise that the respondent intends to return the  appellant  to  Baghdad.
He argued that from there the appellant would have  to  obtain  preclearance
in order to enter IKR. He told  me  that  if  the  appellant  cannot  safely
relocate to IKR, then his appeal should be allowed.  He  argued  that  there
was an implicit acceptance that it would be unduly harsh for  the  appellant
to remain in Baghdad.

(b) Mr Winter turned to the grounds of appeal. He told  me  that  the  first
ground of appeal related to the appellant's  contention  that  he  does  not
have a CSID and has no prospect of obtaining one. He took me to [76] of  the
decision and told me that the Judge's finding of  fact  that  the  appellant
would be able to employ a lawyer to obtain a replacement CSID is not safe

(c) Mr Winter moved the second ground of appeal and told me that  the  Judge
has failed to properly consider how the appellant will  make  his  way  from
Baghdad to  Erbil.  He  returned  to  the  argument  the  pre-clearance  was
necessary to secure entry to IKR and told me that,  on  the  facts  of  this
case, travel would be  impossible  because  the  appellant  cannot  board  a
flight in Baghdad without identification documentation,  which  he  told  me
the appellant does not have & cannot obtain.

7. (a) For the respondent, Mr Matthews told me that the  decision  does  not
contain a material error of law. He took me to paragraph 78 of  the  reasons
for refusal letter and told me that, because the appellant's place  habitual
residence was Mosul in Nineveh province, which is not in IKR,  then  return,
would be to Baghdad. Because the appellant is not a recent resident of  IKR,
then the pre-clearance (dealt with in the case of AA) is not  necessary.  He
told me that there is no requirement for pre-clearance of a  Kurd  who  does
not originate from IKR, and that although the appellant  was  born  in  IKR,
because he left there at 10 years of age he will not be treated  as  a  Kurd
who requires pre-clearance.

(b) Mr Matthews referred me to the revised  country  guidance  given  in  AA
(IRAQ) V SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  He  took  me  to  [74]  of  the  Judge's
decision where, he told  me,  the  Judge  highlights  discrepancies  in  the
appellant's evidence. He took me to [77] where the Judge  accepts  that  the
appellant cannot return to a contested area, but goes  on  to  give  reasons
for rejecting the appellant's claim not to have  an  identity  document.  He
told me that that finding goes without  challenge,  and  that  that  finding
completely undermines the first ground of appeal.

(c) Mr Matthews addressed the second ground of appeal by producing  evidence
that a flight from Baghdad to Erbil currently costs US$89.  He  reminded  me
that the appellant can access  the  assisted  voluntary  returns  programme,
which will provide more than sufficient funds to pay  for  that  flight.  He
told me that the Judge's findings at [77] and [78]  are  unimpeachable,  and
that the grounds of appeal are misconstrued. He  urged  me  to  dismiss  the
appeal and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. The decision in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944  was  issued  on  11  July
2017. That decision amends the country guidance in some respects,  but  what
is said at headnote 17 and at paragraph 150 of AA (article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
[2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC)  is  unchanged.  It  is  beyond  dispute  that  the
appellant is a Kurd, and that he originates from Mosul in Nineveh  province.
Although he was born in IKR, he has not lived there since 2002.

9. The appellant was born in IKR, to that  extent  he  originates  from  the
IKR, but the guidance at 17 of AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944  has  little
relevance in this case. Paragraph 17 of the country guidance should  not  be
read in isolation. It is  not  the  respondent's  intention  to  return  the
appellant to  IKR.  The  respondent  intends  to  return  the  appellant  to
Baghdad. The place of the appellant's birth creates the option  of  internal
relocation to IKR. Because the  appellant  has  lived  in  Nineveh  province
since 2002, it is paragraphs 15, 19 and 20 of the guidance  which  apply  to
this appellant.

10. The Judge rejected  the  appellant's  claim  finding  the  appellant  is
neither a credible nor a  reliable  witness,  and  that  the  appellant  has
fabricated a story. No specific challenge is taken to the  Judge's  findings
of credibility. At [120] of the decision the Judge finds that the  appellant
is an Iraqi Kurd who speaks Kurdish Sorani.

11. At [77] of the decision the Judge finds that the appellant is  dishonest
about his documents, that he does have an identity  document  and  that  his
birth has been registered. The appellant will return to  Baghdad.  Paragraph
15 of the country guidance given in the annex to AA (Iraq) [2017]  EWCA  Civ
944 says

    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

12. What the Judge does not consider is whether or not  the  appellant,  who
is a Kurd who does not speak Arabic and does  not  have  family  members  in
Baghdad, can live in Baghdad safely. The Judge does not consider whether  or
not the appellant can return to his family home in  Mosul.  The  Judge  does
not consider how the appellant could make his way  from  Baghdad  to  either
Mosul or IKR

13. The background materials tell me that the appellant will be  allowed  to
visit  IKR  for  10  days.  The  Judge's  decision  contains  no   realistic
consideration of what is likely to happen to the appellant  at  the  end  of
that 10-day period. The Judge has found that the appellant is  returning  as
a single man with (at best) limited support. Those findings  have  not  been
factored into consideration of whether it is safe  and  reasonable  for  the
appellant to return to an area of Iraq other than his home area.

14.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

15.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law because the Judge, having found that the appellant will not be  safe  in
his home area,  does  not  go  on  to  properly  consider  whether  internal
relocation is safe and reasonable for this appellant.  The conclusions  that
the Judge reaches are not supported by adequate reasoning - so  that  it  is
impossible for the objective  reader  to  see  how  the  Judge  reached  her
conclusions. A  fuller  fact-finding  exercise  might  have  resulted  in  a
different outcome to this  appeal.  I  must,  therefore,  set  the  decision
promulgated on 03 February 2017 aside.

16. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision  promulgated  on  02  February
2017. I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own decision  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision
in this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

17. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

19. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Glasgow  to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge D H Clapham .



Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

21. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 02  February  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 20 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle



