
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06516/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th December 2017                         |On 22nd January 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                   mr MBA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant claims to be a citizen of Iraq and to have been  born  on
    17th March 1988.  He claims to have left Kirkuk in Iraq in October 2015
    arriving in the UK on 15th December 2015 by lorry before being arrested
    for illegal entry and being served with IS96.  He claimed asylum on the
    basis that he had  a  fear  that  if  returned  to  Iraq  he  would  be
    mistreated or even killed  by  Daesh  due  to  his  assistance  to  the
    Americans in Iraq from 2008 to 2010 or by the family of  the  woman  he
    had had a relationship with in Kurdistan.  The Appellant's  application
    for asylum was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 13th June 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed against the decision and the appeal came  before
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon sitting  at  Manchester  on  1st  March
    2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on  10th  March  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  28th
    March 2017.  The grounds contended the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had
    failed to take into account two material  factors  when  assessing  the
    reasonableness of the Appellant's relocation to the Kurdish  Autonomous
    Region.  Firstly that the judge had failed to deal with the submissions
    made in relation to the route of return to the KRI  and  secondly  this
    was a case where the state of the Appellant's documentation fell to  be
    considered as part of the relocation assessment.

 4. On 17th July  2017  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Bird  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Bird noted  that  in  accepting  that  the
    Appellant could not return to his home area or reasonably  relocate  to
    Baghdad the judge made an arguable error of law  in  finding  he  could
    reasonably relocate to the IKR and also an arguable  error  of  law  in
    failing to consider all the factors when assessing the  possibility  of
    his relocation to the Kurdish Autonomous Region.

 5. On 4th August 2017 the Secretary of State responded to the  Grounds  of
    Appeal under Rule 24.  Specifically within that response the  Secretary
    of State concentrated on the Appellant's complaint that the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge had failed to have regard to  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    documentation and contended that the judge  had  failed  to  take  into
    account that the Appellant would be unable to travel  overland  to  the
    IKR was in the view of the Secretary of State misconceived.

 6. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Mr Holmes.  Mr Holmes is very familiar with  this  matter.   He
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and he is  the  author  of  the
    Grounds  of  Appeal.   The  Respondent  appears  by  her  Home   Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Diwnycz.  I note  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge granted the Appellant anonymity  within  these  proceedings.   No
    application is made to vary that order and the anonymity direction will
    remain in place.

Submissions/Discussion

 7. Mr Diwnycz starts by pointing out that there  are  means  by  which  an
    Appellant can return to the IKR and that flights are about  to  restart
    to Irbil from Manchester, that it is also possible to fly to Irbil  via
    Vienna and flights  run  from  Baghdad  internally  to  Sulemanya.   He
    believes that the  geography  which  is  conceded  by  the  Appellant's
    representatives indicates that the Appellant's village is very close to
    the Iraq/Kurdistan border and that  therefore  it  would  not  be  that
    difficult for the Appellant to return to his home town.

 8. Mr Holmes indicates that as a starting point  it  is  accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State as a general rule  that  it  is  not  reasonable  to
    expect someone from the IKR to relocate to Baghdad.   Consequently  the
    only way to return there  is  either  by  land  and  he  refers  me  to
    authority indicating that this is a fact-sensitive assessment but  that
    there are practical difficulties in travelling and that overland travel
    is not an option and secondly by air.  He admits that is  not  possible
    for this particular Appellant because he is without  documentation  and
    that the judge has failed to deal with the lack of  documentation.   He
    acknowledges that the decision predates the most recent authority  from
    the Court of Appeal and that the judge's finding  at  paragraph  67  is
    flawed when concluding that had the Appellant  been  in  possession  of
    requisite identification he would have been able to travel  by  air  as
    there remained internal flights to the IKR.  Mr Holmes submits that the
    Court of Appeal have indicated and clarified you cannot assess  a  case
    on a hypothetical basis.  Mr Diwnycz disagrees pointing out  that  even
    if there is an error it is not material and that  the  Appellant  would
    not be removed without appropriate documentation.

The Law

 9.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

10. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

11. Upper Tribunal Judges are  regularly  faced  with  the  problem  as  to
    whether there is an error of law by a First-tier Judge's assessment  as
    to whether or not an Appellant can return  to  the  IKR.   Reliance  is
    placed on the authority of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544
    (IAC)  which  is  accepted  as   authority   or   guidance   upon   the
    reasonableness of an Appellant's relocation to the  Kurdish  Autonomous
    Region and the guidance given that it is only possible to travel by air
    for one journey on what is known as a laissez passer.

12. It is consequently the view submitted to me by Mr Holmes the  Appellant
    could not return mainly  because  overland  travel  is  plainly  not  a
    possibility as the contested area forms a complete barrier and  because
    of the guidance given in AA that travel by air is not an option.

13. Each case turns on its individual facts.  However in this instant  case
    it is submitted to me there is an error of law is that  the  judge  has
    failed to give due  consideration  to  the  state  of  the  Appellant's
    documentation as part  of  the  assessment  of  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation.  That appears to be correct.   In  such  circumstances  the
    correct approach is to find there is a material error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit the matter  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing with none of the  findings  of
    fact to stand.  However I would express a  warning  to  the  Appellant.
    Whilst the most recent authority has not been given  due  consideration
    each case turns on it individual facts and whilst of course  there  are
    no enforced returns to Iraq at present it is not to say that on further
    and fresh consideration of this matter that a judge will  not  come  to
    exactly the same conclusion reached by the previous First-tier Tribunal
    Judge.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a material  error  of
law and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing
of this matter.
 1) That the matter be remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  in
    Manchester on the first available date 28 days hence  with  an  ELH  of
    three hours.  None of the findings of fact are to stand.
 2) That the remitted hearing be before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other
    than Immigration Judge Moxon.
 3) That there be leave to either party to file and/or serve on  the  other
    party and at the Tribunal an up-to-date bundle of documents upon  which
    they intend to rely at  least  fourteen  days  prior  to  the  restored
    hearing.
 4) That if the Appellant  requires  an  interpreter  then  his  instructed
    solicitors must notify  the  Tribunal  Service  within  seven  days  of
    receipt of these directions.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris






TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 19 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

