

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeals PA/06833/2019 (P)
                                                           PA/06105/2019 (P)
                                                           PA/06106/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 14 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                 S, A & S S
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. This determination is to be read with:

      i) The respondent's 3 decisions, dated 13 June 2019.

     ii) The appellants' (triplet brothers) grounds of appeal to the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

    iii) The decision of FtT Judge Watson, promulgated on 31 December 2019.

     iv) The appellant's  grounds  of  appeal  to  the  UT,  stated  in  the
         application for permission to appeal filed on 14 January 2020.

      v) The grant of permission by the FtT,  dated  14  and  issued  on  25
         February 2020, with usual directions.

     vi) The note and (further) directions of the UT issued on  1  May  2020
         with a view to deciding without a hearing whether the FtT erred  in
         law and, if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

    vii) The  appellants'  written  submissions  and  request  for  an  oral
         hearing, dated 14 May 2020.

   viii) The SSHD's submissions, dated 1 June 2020.

     ix) The appellants' reply, dated 5 June 2020.

 2. In light of the explanations tendered, time for making  submissions  is
    extended until their dates of receipt.

 3. The first question is whether to proceed "on the papers" or  to  direct
    an oral hearing.

 4. The appellants' submissions at pp.2-4, [4-13], cite  authority  on  the
    value of oral argument, and argue that this is an asylum  appeal  "with
    potentially extreme consequences" calling for "a nuanced argument which
    requires very careful and detailed analysis of the  FtT's  approach  at
    every instant", such that an oral hearing, by video if not  in  person,
    should be held.  Submissions on the merits of  the  grounds  follow  at
    pp.4-10, [14-34].  At [35-36] the appellants conclude by asking  for  a
    remit to the FtT.

 5. The SSHD raises no objection to decision without a hearing, and  argues
    for the appeal to the UT to be dismissed.

 6. The appellants' reply comments that the SSHD has not  objected  to  the
    suggestion of a remote hearing, and founds upon this being "a factually
    involved case (including references to the record of  proceedings)  and
    ... an asylum claim by three very young men".

 7. Although this issue is preliminary, it has  been  resolved  only  after
    considering the details of the case, as discussed  in  its  substantive
    resolution.

 8. I accept that oral arguments are sometimes  "game-changing".   However,
    fair resolution of issues such as the present on written  materials  is
    common in this and in other jurisdictions, and well within professional
    and judicial competence,  in  asylum  as  well  as  other  cases.   The
    appellants' citations are not good authority for never  deciding  error
    of law without an oral hearing, a  course  available  to  the  tribunal
    within its rules.  Contrary to their submission, the  facts  which  the
    appellants sought to establish, and their supporting evidence, are  not
    complex.  The claim is straightforward.  The  evidence  has  been  led.
    Parties have had ample opportunity to explain their  positions  on  it.
    The appellants have done so at length and in detail.  I find no feature
    of this case such that it cannot now fairly be resolved without an oral
    hearing.

 9. The appellants claim that while they were in  the  UK,  their  maternal
    aunt warned them by telephone that their father had sent videos of them
    producing and consuming alcohol to the authorities,  resulting  in  the
    detention of their mother and maternal  grandfather,  and  in  risk  to
    them, if they were to return.

10. The respondent declined to accept their account as credible, for  these
    principal reasons:

      i) if their father had a high reputation as a strict Muslim to uphold,
         he would not ruin his standing by reporting his wife and children;

     ii) if their father wished to cause them trouble with the  authorities,
         he would not make his report while they were out of the country;

    iii) as a strict Muslim, it was not plausible their father would  permit
         his children to consume alcohol;

     iv) not plausible their father would  permit  video  recording  of  the
         gathering at which alcohol was taken;

      v) the appellants contradicted each other over whether their  parents'
         arguments led to their moving to their grandfather's house;

     vi) the appellants  contradicted  each  other  over  the  date  of  the
         telephone call;

    vii) the appellants contradicted each other over  whether  their  father
         first discovered their alcohol consumption in 2017 or in 2018,  and
         whether he was at first angry;

   viii) the appellants contradicted each other over  whether  their  father
         knew of their involvement in their grandfather's alcohol production
         since they were children; and

     ix) if their father produced  videos  to  the  authorities  of  alcohol
         consumption at the party, it would be reasonable to expect that  he
         would also be detained.

11. The FtT's decision records at [21] that it was common  ground  that  as
    one of the interview records was not  produced,  discrepancies  between
    the interviews could not be relied upon.  The  principal  reason  given
    for dismissing the appeal is stated at [26], "the very many  and  clear
    inconsistencies" in the appellants' account.  The main specific  points
    taken at [27-32] are:

      i) oral evidence of taking alcohol on two occasions, inconsistent with
         statements of greater involvement in drinking and distribution;

     ii) three different descriptions in oral  evidence  of  first  drinking
         occasion, its duration and those present;

    iii) inconsistency over whether they drank alcohol in the UK;

     iv) explanation by S for not drinking in UK, consciousness  of  weight,
         implausible;

      v) appellants living together would know each other's drinking habits,
         around which their whole case revolved;

     vi) one brother would know that two others drank regularly, if that was
         the case;

    vii) major discrepancy over second drinking occasion, how many present -
         9 named relatives,  or "a lot", more than 15, names unknown;

   viii) no information from mother's lawyer; claimed inability  to  provide
         information without her consent not accepted;

     ix) expert opinion accepted that scenario plausible, but undermined  by
         appellants' "inconsistency with their witness statements  and  with
         each other";

      x) on core incident of being filmed by father not being made out, rest
         of account falls away;

     xi) implausible strict father would accept his sons "going to a western
         country with all the liberal attitudes he decries shortly after  he
         has discovered them drinking for the first time".

12. The substantive points in the appellants' grounds are (following  their
    numbering):

      [3]  no  holistic  assessment;  inconsistences  noted,  but  "complete
      silence on consistent aspects", which are specified;

      [4] not shown how Judge bore in mind appellants' age and intoxication;

      [5a] error in rejecting A's evidence of not drinking as  conscious  of
      his weight, when he also said this was due to legal age  for  drinking
      in the UK, with which judge did not deal; no reason why not  plausible
      he might not drink due to weight concerns;

      [5b] evidence of 2 brothers  did  not  amount  to  saying  they  drank
      "fairly regularly";

      [6] no engagement with significance of summons, which did  not  depend
      on disclosing whereabouts of mother.

13. The FtT granted permission on  the  view  that  only  ground  [5b]  had
    arguable merit, but did not restrict the grounds which might be argued.

14. The appellants' written submissions contend, in  summary,  using  their
    headings:

      i) Events of when they first drank alcohol in Iran: inconsistency does
         not  always  lead  to  incredibility;  lip  service  only,  and  no
         intelligible explanation, of how age and  intoxication  were  taken
         into account;

     ii) Whether the appellants drank alcohol in the UK: inconsistency  over
         drinking in the UK, S said he drank not very much but only once  in
         a while; A clarified his initial "yes" to "maybe  once  in  a  blue
         moon ... [not] every week or every month"; this did not  amount  to
         drinking "fairly regularly"; no engagement with evidence of S  that
         he also did not drink due to the legal age limit, and he had turned
         18 only 5  months  before  the  hearing;  inadequate  reasoning  on
         explanation of weight concerns; implausibility of  father  allowing
         travel to UK amounted to judge "imposing her view of how the father
         should behave", and overlooked the evidence of S that he wished  to
         keep them away from their maternal family, "a cogent reason";

    iii) Failure to conduct a holistic credibility assessment: consistencies
         overlooked; even if appellants had lies, failure to  consider  that
         might be of no great consequence, given strengths of other  aspects
         or oral and documentary evidence;

     iv) Weight on summons from lawyer: error in failing to engage with  its
         contents.

15. The SSHD submits:

      i) on lack of holistic assessment, no  specification  of  the  alleged
         error;  [22]  and  [29]  of  the  decision  confirm  all   evidence
         considered in the round;

     ii) on failure to consider age and intoxication, not lip  service,  but
         fully set out at [18] and [26];

    iii) on error of fact, A's explanation unfathomable, when  he  drank  in
         Iran where this was not only illegal but a  personal  risk;  weight
         aspect the same in Iran as in UK; substantive point  correct,  that
         no sensible explanation for drinking in Iran but not in UK;

     iv)  whether  evidence  correctly   taken   as   "drinking   regularly"
         immaterial, in light of other findings;

      v)  not  speculative  to  find  actions  of  lawyer  implausible;  the
         appellants'  mother  being  his  client,  no  reason  to   withhold
         information.

16. The main points in the appellants' reply are on S's explanation for not
    drinking in the UK: "It is disingenuous to  suggest  that  the  Judge's
    mistake in recording [this]  evidence,  which  very  visibly  formed  a
    substantial part of her adverse credibility finding,  was  immaterial";
    and materiality is a modest threshold.

17. The appellants' case has been doggedly pursued; but their  grounds  and
    submissions have not persuaded me  that  there  is  any  error  in  the
    decision, such as to amount to error of law, or such as to require  the
    decision to be set aside.

18. Judges of course have to observe  their  self-directions,  and  not  to
    treat them as mere matters of form.  However, the appellants  have  not
    specified anything by which the Judge should not be taken at  her  word
    when she says more than once that she takes youth and intoxication into
    account, and that she considers the evidence as a whole.

19. The Judge cannot specify the allowances she makes  as  an  arithmetical
    percentage; and the  only  outcome  which  would  avoid  this  line  of
    criticism is to  accept  all  that  the  appellants  say,  despite  its
    shortcomings.

20. A judge does not have to mention every dot and comma  of  the  evidence
    before her, or to list all its consistencies.

21. It was well within the Judge's reasonable scope to take S's evidence as
    disclosing no sensible reason for not drinking in the UK,  as  compared
    with Iran.

22. On whether the two other appellants said that they drank in the UK, the
    Judge's typed record is that S said that he did not drink  in  the  UK,
    and he did not think his brothers did.   He  knew  he  was  allowed  to
    drink, "But I was under 18 and decided I wanted to lose weight".   S  S
    said that he drank here, "If there is a celebration  or  at  weekends",
    and his brothers did not.  A S said  that  he  drank  here,  "Wine  and
    scotch".  In re-examination it was put to him that his brother had said
    he did not drink and he replied that he was "... not a regular  drinker
    ... maybe once every few months ... I don't drink every week".

23. The evidence in re-examination, giving A S the  chance  to  back-track,
    has to be read with his first response in cross-examination.

24. The  high  point  of  the  grounds,  as  identified  in  the  grant  of
    permission, is at [5b].  I do not think the judge made any  significant
    error in construing the appellants' description of their drinking  into
    the decision.  The phrase "fairly regularly", although  vague,  perhaps
    pitches the matter rather high; but there was inconsistency  among  the
    appellants  about  drinking  in  the  UK  and  the  Judge  was,  within
    reasonable limits, entitled to take that as a point against them.

25. I have sought to summarise the specific points in  issue,  to  put  any
    error about the facts into context.  The exercise has  led  me  to  the
    view  that  the  grounds  and  submissions  for  the  appellant  burrow
    industriously for disagreement, but they look for reasons upon reasons,
    and for reasons on minute points.  At best, they  disclose  a  marginal
    error in summarising the evidence on one aspect.  It is never  possible
    to resolve the facts beyond every possible quibble.  The overall  issue
    is whether the judge has given a legally adequate explanation  for  not
    finding the evidence, as a whole, probative to the lower standard.

26. The judge was entitled to find that the evidence that  the  appellants'
    father plunged his sons' mother and grandfather  into  serious  trouble
    with the authorities, and sought to do the same to his  sons,  did  not
    reach that standard.  Naturally, some of her reasons are not so  strong
    as others; but some of them are strong  indeed.   Those  are  not  only
    inconsistencies, which are always present in some degree.  The decision
    was also founded  on  the  absurdity  of  the  appellants'  mother  not
    disclosing details of her case,  and  on  the  absurdity  of  a  strict
    Islamist making a video to cause drastic problems with the  authorities
    for his sons, other relatives, anyone else in  the  video  (and  indeed
    himself), while  encouraging his  sons  to  study  in  the  west.   The
    apparently absurd may of course be true, but it does not always have to
    be believed.

27. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision of the FtT stands.

28. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Neither party has addressed  that
    matter further.  Anonymity is preserved.

29. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the
covering letter or covering email.

