

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06851/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 28 July 2017                               |On 25 August 2017            |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                          MR CHINAR ISMAEL MOHAMMED

                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Cole        (Solicitor)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the  Secretary  of  State's  appeal  to  the  Upper Tribunal,
brought with the permission of a judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a
decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge T Jones hereinafter "the Judge")
to allow the claimant's appeal against a decision of 22 June 2016 refusing
to grant him international protection.  In particular,  although  the Judge
had  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  he  had  allowed   it   on
humanitarian protection grounds.

2.    By way of brief  background,  the  claimant  is,  it  is  accepted,  a
national of Iraq, a person of Kurdish ethnicity and  a  former  resident  of
Mosul.  It is said that he entered the  UK,  in  a  clandestine  manner,  on
12 October 2015 whereupon he claimed asylum.  Put simply, in  making  that
claim he asserted that the organisation sometimes called ISIS had sought  to
forcibly  recruit  him  in  Mosul  and  that  he  had  fled  to  avoid  such
recruitment.  He asserted that, in those circumstances, he would be at  risk
of persecution if he were to return to Mosul.  He  also  contended  that  he
would not have, available to him, an internal flight alternative.

3.    The Secretary of  State  did  not  think  the  claimant  had  given  a
truthful account of events.  The strongest  point  the  Secretary  of  State
had, in that regard, was that whilst the claimant had originally  seemed  to
claim that he had fled Iraq on 29 September 2015 in response to the attempt
to recruit him, there was  evidence  that  he  had  been  finger-printed  in
Greece on 29 July 2015.  The Secretary of State, nevertheless, did  accept
that given prevailing  conditions  in  Mosul,  unless  there  was  a  viable
internal flight alternative, the claimant would be entitled to  humanitarian
protection under Article 15c. But, it was argued that the claimant would be
able to locate either to Bagdad or to the part of the country under  Kurdish
control (the "KRG").

4.    At the hearing extensive submissions were made to the Judge as to the
viability or otherwise of an internal flight alternative.   The  content  of
those submissions is recorded very fully in  a  passage  from  paragraph 15
to 19 of the Judge's written decision.  I do not need to set  out  all  of
that in full.  But Mr Cole's submissions to the Judge (Mr Cole  represented
the claimant before the First-tier as well as before  me),  in  a  nutshell,
were that the claimant would not be able to relocate because  he  might  not
be able to properly document himself (a reference to a  CSID  document),  he
is unable to speak Arabic except to a very limited extent, he would have  no
sponsor available to assist him in obtaining accommodation  in  Baghdad,  he
is from a Sunni minority community (and I suppose he is also in  a  minority
being Kurdish), he does not have family in the Baghdad  region  nor  in  the
KRG, there is now greater  pressure  on  resources  in  the  KRG  given  the
numbers of persons relocating there, and the UNHCR had taken the  view  that
internal flight would not be viable for a person who  does  not  have  close
links with the proposed area of relocation including the presence of  family
both willing and able to provide support.

5.    The Judge, having set out the competing submissions  as  to  internal
flight went on to say this:

      "     23.  However, it is equally clear that the Appellant  simply  by
      want of being in the United Kingdom and in the  absence  of  internal
      flight options being available,  would  be  entitled  to  humanitarian
      protection pursuant to Article 15(c).

            24.  With this in mind, I have noted  the  representations  made
      by Mr Hunt-Jackson as regards his  instruction  that  the  Respondent
      would intend to remove  the  Appellant  to  Bagdad,  from  whence  the
      Appellant could then safely arrange his own onward travel,  presumably
      by air so as to avoid ISIS controlled areas, to the KRG.  I have taken
      account of the Country Guidance decision, and the  further  and  more
      recent overview of  the  humanitarian  protection  positions  for  the
      appellant, be that in Bagdad - or the KRG as highlighted in the UNHCR
      report.  I find the appellant's return to Bagdad on the facts  of  his
      own case is such at this time that to return him there would be as was
      being submitted, unduly harsh (Januzi [2006] UKHL 5) or  unreasonable
      in line with Mr Cole's submissions I have summated above.  I also, for
      like  reasons  myself  subscribe  to  Mr Cole's  balanced,   careful
      submissions, as to internal relocation into the KRG not being a viable
      option for the appellant at this time as this would be unduly harsh or
      unreasonable.

            25.  It  may  be  unfortunate  that  this  is  an  unmeritorious
      protection claim, but in all the circumstances and for  these  reasons
      and in line with Mr Cole's submissions, I am  obliged  to  allow  the
      appeal given the circumstances in country at this time."

6.     The  Secretary  of  State  sought  permission  to   appeal   to   the
Upper Tribunal contending that the Judge had given inadequate reasons  for
his conclusions regarding internal flight, had failed to take  into  account
the submissions of the Home Office Presenting Officer at the hearing  with
respect to that  issue  and  had  failed,  given  the  conclusion  that  the
claimant had lied about core aspects of his claim, to properly evaluate  the
contention that he might similarly  be  seeking  to  mislead  regarding  the
absence of ties and associations in places of possible relocation.   It  was
also suggested that the Judge had failed to consider the possibility of the
claimant benefitting from Assisted Voluntary Return ("AVR") payments.

7.    Permission to appeal was granted.   The  salient  part  of  the  grant
reads as follows:

      "The complaint by the respondent, that the learned Judge, in  holding
      the appellant would be unable to return  to  Baghdad  or  KRG,  merely
      adopted the submissions for  the  appellant  without  considering  and
      giving reasons for the rejection of the contrary  submissions  of  the
      respondent, is fairly arguable."

8.    Following the  grant  the  claimant's  solicitors  filed  a  "rule 24
reply".  It was asserted therein, in summary, that  a  judge's  reasons  are
not required to go beyond adequacy, that the  reasons  here  were  adequate,
that the Judge was not required to refer to each and every  aspect  of  the
case and that the decision was a lawful one.

9.    The appeal was listed before the Upper Tribunal (before me)  so  that
it could be considered whether or not the Judge  had  erred  in  law.   The
directions also made provision for  remaking  to  take  place  at  the  same
hearing if that was required.  As it turned out it wasn't.

10.   I was addressed  by  Mr Diwnycz.   He  acknowledged,  contrary  to  a
suggestion in the grounds, that the Judge had clearly  taken  into  account
the Presenting Officer's submissions given that he had  carefully  recorded
them.  He suggested that despite permission having been granted the  grounds
were unpersuasive (he observed that they did  not  have  "a  great  deal  of
bite") and, upon enquiry from  me,  he  said  he  could  not  disagree  with
anything contained within the Order 24 reply.

11.   In face of the above it is right to  say  that  there  was  really  no
substantial argument pursued on behalf of the Secretary of State before  me.
 In any event, there is nothing in  principle  wrong  with  a  judge  simply
making it clear that he/she accepts submissions of a representative for  the
reasons  given  in  those  submissions  and   effectively   adopting   them.
The Judge did consider the submissions made by the Presenting Officer  and
those are clearly recorded in the written decision.  It seems to  me  really
quite  difficult  to  argue  that  in  circumstances  where  the Judge  had
reproduced those submissions in some detail it can be said that he had  then
failed to keep them in mind.  I do not see that the Judge was  required  to
refer specifically to the possibility (and it seems to  have  been  no  more
than that)  of  the  claimant  receiving  some  assistance  by  way  of  the
AVR scheme.  Perhaps, given the Judge's disbelief of the  claimant's  core
account, it might be said that he should have  considered  and  specifically
addressed the possibility of the claimant lying about his lack  of  contacts
in Baghdad and the KRG.  However, there was really nothing in  the  material
before the Judge to support the proposition that the claimant did have  any
such contacts and the mere fact that he had been lying about  other  matters
did not mean he was lying about that.   Further,  that  particular  argument
was not pursued at all, let alone with any vigour, before me.

12.   In the circumstances I have concluded that the Judge did not  err  in
law.  Accordingly his decision shall stand.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of  an
error of law.  That decision shall, therefore, stand.

Anonymity

No anonymity order is made.  None was made by the  First-tier Tribunal  and
none was sought before me.



Signed:                      Date:  25 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.



Signed:                      Date:  25 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


