
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06605/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                     |Decision and Reasons promulgated |
|On 27 March 2017                        | On 28 March 2018                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MYG
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     no appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

      1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Malik, promulgated on  22  September  2017,  in
         which the Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on protection  and
         human rights grounds.

      2. At [5] the Judge records the following:





         "Preliminary matters


         5.   There was no attendance by the appellant or  a  representative
             on her behalf. The appellant's former  representatives  letter
             of 17 August 2017 stated there had been  a  breakdown  between
             the appellant and themselves and the appellant  required  time
             to seek alternative representation. This  application  for  an
             adjournment was refused on 18 August 2017  and  there  was  no
             subsequent application before me, nor any reason provided  for
             the non-attendance of the appellant at the hearing. There  was
             nothing to suggest that if the appeal was adjourned to a later
             date the appellant  would  attend  and/or  be  represented.  I
             therefore proceeded with the appeal and heard submissions only
             from the respondent's representative."


      3. The appellant sought permission to appeal claiming she received  no
         notification of the refusal of  the  adjournment  request  via  her
         representatives and was waiting for the next hearing  notice  which
         she claims never to have received; instead receiving  the  decision
         currently under challenge.  The appellant criticises  a  number  of
         the findings made.

      4. Permission was granted by another judge the First-tier Tribunal for
         the following reasons:

         "2.  The appellant is not represented and her ground of  appeal  is
             effectively that a procedural unfairness, namely:  that  prior
             written application for adjournment through solicitors  having
             been refused, and she not having been informed  of  the  same,
             her solicitors having ceased to act for her; she was not aware
             of the  date  of  the  hearing,  presuming  it  to  have  been
             adjourned, and did not attend the hearing.


         3.   This is not an explanation which I can find at this  stage  to
             have been established on the papers before  me  but  it  is  a
             fairly arguable point which, if established,  might  serve  to
             show a procedural  unfairness  being  a  potentially  material
             error of law."


      5. Two issues arise at  this  stage,  the  first  being  that  as  the
         appellant was aware of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal
         and, despite making the adjournment application, received no notice
         that the hearing had been cancelled or that there  was  any  reason
         why she did not need to attend, no arguable procedural error arises
         solely because the appellant appears to have assumed  that  because
         of the adjournment request  was  being  made  it  would  have  been
         granted.

      6. In any event permission has been granted. Before the Upper Tribunal
         the appellant failed to attend. The address  the  tribunal  has  is
         that provided by the appellant  in  her  documents,  including  the
         application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  It  is
         noted that the notice of today's hearing setting out the date, time
         and venue of the hearing was sent to the appellant on  20  February
         2018 to the appellants last stated  correspondence  address.  I  am
         satisfied that there has been  valid  service  of  that  notice  in
         accordance with the procedure rules. There is no  evidence  of  any
         correspondence being returned as not having been delivered.

      7. There is no application  for  an  adjournment  and  no  explanation
         provided for why the appellant failed to attend today's hearing. It
         is the appellant's application and  it  is  for  her  to  make  out
         whether the Judge has made any arguable legal error.

      8. The grant of permission does not identify any other basis on  which
         permission  is  granted   other   than   any   alleged   procedural
         irregularity. A reading of the determination does not disclose  any
         obvious points necessitating permission being granted  even  though
         the appellant has failed to attend to prosecute her application.

      9. Based on information available to the Upper Tribunal, and in  light
         of the appellants clear failure to engage with the appeal  process,
         even though it is her own  application  for  permission  to  appeal
         which is under consideration, I find it not made out that the First-
         tier Judge has been shown to have erred in law in a manner material
         to the decision to dismiss the appeal. On the basis of the evidence
         it is arguable the findings made by the Judge are within the  range
         of findings reasonably open to the Judge.

Decision

     10. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
         decision. The determination shall stand.

    Anonymity.

     11. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

         I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 March 2018

