
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06907/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|Centre                                |                                      |
|On 24 September 2018                  |On 03 October 2018                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  ALI THABET
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Barton, instructed by Crome Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant Ali Thabet, was born on 15 November 1986 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Egypt.  He arrived clandestinely in the  United  Kingdom  in
    June 2015.  At his screening interview in June 2015 he claimed to be  a
    Palestinian.  However, he subsequently  made  an  asylum  claim  as  an
    Egyptian citizen in January 2017.  His claim was refused by a  decision
    dated 7 July 2017.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Bell)
    which, in a decision which was promulgated on 3 January 2018, dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. There were five grounds of appeal.  At the  hearing  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal at Manchester Mrs Barton,  who  appeared  for  the  appellant,
    dealt primarily in  her  submissions  with  Ground  4  which  reads  as
    follows:

         Finally, Judge Bell  was  biased  and  racially  motivated  in  her
         conduct of the hearing and that the treatment that she meted out to
         our representative who happened to  be  of  a  different  race  and
         colour to her was overbearing while forcing her  not  to  finish  a
         single sentence in presenting her client's case in the  full  glare
         of all present.  This led the representative to break down  in  the
         middle of the hearing for which the judge had to call for a fifteen
         minute break.  Please see enclosed  copy  of  our  representative's
         notes on the day of hearing and had the potential of  changing  the
         outcome of the appeal.  For fairness and justice the  judge  should
         be sound enough to show no bias or preference for certain person or
         show the same for someone not of her colour.  This was clearly  the
         case.  She racist towards our representative (sic).

 3. Resident Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor invited Judge Bell to comment on
    the grounds seeking permission.  Judge Bell's response is  the  subject
    of a memorandum and directions  prepared  by  Resident  Judge  O'Connor
    which has been served on both parties.  Unfortunately, Judge O'Connor's
    direction that the Secretary of  State  file  a  legible  copy  of  the
    Presenting Officer's record of the hearing has not been complied  with.
    However, neither representative before  the  Upper  Tribunal  suggested
    that the appeal need be delayed for that document to be produced.

 4. Having heard the initial representations for both parties, I  found  in
    the court file a typed  document  which  appears  to  be  Judge  Bell's
    contemporaneous Record of Proceedings.  During the brief adjournment, I
    provided a copy of this document to both representatives, who  had  not
    previously  seen  it.   When  the  hearing  reconvened,  I  asked  both
    representatives  to  give  me  their  submissions  in  respect  of  the
    document.  I then reserved my decision.

 5. There appears to be some dispute as to  the  facts.   First,  both  the
    appellant's representative before the First-tier Tribunal (Ms M  Amadi)
    and Judge Bell cannot agree as to who appeared late  for  the  Tribunal
    hearing.  I do not consider it necessary to determine that issue  since
    it is clear that the judge (although she records that Ms Amadi appeared
    late at court - 10.30 -  on  account  of  train  delays)  she  did  not
    criticise Amadi  and she did not allow any irritation she may have felt
     to influence her decision;  having  recorded  the  late  arrival,  the
    record moves on immediately to record the opening of the appeal.

 6. In her response, Judge Bell gives two reasons why she intervened in the
    hearing, the first being that the case had been poorly prepared.  I  am
    entirely sure that both Ms Amadi (who has not provided her own detailed
    account of what happened at the hearing) and the have sought to give  a
    true and accurate  account  of  what  each  believed  occurred  at  the
    hearing.  However, the fact remains that I have the more detailed  and,
    importantly, contemporaneous evidence from Judge Bell in  the  form  of
    her record of proceedings.  I find that I should attach weight to those
    notes because they were prepared at the time  of  the  hearing  itself.
    The notes also support the susequent account of the  hearing  given  by
    Judge Bell in her response to Judge O'Connor. The only account  of  the
    hearing which has emerged from the appellant's  representatives  is  in
    the form of the grounds of appeal (see above).

 7. There appears to have been a problem with documents at  the  outset  of
    the hearing and which the judge has subsequently characterised as  poor
    preparation.  I note that the contemporaneous notes record that

         [Ms Amadi] does not appear very familiar  at  all  with  the  court
         documents submitted, is not able to say what they are  or  how  the
         originals relate  to  the  translations  -  conclude  no  point  in
         pursuing this matter - I will have to do the best I can.

    Notwithstanding the judge's concern regarding the  preparation  of  the
    case, there was nothing in the contemporaneous record  which  indicates
    that any irritation which the judge may have felt  has  influenced  her
    conduct of the proceedings.

 8. A little later in the record the judge asks of Ms Amadi: "Can  you  not
    ask [the appellant] about those documents so that I can be clear  about
    what they are and how he got them?"  Ms Amadi replied "It's my right to
    ask what I want or not and then the PO will ask questions  and  I  will
    respond".  After that exchange, the judge  records  "[Ms  Amadi]  quite
    disrespectful and seems angry".  My reading of  these  notes  indicates
    that whilst the judge had reason for some concern at  the  standard  of
    preparation rather of the case and the attitude of Ms  Amadi,  she  has
    remained  calm.   More   importantly,   I   am   satisfied   that   the
    contemporaneous record indicates that the judge was not expressing  any
    discontent with Ms Amadi or her conduct  of  the  proceedings  but  was
    rather attempting (as she confirms in  her  response)  to  clarify  the
    evidence to enable her to reach a fair and just  determination  of  the
    appeal.

 9. The hearing proceeded and I  note  the  judge  did  make  a  number  of
    interventions but I am satisfied that these were made to  clarify  some
    of the questions being put  by  Ms  Amadi.   Several  times  the  judge
    records that the interpreter looked puzzled.  The judge was right to be
    concerned if the interpreter could not understand the  questions  which
    he was being asked to translate before the appellant.  The  appellant's
    own case would not have been assisted by any breakdown in communication
    involving the interpreter.

10. A little later in the record, Ms  Amadi  says,  "I've  lost  confidence
    because you interrupted me.  Maybe it's because English is not my first
    language.  I've been to court many times".  The judge records  that  Ms
    Amadi was "getting agitated - ... raising her voice to me".  The  judge
    then says, "I think it would be a good  idea  to  take  a  break  now".
    There was then a brief adjournment of fifteen minutes after  which  the
    judge records Ms Amadi as "seems fine now".

11. At the end of  the  record  there  is  no  account  of  the  Presenting
    Officer's submissions but there is  a  lengthy  record  of  Ms  Amadi's
    submissions to the Tribunal which take up most of an A4  sheet.   There
    was no suggestion at all from the record of proceedings  that the judge
    prevented Ms Amadi from presenting her client's case at length  at  the
    end of the hearing.

12. It is vitally important that justice  is  done  but  also  that  it  is
    perceived to be done both by the parties to the litigation but also  by
    any rational observer of the proceedings I find no evidence to  support
    the allegations in the grounds of appeal of racism and hostility on the
    part of Judge Bell.  I accept that Ms Amadi  became  upset  but  I  can
    identify nothing that Judge Bell said to  her  in  the  course  of  the
    hearing which might  justify the allegation of racism.  I find that  Ms
    Amadi became frustrated  when  the  judge  intervened  to  clarify  the
    evidence and questions put to the appellant which Ms Amadi herself  may
    well have considered to be perfectly clear and cogent.  I do  not  find
    that the judge criticised Ms Amadi for the fact that English is not the
    first language.  Ms Amadi should be aware that it was the duty  of  the
    judge to the appellant to ensure that she understood all the  evidence.
    To that end, her interventions were reasonable and necessary.   In  the
    circumstances,  I  reject  the  submission  that  Judge  Bell   behaved
    improperly or unfairly during the course  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing either as alleged in the grounds of appeal or at all.

13. The remaining grounds may be dealt with briefly.   Those  grounds  were
    considered in detail by Judge Hodgkinson in his refusal  of  permission
    in the First-tier Tribunal which is dated 5 February 2018.   The  grant
    of permission in the Upper Tribunal  by  Judge  Rintoul  describes  the
    other grounds as having "significantly less merit" and deals only  with
    Ground 4.  In my opinion, the remaining grounds amount to nothing  more
    than a disagreement with findings which were patently available to  the
    judge on the evidence.  The judge did not find the appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness and  she  has  given  clear  and  cogent  reasons  for
    reaching that conclusion.  Ground 5 addresses Article 8  ECHR.   It  is
    asserted that the judge's analysis was "clearly  biased".   Nothing  is
    provided to support that very serious allegation.  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009 is referred to but I note
    that there are no children of the relationship  between  the  appellant
    and his British partner,  Ms  Armstrong.   Further,  I  note  that  the
    appellant and Ms Armstrong do not cohabit and  the  judge  has  made  a
    clear finding that the relationship was "at  the  present  time,  [not]
    capable of engaging Article 8".  The judge's  findings  in  respect  of
    Article 8 are manifestly sound and no error of law has been disclosed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 27 September 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 27 SEPTEMBER 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






