
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06888/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st August 2019                  |On 5th September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     OK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008.  Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The Appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Maxwell) (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ") who, in a determination promulgated on the 11th September 2018,
    dismissed his claim for protection and his human rights claim.



The factual background:

 3. The background to the Appellant's claim is set out in the determination
    of the FtTJ at paragraphs 4-27  and  in  the  decision  letter  of  the
    Secretary of State issued on 24th March 2018.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Myanmar. He entered the  United  Kingdom
    on 6 May 2002 with entry clearance as a student valid until  May  2003.
    He applied for further leave to remain  a  student  which  was  granted
    until January 2005. Upon application for further leave to  remain,  the
    application was refused on 18 February 2005 with a right to appeal.  He
    appealed against this decision, but it was dismissed by the Tribunal on
    3 March 2006 and he became appeal rights exhausted. On 19 December 2007
    he was served with an IS 15 A as an overstayer and  next  came  to  the
    attention of the respondent on 7 June 2017 when arrested by the  police
    on suspicion of fraud. On 12 July 2017 he was convicted of  two  counts
    of  possession/control  of  identity  documents  with  intent.  He  was
    sentenced to a period of nine months' imprisonment on 20 October 2017.

 5. In August 2017 he made a claim for asylum.

 6. In light of his conviction he was served with a notice of a decision to
    deport on 29 October 2017.

 7. His claim for protection was based on his assertion that he was at risk
    on return to Myanmar as a result of political opinion imputed to him by
    the authorities, and on account of his sexuality. In a decision  letter
    dated 24th March 2018 the Respondent refused his protection  and  human
    rights claim in the context of his deportation. As to his  claim  based
    on political opinion, the respondent set out reasons  why  he  had  not
    given a credible or consistent account of supporting the Karen National
    Union and his claim to have been arrested  whilst  in  Burma  was  also
    rejected. As to his  sexuality,  the  respondent  considered  that  the
    appellant had given inconsistent and vague evidence  relating  to  this
    issue and did not accept his account of his claimed sexuality.

 8. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ on  the  29th  August
    2018.

 9. At paragraphs 11 - 27 the FtTJ summarised the basis of the  appellant's
    claim. The appellant's father  had  formerly  been  a  supporter  of  a
    Christian rebel group.  The  appellant  took  part  in  anti-government
    protests and became more involved after two of his friends were shot by
    the military. He had delivered leaflets and was generally very  active.
    One day the military went to his home and drove him to prison where  he
    was ill-treated but had not been produced before any court. He was told
    he had been arrested because he had been involved in demonstrations and
    was held for about 18 months in X prison before he was released because
    he refused to sleep and had become mentally ill. After his  release  he
    was able to sit  his  final  exam  and  then  went  to  live  with  his
    grandfather, but the military intelligence kept coming  to  his  family
    home and they then  discovered  his  grandfather's  address.  When  the
    military came, his grandfather told the military had not been there. He
    was then advised to run away but was discovered hidden in a lorry.  The
    appellant was further interrogated, and it was agreed  that  he  should
    act as an unpaid military porter and was sent to cook for  the  troops.
    He was not paid for this forced labour. On a day when the fighting  was
    intense, everyone ran away and the appellant  escaped.  He  walked  for
    five days where he managed to find a lift to a different state where he
    worked as a teacher for 2 to 3 years. The appellant  left  Myanmar  for
    his own safety and obtained a student visa with the assistance  of  the
    Christian group and a friend and that his mother  had  given  him  some
    money to get a passport. He was able to travel in and out of Myanmar to
    visit his mother, the last occasion being in 2004 because she was  able
    to arrange for a bribe of $2000 to the immigration enforcement.

10. As to his sexuality, he had no relationship with either  sex  and  only
    his mother knew of his sexuality as he had told when she  was  ill.  He
    only realised his sexuality when his friend suggested it to him. He has
    never discussed any sexual relationships with his friend all  told  her
    about them. He had two  relationships  since  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom.

11. In the decision  promulgated  on  11  September  2018  his  appeal  was
    dismissed. The FtTJ set out his findings of fact  in  relation  to  his
    protection claim at paragraphs 29 - 51.  The FtTJ rejected his  account
    that he had been politically active in  the  light  of  what  the  FtTJ
    referred to  as  "very  significant  inconsistencies"  in  the  account
    provided which was set out at paragraphs  33  -  41  and  included  the
    appellant's ability to return to Myanmar after his  claimed  arrest  on
    three  return  visits  between  2003  and  2005.  In  relation  to  his
    protection claim based on his sexuality, the FtTJ set out his  findings
    at paragraph 42 - 50 but having considered the evidence, including that
    of his witness at paragraph 47, did not find  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated his sexuality  as  claimed.  He  therefore  dismissed  the
    appeal on all grounds.

12. Permission to appeal that decision was sought and refused by the First-
    tier   Tribunal   (Judge   Grant-Hutchinson)   but   was   granted   on
    reconsideration by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey on the 11  January
    2019 for the following reasons:

         "The grounds dated 7 November 2018 challenging the decision of  FTT
         J Durrance dated 11 September 2018 at ground number one and two  do
         disclose arguable material errors of law. It would  be  helpful  to
         know the appellant's response, if the  matters  had  been  put  the
         appellant, so as to assess the materiality of the claimed errors of
         law"

13. The appeal was therefore listed before the Upper Tribunal on  the  23rd
    May 2019. At that hearing the appellant was represented by Ms  Cleghorn
    of Counsel. As the appellant had  changed  his  representation  shortly
    before the hearing, Ms  Cleghorn  applied  for  adjournment  which  was
    granted by the Tribunal. A direction was made that any application made
    under Rule 15 (2A) relating to evidence relied upon must be  filed  and
    served within 14 days. The hearing was listed for hearing on 21 August.
    There had been no application filed pursuant to rule 15 (2A).

14. On the day before the hearing an application was made  to  adjourn  the
    hearing and that the representatives  had  sought  further  information
    from counsel between May and August  but  were  without  counsels  note
    which were necessary to determine what  questions  were  asked  of  the
    appellant. That application was refused on the papers.

15. At the hearing listed on the 21st August, Ms Rogers, who did not appear
    before the FtTJ, appeared on behalf of the appellant and Ms  Petterson,
    senior presenting officer, appeared on behalf of  the  respondent.  She
    informed the Tribunal that she had not been able  to  comply  with  the
    direction made in May as the  information  had  not  been  provided  by
    counsel. However, that note was now available having been sent by email
    and she sought permission to rely upon it.  In  the  circumstances  she
    stated that she did not require an adjournment. Both the  Tribunal  and
    the presenting officer were provided with copies of counsel's note  and
    time given to read the contents.

16. Whilst that evidence had not been filed and served in  compliance  with
    the directions made, in the light of its relevance to  the  proceedings
    and in the interests of justice, I  was  satisfied  that  the  evidence
    should be admitted.

17. I am grateful for the submissions heard from Ms Rogers and Ms Petterson
    on the issues that arise in the two grounds advanced on behalf  of  the
    appellant. I confirm  that  I  have  considered  those  submissions  in
    accordance with the decision of the FtTJ and the grounds which had been
    filed before the Upper Tribunal. I further confirm that  I  have  given
    full consideration to those submissions  which  I  have  heard,  and  I
    intend to incorporate those submissions into my analysis of the grounds
    that are relied upon by the appellant.

18. There is no challenge made to the FtTJ's  findings  of  fact  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on  the  basis  of  any  political  opinion.
    Neither is there any challenge made to the FtTJ's legal  assessment  of
    the deportation of the appellant.  The  two  grounds  advanced  on  the
    appellant's behalf relate solely to the credibility  findings  made  by
    the FtTJ in relation to the issue of his sexuality.



Ground 1:

19. In the original  grounds  filed  it  was  asserted  that  there  was  a
    procedural unfairness on the part of the FtTJ by placing weight  on  an
    inconsistency in the appellant's evidence which it is said was not  put
    to the appellant.

20. The  grounds  referred  to  paragraph  43  where  the  FtTJ  found  the
    appellant's evidence to be inconsistent because he had  stated  in  his
    interview that he had had no relationships with men or women but in the
    witness  statement  filed  claimed  to  have  been  in   two   same-sex
    relationships. The judge stated at paragraph 43 that the appellant  had
    not sought to explain this inconsistency. The grounds therefore  assert
    that the reason for the  failure  to  explain  this  inconsistency  was
    because it had never been put to the appellant.

21. Ms Rogers on behalf the appellant no longer relies on  this  ground  as
    set out above in view of counsel's  note  handed  in  at  this  hearing
    before the Upper  Tribunal.  In  that  note,  written  by  counsel  who
    appeared  before  the  FtTJ  and  who  also  drafted  the  grounds  for
    permission to appeal, he now accepts  that  he  was  incorrect  in  his
    recollection of events and accepts that the inconsistency  referred  to
    in ground one had been put to the appellant (see paragraphs 5 and 6  of
    counsel's note).

22. In the light of that acceptance, ground one cannot succeed as  advanced
    on that basis. However, Ms Rogers sought to reformulate the ground. She
    submitted that by reference to counsel's note  of  the  oral  evidence,
    that the appellant did explain the discrepancy  but  that  it  was  not
    considered by the FtTJ and therefore the FtTJ erred by failing to  take
    into account material evidence.

23. Ms Petterson on behalf the respondent  submitted  that  the  formulated
    ground  did  not  demonstrate  any  material  error  of  law  and   the
    explanation given was simply that he did not say what was  set  out  in
    the interview record and that it was open to the FtTJ to find that  the
    appellant's evidence was inconsistent given the explanation provided.

24. I have carefully considered the submission made by Miss Rogers. To  put
    it in context, it is important to consider the earlier findings of fact
    set out by the FtTJ before paragraph 43. At [37] the FtTJ  referred  to
    the "very significant inconsistencies in his account" and at  paragraph
    34 - 41 sets out the nature of those inconsistencies in the appellant's
    evidence that went to the core of his account. At [34] the  FtTJ  found
    that the appellant had made no reference in his screening interview  of
    having been incarcerated,  tortured  and  forced  into  labour  by  the
    military and at  paragraph  35,  observed  that  whilst  the  appellant
    claimed his father was "a fighter" in the screening interview, his case
    before the FtTJ  was  that  his  father  was  suffering  from  dementia
    (paragraph 35). At paragraph 36, the FtTJ made reference to his failure
    to mention his claimed forced labour on the battlefield  where  it  was
    said he escaped from the authorities but  that  he  had  mentioned  the
    forced work in a restaurant therefore the appellant clearly  understood
    what he was being asked about. At paragraph 37,  the  judge  considered
    his claim that his political activities increased as a reaction to  the
    death of his friends at the hands of the military  and  whilst  he  had
    referred to the men during the course  of  his  asylum  interview,  the
    appellant made no mention of the fact that they had both  been  killed.
    At paragraph 38 the judge considered a letter provided  in  support  of
    the appellant's claim but gave a  number  of  reasons  as  to  why  the
    contents  of  that  letter  was  significantly  inconsistent  with  the
    appellant's evidence. At paragraphs 39 -  41  the  judge  set  out  his
    findings in relation to  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  obtained  a
    passport after his escape from the authorities, and that the  appellant
    had returned to Myanmar on three occasions since his escape. The  judge
    did not accept the appellant's explanation that he was able  to  return
    at a time when he had been the  subject  of  adverse  interest  by  the
    authorities.

25. At [42], the FtTJ observed that the appellant  failed  to  mention  his
    sexuality during the course of his screening  interview,  however,  the
    FtTJ did not  hold  this  failure  against  the  appellant  and  stated
    "accordingly, I do not find  this  particular  omission  of  itself  to
    undermine  his  claim.  Having  said   that   there   are   significant
    inconsistencies as between the account he now gives  and  his  original
    account." At paragraph [43]  the  judge  then  set  out  one  of  those
    inconsistencies. The FtTJ made reference  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement  at  paragraph  19  where  he  claimed  to  have  had  sexual
    relationship with two men in 2007 and 2015 and  the  FtTJ  stated  that
    "both claimed relationships predated his substantive  asylum  interview
    during the course of which at question 237, he  was  asked  the  direct
    question "have you had relationships with men or women?"  His  response
    was "no, only just in my mind. If I  go  out  at  night-time,  I'm  run
    fast." The appellant has not sought to explain this inconsistency which
    I find to be particularly significant."

26. There can be no dispute that the appellant's evidence  is  inconsistent
    on this issue and further it is now accepted  that  the  appellant  was
    asked about  that  inconsistency.  Counsels  note  was  not  an  agreed
    document in view of its late arrival and as no notice had been given to
    the presenting officer it had not been checked by  a  referral  to  the
    previous presenting officer. However, there is no reason to not  accept
    the contents of that document, and it states as follows: -

          a. Asylum interview questions to 37 - have you had  relationships
             with men or women? You say - no.

               i. I replied yes

          b. can you explain why your answer begins with the word "no"?

               i. My reply was I have interest with men, not woman.

27.  From  those  answers,  it  is  clear  that  his  explanation  for  the
    inconsistent evidence was that he had not said "no"  and  that  he  had
    given an entirely different reply to the question as to whether he  had
    relationships with men and women.

28. In the light of the earlier adverse findings of credibility and in  the
    light of the appellant's explanation which  was  in  essence  that  the
    interpreter and the interviewer had written down completely  the  wrong
    reply given by the appellant, it was reasonably open  to  the  FtTJ  to
    conclude  that  he  had  not  sought  to  explain  this  inconsistency.
    Reference had been made  to  the  answer  given  in  the  interview  at
    question 237 in the refusal letter at page 7. However there had been no
    reference made in the appellant's witness statement as  the  answer  to
    Q237 being an error or any attempt to clarify the answer given prior to
    the hearing. At paragraph 43, the FtTJ referred to question  237  as  a
    "direct question" with the inference being there was little or no  room
    for any misunderstanding and there has been no challenge  made  in  the
    grounds or the submissions to the answers to the questions and  answers
    that followed.

29. Drawing those matters together, in my judgment ground 1 is not made out
    and the FtTJ's assessment was one that was properly open to him on  the
    evidence.



Ground 2:

30. Ms Rogers relies on the written grounds. It is submitted  that  it  was
    central to the appellant's claim that he was  a  subject  of  a  sexual
    assault in prison and that the assailants knew  of  his  sexuality  and
    that was the reason for the assault but that the FtTJ at  paragraph  45
    engaged in speculation by stating that this claim was  similar  to  the
    description of a sexual assault reported by Mr  X  on  the  appellant's
    behalf.

31. Ms Rogers submitted that this had not been put to the appellant and was
    therefore a procedural irregularity. She submitted  that  the  language
    used by the FtTJ at paragraph 45 was "speculative" and  made  it  clear
    that the FtTJ was relying on the coincidence between the two  accounts.
    She therefore submitted that it was a material issue and one which  had
    influenced  the  decision  made  by  the  FtTJ.  It  was  a  procedural
    irregularity which went to the issue of fairness.

32. Ms Petterson submitted that this was not the central issue as there had
    been no medical evidence or any evidence from the police. She submitted
    that the grounds did not undermine the FtTJ's  overall  findings  where
    the FTT J had made a number of other adverse  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's account of his claimed sexuality apart from
    this issue at paragraph 45.

33. I have carefully considered the submissions made in the context of  the
    FtTJ's decision  as  a  whole  and  the  evidence  before  him.  Whilst
    paragraph 45 is the paragraph under challenge, in fact the  FtTJ  began
    his consideration of the issue at paragraph 44 where  he  set  out  the
    appellant's  claim  and  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the  appellant
    concerning the sexual assault.  It is clear from reading  paragraph  44
    that the FtTJ had considered the appellant's evidence in the  light  of
    the medical records before him and  that  the  account  given  was  not
    consistent with the evidence contained in the records exhibited at page
    40 of the bundle. Those records refer to the caseworkers  written  note
    on 9 April 2018 referring to the location of the  assault  as  not  the
    prison but at a different centre. The note records on 26 April that the
    appellant gave a different account of the type of assault and the  rule
    35 report referred to an assault at the prison  but  gave  a  different
    reason for why the assault occurred which the judge made  reference  to
    at paragraph 44.

34. It is clear that in view of the inconsistent evidence set  out  in  the
    written records that the FtTJ stated that he was not  able  to  resolve
    this issue. He went on to refer to it being  more  than  a  coincidence
    that a similar factual claim had been  made  in  a  letter  from  Mr  X
    (exhibited a page 15 of the  respondent's  bundle),  concerning  events
    which took place in Myanmar.

35. Paragraph 45 should be viewed not only in the light of paragraph 44 but
    also in the light of the contents of the letter itself which the  judge
    considered at paragraph 38 of his  decision.  The  letter  set  out  an
    account of the appellant's arrest, being charged with  an  offence  and
    sentenced to a period of 3  months  imprisonment  and  that  whilst  in
    custody was forced into an assault. The FtTJ's assessment was that  the
    contents of the letter was inconsistent with the  appellant's  evidence
    in material aspects; the appellant claimed  that  there  was  no  court
    hearing but the letter referred to a sentence of three months, the name
    of the prison was different and the length of the imprisonment was also
    different and that  the  appellant  had  not  referred  to  any  forced
    assault. The FtTJ made refence to the same factual account set  out  in
    that letter relating to events in Myanmar and the factual account as to
    what occurred in the UK which he referred to as "a coincidence."

36. However when looking at the FTT J's decision, whilst at paragraph 45 he
    referred to it as a "coincidence" the FtTJ did not state that he placed
    any weight on that particular point as one adverse to the appellant and
    therefore contrary to the grounds there can be  no  unfairness  to  the
    appellant.

37. The FtTJ had the advantage of seeing and assessing  the  appellant  and
    making an  assessment  of  both  the  oral  and  the  written  evidence
    presented on his behalf. The judgment of Lady  Hale  in  AH  (Sudan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2007] UKHL  49,  [2008]  AC
    678 emphasises this issue at paragraph 31:

         "...This is an expert tribunal charged with administering a complex
         area of law in challenging circumstances. To paraphrase a view I
         have expressed about such expert tribunals in another context, the
         ordinary courts should approach appeals from them with an
         appropriate degree of caution; it is probable that in understanding
         and applying the law in their specialised field the tribunal will
         have got it right: see Cooke v Secretary of State for Social
         Security [2001] EWCA Civ 734, [2002] 3 All ER 279, para 16. They
         and they alone are the judges of the facts. It is not enough that
         their decision on those facts may seem harsh to people who have not
         heard and read the evidence and arguments which they have heard and
         read. Their decisions should be respected unless it is quite clear
         that they have misdirected themselves in law. Appellate courts
         should not rush to find such misdirections simply because they
         might have reached a different conclusion on the facts or expressed
         themselves differently."


38. In my judgment, the grounds relied upon do  not  demonstrate  that  the
    judge failed to properly consider the evidence before him. Whilst those
    grounds seek to only challenge  paragraphs  43  and  45,  the  decision
    should be read as a whole and the judge set out at paragraphs 33  -  50
    his findings of fact and his assessment of the appellant's  credibility
    and those which related to the issue of his sexuality at paragraphs  42
    - 48. In that assessment the FtTJ made a number of adverse  credibility
    findings when considering the appellant's account in the context of the
    evidence as a whole, including the evidence of a witness  at  paragraph
    47.

39. In summary, the assessment made was one reasonably open to the FtTJ  on
    the  evidence,  both  oral  and  documentary,  and  it  has  not   been
    demonstrated that the decision of the FtTJ involves the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law. Therefore the decision to dismiss  the  appeal
    shall stand.



Notice of Decision

40. The decision of the FtTJ did not involve the making of an  error  on  a
    point of law; the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 27/8/2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
