



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/06468/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 October 2017                         |On 16 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                              MR KARZAN QADREE
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms McCallum
For the Respondent:    Ms O'Brien


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in  1994.   His  nationality  is  disputed.   He
    appeals against a decision of the Respondent made on  6  June  2016  to
    refuse his application for asylum.

 2. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is  an  Iranian  national
    who fears persecution by  the  authorities  who  caught  him  smuggling
    alcohol and weapons over the Iraq/Iran border. In  or  around  November
    2015 while smuggling goods he  was  ambushed  by  the  authorities  and
    detained for one night. He  was  released  on  bail  to  attend  court.
    However, he went back to his activities.  Soon after his family  called
    to say they had received papers and his  life  was  in  danger  and  he
    should not return.  They had more  evidence  against  him.   An  arrest
    warrant had been served.  An uncle arranged for his exit from Iran.

 3. The Respondent refused the application.  It was not accepted that he is
    an Iranian national.  His knowledge of his home area and Iran generally
    was vague.  When fingerprinted in France he claimed to be a citizen  of
    Iraq.  His claim to have been ambushed, detained and released  on  bail
    was also not believed.

 4. He appealed.

 5. Following a hearing at Glasgow on 20 December 2016 Judge of the  First-
    Tier David C Clapham dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds.   His
    findings are at paragraph 44ff.

 6. At [44] he states:  'The  Appellant  has  conceded  that  when  he  was
    fingerprinted  in  France  he  provided  a  false  name  and  a   false
    nationality.  The Appellant did not hesitate when in France to create a
    story to suit his purpose.  When the Appellant was in France he claimed
    to be Iraqi and used a false name.  The Appellant was prepared  to  lie
    when he was in France in order to avoid being sent back.  In  my  view,
    the provision by the Appellant of a false name and a false  nationality
    while in France must undermine his credibility ...'

 7. The  judge  went  on  (from  [45ff])  in  considering  the  appellant's
    historical account to find substantial  differences  between  his  oral
    account and that given in his statement.  He  made  additional  adverse
    findings. A medical report did not provide support for the account.  He
    concluded  (at  [52])  that  the  account  was  'entirely  lacking   in
    credibility'.

 8. He sought permission to appeal on three  grounds:  failure  to  provide
    adequate reasons, failure to make a finding on nationality and  failure
    to give sufficient  weight  to  the  medical  report.   Permission  was
    refused.

 9. The application was renewed on identical terms to the Upper Tribunal.

10. Permission was granted on 21 August 2017 by UTJ Gill who stated:

           'The appellant claimed to be a national of Iran.  The  Secretary
           of State disputed his claimed nationality.  It is arguable  that
           it is unclear from the  decision  of  (FTJ)  whether  the  judge
           accepted or rejected the appellant's claimed nationality.  It is
           therefore arguable that the judge failed to resolve  a  material
           fact in issue.


           Permission is therefore granted  on  ground  2.   Permission  is
           refused on the remaining grounds.  Contrary to  ground  1  (FTJ)
           did give  adequate  reasons  for  his  findings.   There  is  no
           substance in ground 3.  It was for  the  Judge  to  decide  what
           weight to give the medical report.'


11. At the error of law hearing before me, Ms McCallum essentially repeated
    the submission  made  in  the  grounds  about  lack  of  a  finding  on
    nationality.  The written submissions which were before the  judge  set
    out at length why the claimed nationality should be accepted  based  on
    the internal and external  consistency  of  evidence  provided  by  the
    appellant.  It was material because it supports his credibility  if  he
    is Iranian.  It also affects risk on return.

12. Ms O'Brien's position was that he would be removed to  the  country  of
    which he claims to be a national if he was not at risk  there.  He  has
    made no claim with regard to risk  in  Iraq.  The  inference  from  the
    judge's decision is that he is Iranian  whose  historical  account  was
    disbelieved.  Even if  the  finding  on  nationality  was  unclear  the
    findings were clear that he would not be at risk if returned to Iran.

13. In considering this matter it is for the  appellant  to  establish  his
    nationality.  The Respondent considered that  he  had  not  established
    that he is Iranian as he claims.  From  my  reading  of  para  [44]  by
    stating that the appellant 'conceded that when he was fingerprinted  in
    France he provided a false name and a false nationality' the  inference
    is that the judge found that the appellant  is  Iranian  but  that  his
    willingness to lie about that matter to the French authorities and  his
    failure  to  claim  asylum  in  France  did  not  assist  his   overall
    credibility.

14. However, in the event that it was an error not to make a clear  finding
    on nationality I do not consider that it was material because the judge
    at [45-52] went on to give numerous reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    Appellant had been untruthful about his claimed problems in Iran  as  a
    smuggler. The judge rejected the account. No successful  challenge  has
    been made to these findings which were properly  open  to  him  on  the
    evidence for the reasons he gave.  Even  if  the  appellant  left  Iran
    illegally and is returned as a failed asylum seeker, as an Iranian male
    of whom no adverse interest has been manifested by the Iranian State he
    does not face a real risk of persecution/breach of his Article 3 rights
    on that basis (per SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran
    CG [2016] UKUT 00308.

15. Thus, he is not at risk on return to Iran.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  does  not  show  the  making  of  a
    material error of law.
That decision dismissing the appeal stands.

No anonymity direction made.





Signed                                             Date 16/11/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway








