
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA060622016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 May 2017                                |On 03 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     H Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Cole
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, H Y,  was  born  in  1991  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Afghanistan.  He appealed against a decision of the respondent dated 27
    May 2016 to refuse  his  protection  claim.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Kelly), in a decision promulgated on 8 December 2016,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Judge Kelly summarised the appellant's claim as follows:

         "5.  The appellant's case, as he presented it at the hearing of his
         appeal, may conveniently be summarised as follows.

         6.   Prior to his departure for the United Kingdom in May 2014, the
         Chief of  Staff  of  the  TCC  (Mukhtar  Ullah)  had  promised  the
         appellant that he would be given a key position  within  government
         upon his return  to  Afghanistan.  Mukhtar  Ullah  reiterated  this
         during the  course  of  a  telephone  conversation  whilst  he  was
         visiting London with Dr Ashraf Ghani, who was by now the  President
         of Afghanistan. The appellant had been too busy to meet  with  them
         at the time due to his study commitments in Chester.

         7.   Upon returning to Afghanistan in  September  2016,  therefore,
         the appellant met with Mukhtar Ullah who was now the Chief of Staff
         to the President. They discussed the terms and conditions of a role
         within government (that was similar to that which he  had  formerly
         held with the TCC) and they agreed that he would commence  his  new
         employment upon return from his graduation ceremony in Chester (UK)
         which was due to take place on 5 November 2015.

         8.   On the 26 October  2015,  the  appellant  attended  his  local
         mosque in Afghanistan with  his  uncle,  Mr  M  N.  Following  noon
         prayers, his uncle informed him that a group  of  local  insurgents
         were coming for him. Rather than returning to his  father's  house,
         therefore, the appellant went with his wife  and  children  to  the
         home of his uncle in Shahak in order to hide. Shortly afterwards, a
         group of insurgents attended and surrounded his uncle's house.  His
         uncle and a group of local  Elders  acted  as  intermediaries.  The
         insurgents said they had come for the appellant because they needed
         him to work for them. They were told they could not enter the house
         as there were  women  present.  The  appellant's  uncle  sought  to
         persuade the insurgents that the appellant was not  going  to  work
         for the government and was thus of no value to them. The insurgents
         nevertheless insisted that the appellant work for them due  to  his
         links to  high-ranking  government  politicians  and  knowledge  of
         sensitive information. Ultimately, agreement was reached  that  the
         insurgents would lift their siege in return for a promise that  the
         appellant would be delivered to them at a later date.

         9.   The appellant thereafter returned to the home of  his  father.
         He remained undetected because he was wearing a burka.  Upon  being
         told what had occurred, his father  advised  him  that  he  had  no
         option but to leave the country. That advice was  reinforced  when,
         having explained to Mukhtar Ullah what had  occurred  earlier  that
         day, he was informed that the government would be unable to provide
         him with protection  outside  work.  He  therefore  flew  out  from
         Afghanistan on the following day, landing in the  UK  on  the  28th
         October 2015.

         10.  It did not occur to the appellant to claim asylum upon arrival
         at the airport. He did  however  make  a  number  of  enquiries  of
         various solicitors. He eventually found a solicitor  in  Manchester
         who put him in touch with the Home Office. This led to  the  making
         of an appointment in order to claim  asylum  on  the  3rd  December
         2015.

         11.  The appellant has since learnt from his uncle (who remains  in
         Afghanistan) that the insurgents attended at the home of his father
         a few days after his departure and fired shots. As  a  result,  his
         parents, his sister, and his brother, have moved to Iran.

         12.  On return, he fears "persecution from insurgents  ...  because
         [he] couldn't survive their torture or I couldn't work  them  so  I
         couldn't survive their torture" [reply to question 110 of AIR]."

 3. At [37], Judge Kelly found that the  appellant  had  been  truthful  in
    relation to the entirety of his account.  At [38], he concluded,

         "38.  At  first  blush,  the   respondent's   argument   concerning
         sufficiency of protection is an attractive one. If the President of
         Afghanistan is  unable  to  provide  the  appellant  with  adequate
         protection then nobody can. However, the appellant does not seek to
         argue that he would be unsafe during office hours. His argument  is
         that that there would be insufficient protection for him  at  other
         times, such as when he was at home or whilst travelling to and from
         work. I find that argument persuasive given that it  was  confirmed
         to the appellant that  the  security  arrangements  for  government
         staff would not extend beyond the office door. So far as other  law
         enforcement agencies  (such  as  the  police)  are  concerned,  the
         Mujahideen have already demonstrated  their  ability  to  act  with
         impunity within the appellant's home area. I am therefore satisfied
         that the appellant would to that extent at risk on return."

 4. Judge Kelly rejected the appellant's claim that he  would  be  at  risk
    elsewhere in Afghanistan:

         "39. I am not however satisfied that this  risk  extends  to  other
         areas of Afghanistan. The appellant's argument to the contrary  can
         be found in paragraph 9 of his witness statement:

             "It is not possible for me to return to Afghanistan because  I
             have travelled 114 times to the different provinces. There are
             32 different provinces so I have visited them a lot.  I  would
             meet with the people, meet with the  chief  of  police,  local
             leaders, ministers etc and so they all  know  who  I  am.  The
             insurgents could have been there. They are  often  just  local
             people. I was also in touch with the local people to  help  to
             solve their  problems  when  they  contacted  the  President's
             office so they know who I am. I cannot go  back  to  Kabul  as
             that was where I was living before and it other provinces  are
             a lot less secure than Kabul so I have nowhere safe to go."

         40.  I reject this argument for the following reasons.  Firstly,  I
         have  noted  the  speculation  that  is  inherent  in  the   phrase
         "insurgents could have been there". Secondly, whilst I accept  that
         the appellant has travelled extensively throughout Afghanistan this
         would in turn necessarily have limited the time that he was able to
         spend in any one place and thus become a  familiar  face.  Thirdly,
         and in any event, the prospect that local people would remember the
         appellant following brief visits that were  made  upwards  of  2  �
         years ago seem to me  to  be  so  remote  that  it  can  safely  be
         discounted. Moreover, my attention has not  been  directed  to  any
         evidence to suggest that there is a network of  communication  that
         would enable insurgents in Kabul to  identify  the  fact  that  the
         appellant was residing in another area of Afghanistan."

 5. Judge Kelly reached his own conclusion regarding  the  availability  of
    internal flight at [41]:

         "41. I therefore turn  to  consider  whether  the  appellant  could
         reasonably be expected to reside in another area of Afghanistan.  I
         accept that the arrival of a highly educated  and  to  some  extent
         westernised man in a rural community would  raise  questions  about
         who he was. I also accept that it would be difficult for a  man  of
         his background to gain employment in such an  area.  On  the  other
         hand, it appears to me that he  would  have  little  difficulty  in
         finding suitable employment in an urban area such as Jalalabad.  He
         would not attract the level of attention in a  populous  city  that
         might occur in a rural village. He would  not  be  required  to  be
         discreet about his political opinions. There would  however  be  no
         reason for the casual observer to suspect that he had  ever  worked
         for central government with its associated risk of  coming  to  the
         adverse attention of members of the local  Mujahidin.  I  therefore
         find that the appellant has failed to show that he would be  unsafe
         upon relocation to another city in Afghanistan, or that it would be
         unreasonable to expect him to do so."

 6. Granting permission, Judge Kopieczek wrote:

         "I consider it arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in
         law in his consideration of the issue of internal relocation in the
         light of the appellant's background and the findings of fact in his
         favour.  Whilst not advanced as an argument in the  grounds,  there
         may be something to be said for the  proposition  that  whilst  the
         First-tier Tribunal Judge at [41] considered  the  appellant  would
         not be required to be discreet about his  political  opinions,  the
         same arguably could not be said for his background of work for  the
         government."

 7. Mr Cole, for the appellant, sought to rely on MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA
    Civ 715, in particular at [46 - 49]:

         "There are three difficulties with  this  submission.  First,  Lord
         Dyson only stated that there "may be scope"  (emphasis  added)  for
         the application of the distinction  and  only  regarded  it  as  an
         alternative way of looking at the position. Secondly, his  approach
         was not adopted by the other members of the Supreme Court. Thirdly,
         in RT (Zimbabwe)'s case, Lord Dyson stated (at [50]) that the parts
         of his judgment on which Ms  Rhee  relied  said  no  more  than  "a
         determination of  whether  the  applicant's  proposed  or  intended
         action lay at the core of the right or at its margins was useful in
         deciding  whether  or  not  the  prohibition  of  it  amounted   to
         persecution". As Ms  Demetriou  observed,  that  is  essentially  a
         restatement of Article 9(1)(a) of the Directive, which is concerned
         with whether the persecution is sufficiently serious to be a severe
         violation of basic human rights. In this case, the Upper Tribunal's
         finding is that MSM faces the risk  of  death  or  violence  if  he
         returns to Somalia as a journalist, and that clearly  falls  within
         the meaning of persecution under Article 9 of the Directive.

         I have acknowledged that the  cases  I  have  referred  to  so  far
         concerned actual rather than imputed protected characteristics. The
         decision  of  the  Federal  Court  of  Australia  in  Minister  for
         Immigration and Border Protection v Szsca  [2013]  FCAFC  115  does
         not. It is, in my judgment, on all fours with the present case. The
         case concerned a citizen of Afghanistan who applied for  asylum  in
         Australia on the ground that the Taliban had imputed pro-government
         or pro-western opinions to him because he had  worked  as  a  lorry
         driver transporting construction materials in Afghanistan.  He  had
         previously  worked  as  a  jeweller.  In  the  tribunal,   it   was
         successfully  argued  that  because  the  imputation  of  political
         opinion arose solely because of the  Taliban's  perception  of  the
         applicant's truck driving activities, he could avoid persecution if
         he were to change his occupation and work as a jeweller  in  Kabul.
         An appeal by the applicant to the Federal Court  of  Australia  was
         allowed.

         The majority of the Federal Court decided (see [62]  -  [66])  that
         the tribunal had erred in embarking on a chain  of  reasoning  that
         the applicant for refugee status could avoid persecution if he were
         to change his occupation. It stated (at [63]) that the tribunal had
         erred in looking at what the individual "could do rather than  what
         he would  do  if  returned"  to  Afghanistan.  The  High  Court  of
         Australia dismissed the Minister's appeal, but did so on the ground
         that the tribunal had failed to address whether the applicant could
         reasonably be expected to remain and work  as  a  truck  driver  in
         Kabul. That is an internal relocation analysis. Ms Rhee invited  us
         to follow the dissenting judgment of Flick J in the Federal  Court.
         In terms of precedent, this decision provides no assistance to  her
         case and directly supports those of the respondent and the position
         taken by the UNHCR. The argument accepted by the  majority  of  the
         Federal Court is also  essentially  the  argument  which,  for  the
         reasons I have given, I would have been inclined to accept  in  the
         present case had it been necessary to decide the wider question.

         For these reasons, I would dismiss this appeal."

 8. Mr Cole also helpfully supplied  me  with  the  case  of  Minister  for
    Immigration and Border Protection v SZSCA [2013] FCAFC 155, the Federal
    Court of Australia case to which the Court of Appeal refer in MSM.  The
    Federal Court, in turn, approved an Australian High Court  decision  (s
    395) including the statement in  that  judgment  that,  "the  [Refugee]
    Convention would give no protection from  persecution  for  reasons  of
    religion or political opinion if it was a condition of protection  that
    the person affected must take steps -  reasonable  or  otherwise  -  to
    avoid offending the wishes of the persecutors."

 9. I am reminded that each case should be determined according to its  own
    facts.  In the instant appeal, the facts are very clearly  set  out  in
    Judge Kelly's decision in the passages which I have  quoted  above.   I
    accept that it is often unhelpful to compare the facts of a  case  with
    those in a case before the Higher Courts; one should, instead, seek  to
    derive from the judgments of Higher Courts the principles of law  which
    it is necessary  to  apply  rather  than  to  embark  upon  a  detailed
    comparison of factual matrices.  However, in this case, I find that  it
    is possible to distinguish the facts from those which  applied  in  MSM
    and also in the Australian case referred to by the Court of  Appeal  in
    MSM at [47].  In those cases, the issue of internal flight was examined
    in the context of an appellant's profession or usual occupation, in the
    case of the Australian case,  that  of  lorry  driver.   Lorry  drivers
    operate throughout Afghanistan.  Further, as the Court of Appeal noted,
    in the Australian case "the Taliban have imputed pro-government or pro-
    western opinions to [the appellant] because he had worked  as  a  lorry
    driver transporting construction materials  in  Afghanistan."   In  the
    present case, the imputation of political  opinions  to  the  appellant
    because he had been offered a job  at  a  high  level  in  the  Central
    Government of Afghanistan was not the  issue.   Rather,  the  appellant
    feared local insurgents who had become aware that he had  been  offered
    the job in government not because of the imputed political opinions  to
    him to which they objected on account of  his  work  but  because  they
    wished to exploit his employment position for their own ends  no  doubt
    by manipulating him and obtaining information from him which he  might,
    in turn, acquire in the course of his duties.  It  is  clear  that  the
    appellant believed that he  would  be  ill-treated  by  those  specific
    insurgents if he chose not to assist them.  There is nothing to suggest
    that if he was working in another government job  the  appellant  would
    meet the same problems; for whatever reason, the particular  insurgents
    wished to exploit his occupation of the particular role  which  he  had
    been offered and which  he  would  take  up  upon  his  return  from  a
    graduation ceremony in the United  Kingdom.   In  short,  the  fear  of
    persecution arose (i) from the annoyance of the insurgents who had been
    thwarted by the fact that the appellant had not taken up  the  job  but
    fled to the United Kingdom and; (ii) the fact that if he had stayed and
    taken up the job the Afghan authorities were  unwilling  or  unable  to
    offer the appellant protection.  I accept,  referring  to  the  passage
    which  I  have  quoted  above  [8]  that  the   appellant's   potential
    persecutors would "win" if he  was  compelled  to  work  for  them  and
    thereby be bent to their wish if he returned  to  Kabul.   However,  Mr
    Cole's submission that the appellant would, in effect, be excluded from
    taking any high level government job (in  Jalalabad  or  a  large  city
    other than Kabul) is simply not borne out by the facts  in  this  case.
    As I have said, there is no evidence that these  particular  insurgents
    or any other group of insurgents  elsewhere  in  Afghanistan  would  be
    interested if the appellant  were  to  occupy  some  other  high  level
    government job and, secondly, there is no evidence at all that the  job
    referred to by the appellant in which he hoped  to  take  up  in  Kabul
    would be available to him now some years after it had been offered  and
    that it would be available outside the capital of Afghanistan.  In this
    way, the facts of this case are wholly  different  from  those  in  the
    Australian decision because, as I have noted, a lorry  driver  (in  the
    same way as a doctor or at teacher) is a job title or profession  which
    exists throughout Afghanistan.  Significantly, Mr Cole  did  not  argue
    that internal flight was not appropriate in this  case  simply  because
    the appellant would be unable  to  take  up  the  job  offered  to  him
    anywhere else other than Kabul.  If the appellant sought and obtained a
    high level government job (obviously, not the same job as that which he
    had been offered previously which would only be available in Kabul) in,
    say, Jalalabad there is no evidence that any group of insurgents  would
    necessarily show an interest in him because of his work  or  that  they
    would impute political opinions to him on account of  such  work.   The
    fear which he may have felt in Kabul related to a particular job and to
    a particular group of insurgents; neither the job nor  the  individuals
    involved will be the same if he seeks employment in a large  city  such
    as Jalalabad.

10. In the light of these comments, I conclude that Judge Kelly's  findings
    at [41] were indeed available to him  on  the  evidence.   Judge  Kelly
    refers to "suitable employment" in a city such as Jalalabad. I take  it
    that he intends to mean government work as  well  as  other  employment
    which might  suit  the  appellant  given  his  educational  background.
    Indeed, I would go  further  than  Judge  Kelly  in  finding  that  the
    appellant could work for the Central Government in Jalalabad and do  so
    without risk of serious harm although I do  agree  with  Judge  Kelly's
    observation  that  "no  casual  observer  [would]  suspect  that   [the
    appellant] had ever worked for the Central Government ..."

11. For the reasons I have given, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 23 June 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive  Lane                                   Date:  23
June 2017















