
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06205/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 8 February 2018                 |On 21 March 2018                        |
|                                   |                                        |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                    [I H]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, of Aman Solicitors Advocates (London)
Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
       Tribunal Cary (the judge), promulgated on 2 August 2017, in which  he
       dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  respondent's  decision
       dated 14 June 2017 refusing his protection claim.



Factual Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Syria, date of  birth  [  ]  1973.  He
       entered the United Kingdom on 18 January 2017 from China, on  transit
       to Oman. He destroyed his passport on arrival at  Heathrow  (although
       he retained an expired passport) and claimed  asylum.  He  maintained
       that he was unable  to  return  to  Syria  because  of  the  security
       situation. In interview he stated that he  left  Syria  in  1996  and
       moved to Dubai where he married his wife, a Russian national,  on  17
       July 2004. He had not been back  to  Syria  since  2009.  He  briefly
       visited Russia in 2006/2007 when he resided with  his  wife  and  her
       family before moving to Oman in 2008 where he lived until  2015/2016.
       The appellant claimed he had been attacked by 4 people in  Russia  as
       he was a foreigner. The appellant set up a company in China in 2014.

    3. The respondent accepted that the appellant is a  national  of  Syria,
       and that he would be unable to reside in Dubai, Oman, or  China.  The
       respondent considered that the appellant could,  however,  reside  in
       Russia. This was because he was married to  a  Russian  national.  In
       support of her conclusion the respondent  identified  and  relied  on
       background information indicating  that  a  foreigner  married  to  a
       Russian citizen residing in the Russian Federation would be  able  to
       apply for a temporary or permanent residence permit.  The  respondent
       noted that the appellant and his wife were  issued  with  a  marriage
       document in Dubai. The respondent concluded that the appellant  could
       use this marriage document to obtain a residence permit to enable him
       to reside in Russia. The respondent had given the  appellant  a  two-
       week extension to obtain the marriage document but no  such  document
       was provided by the appellant.

    4. The respondent considered the appellant's claim to have been attacked
       in Russia but rejected this aspect of his account. The respondent did
       not accept that the appellant had a genuine and subjective fear  were
       he to reside in Russia. The respondent went on  to  consider  whether
       the appellant would be provided with a sufficiency of  protection  in
       Russia and concluded that he would. The respondent considered in  any
       event that the appellant would be able to internally relocate  within
       Russia. The respondent rejected the appellant's asylum claim  on  the
       basis that he would be able to reside in Russia. For the same reasons
       the appellant's article 2 and article 3  claim  where  rejected.  The
       respondent then went on to reject the claim under article 8.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

    5. The judge heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  which  included
       questions asked in  cross-examination  concerning  why  he  would  be
       unable to live in Russia. The appellant  confirmed  that  his  wife's
       mother and sister were still living in Russia and that his  wife  was
       currently visiting China, was staying with a  friend  there  and  was
       undergoing IVF treatment. The appellant said that his wife could  not
       stay in Russia because she did not get on with  her  stepfather.  The
       judge recorded the appellant's account of being attacked in the small
       village in which he  resided  in  Russia.  He  did  not  report  what
       happened to the police as he was advised  that  they  were  like  the
       Mafia. The attack took place in the village that was approximately 16
       hours by train from Moscow and even further from St  Petersburg.  The
       judge  recorded  the  Presenting  Officer's  submissions   that   the
       appellant could go to Russia. The  judge  also  recorded  Mr  Saeed's
       submission that the decision in RR (refugee  -  safe  third  country)
       Syria [2010] UKUT 422 (IAC) (RR (Syria)) should no longer be followed
       as, at the time of that decision, the respondent was required to make
       a separate removal decision and this was no longer the case following
       the amendments brought in  by  the  Immigration  Act  2014  affecting
       appeal rights.

    6. The judge accepted that the appellant could not be returned to Syria,
       and noted that it was the respondent's case that he could be  removed
       to Russia. The appellant  was  present  in  the  UK  as  someone  who
       required leave to enter or remain but did not have it  (s.10  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999). The judge noted that an Immigration
       Officer is entitled to give a direction for a person's removal  under
       paragraphs 8 to 10 of Schedule 2 to the Immigration Act  1971,  which
       included removal of a person to a country where there was  reason  to
       believe the person would be admitted.

    7. At [28] the judge wrongly set out the grounds of appeal available  to
       the appellant under s.84 of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
       Act 2002 (the 2002 Act). He included an extract of  s.84  in  a  form
       prior to its amendment by the Immigration Act 2014.  The  judge  then
       stated that the (unamended)  provisions  of  the  2002  Act  did  not
       include 'removal directions' within  the  description  of  appealable
       immigration decisions and that it was therefore difficult to see  how
       the change in removal arrangements since RR (Syria) could assist  the
       appellant. The judge relied on what was  then  the  Court  of  Appeal
       authority of  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  ST
       (Eritrea) [2010] EWCA Civ 643 (SSHD v ST) in asserting that the  fact
       of being found to be a refugee does not of itself entitle a person to
       a grant of asylum.

    8. The judge then went on to consider whether the appellant's removal to
       Russia would be contrary to Article 33 of the Refugee Convention. The
       judge referred to Article 27 of Council  Directive  2005/85/EC  which
       deals with the application of the safe 3rd country concept and  noted
       that it was the respondent's position that  the  appellant  had  some
       connection with Russia which would make it reasonable for him  to  go
       to that country.

    9. The judge considered in some detail the background evidence  provided
       by the appellant in  respect  of  Russia,  and  then  rejected,  with
       supporting reasons, the appellant's claim to have  been  attacked  in
       Russia. I need not dwell on this aspect of the decision as it has not
       been challenged in the grounds of appeal. The  judge  considered,  in
       the alternative, that even if  the  attack  had  occurred  there  was
       nothing to suggest it was anything other than  an  isolated  criminal
       attack, and that  the  appellant  could,  in  any  event,  internally
       relocate. The judge found that there was nothing  in  the  background
       material suggesting that Syrians living  in  Russia  were  reasonably
       likely to be at risk of persecutory treatment or that the authorities
       were unwilling or unable to  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection.
       There was nothing to indicate that the appellant would  be  perceived
       as having a political profile that would bring  him  to  the  adverse
       attention of the Russian authorities. The  judge  specifically  found
       that there was no risk to the appellant of indirect refoulement  from
       Russia to Syria. There has been no challenge to this  aspect  of  the
       decision. The judge found that the appellant had  a  connection  with
       Russia through his wife, a Russian citizen who  spent  the  first  18
       years of her life in that  country.  The  judge  found  it  would  be
       reasonable to expect the appellant to go to Russia with his wife  who
       was only "visiting" China for the purpose of IVF treatment, and  that
       his removal to Russia would not contravene Art 33(1) of  the  Refugee
       Convention.

   10. The judge indicated that he did not need to consider the practicality
       of the appellant's removal to Russia citing Saad, Diriye and Osorio v
       The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2001] EWCA Civ  2008.
       In  the  alternative,  the  judge  considered  that  the  appellant's
       proposed removal  to  Russia  would  be  feasible  in  light  of  the
       information provided by the respondent in  her  Reasons  For  Refusal
       Letter and in view of his marriage to a Russian citizen. There was no
       evidence before the judge to suggest that it  was  reasonably  likely
       that the appellant would not be returnable to Russia and he  did  not
       produce anything from the Russian authorities to say that they  would
       not permit him to enter Russia or give him some form of residency.

The challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's decision

   11. The grounds  of  appeal,  as  amplified  by  Mr  Saeed  in  his  oral
       submissions and his skeleton argument, contend  that  the  judge  was
       wrong to follow RR (Syria) because that was a decision made under the
       previous appeal  regime  prior  to  the  amendments  wrought  by  the
       Immigration Act 2014. The new appeal regime no longer attaches rights
       of appeal to immigration decisions involving  removal  decisions  and
       the making of those removal decisions was said to be crucial  to  the
       appeals in RR(Syria) and SSHD v ST (Mr Saeed was not aware  that  the
       Court of Appeal's decision was appealed to the  Supreme  Court  which
       upheld the Court of Appeal's decision; see ST (Eritrea),  R  (on  the
       application of) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]
       UKSC 12  (ST  (Eritrea)).  Mr  Saeed  submits  that  the  legislative
       landscape has materially changed such that both these  decisions  are
       no longer relevant and that as the appellant's appeal was  against  a
       refusal of his protection claim, and it was accepted that he  held  a
       well-founded fear of persecution in Syria,  his  appeal  should  have
       been allowed. Mr Saeed  submits  that  the  appellant  is  a  refugee
       because he fulfils the criteria in the 1951 Refugee  Convention  (see
       Hoxha v Special Adjudicator [2005] UKHL 19). As he only has  a  right
       of appeal against a decision to refuse his protection claim and not a
       decision to remove him, and as there are no directions specifying the
       country to which he will be returned, he meets the  definition  of  a
       refugee and "... that is the end of  the  matter."  As  there  is  no
       decision to remove the appellant to Russia, the  First-tier  Tribunal
       erred in considering Russia as a country  in  respect  of  which  the
       appellant may be removed. The grounds additionally contend  that  the
       judge cited and applied the wrong version of the s.84 of the 2002 Act
       and that this error was sufficiently  fundamental  to  undermine  the
       sustainability of the judge's decision. Mr Saeed also  contends  that
       it was irrational or perverse for the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant could live in Russia as the respondent had not proposed  to
       remove the appellant to Russia because at the date of the hearing the
       appellant had no visa to enter Russia and that in order to apply  for
       a visa he would need his wife's passport, but it  was  impossible  to
       obtain this because she was in China. Mr Saeed finally contends  that
       the judge was not entitled to conclude that the  appellant  would  be
       granted a temporary residence permit as his wife  had  not  lived  in
       Russia since 2006/2007.

   12. In granting permission Upper Tribunal judge Grubb observed  that  the
       judge  clearly  wrongly  cited  and  applied  the   pre-2014   appeal
       provisions of the 2002 Act. Judge Grubb noted however that this error
       would not  be  material  if  the  judge's  approach  to  the  Refugee
       Convention was nevertheless  correct.  Judge  Grubb  found  that  the
       grounds raised an important point that,  since  the  decision  in  RR
       (Syria)  the  appeal  regime  had  changed  and  so  had  the  notice
       provisions relating to removal such that no removal  destination  was
       now named.

Discussion

   13. In RR (Syria) the Upper Tribunal was concerned with a Syrian national
       in  respect  of  whom  the  Secretary  of  State  intended  to  issue
       directions for her removal to Algeria based on  her  marriage  to  an
       Algerian  national,  through  having  children  who   were   Algerian
       nationals and having lived there for  some  9  months  prior  to  her
       arrival in the UK. The Secretary of State conceded that RR  fulfilled
       all the requirements of Article 1 of the Refugee Convention  and  was
       properly to be considered a refugee. The Upper Tribunal was going  to
       consider the issue of whether a person accepted as  being  a  refugee
       was entitled to the  protection  of  Article  32(1)  of  the  Refugee
       Convention in the context of  a  s.84(1)(g)  ground  of  appeal  (see
       paragraph 5). The matter was however  authoritatively  determined  by
       the Court of Appeal in SSHD v ST.

   14. In SSHD v ST the appellant was a national of  Eritrea  and  had  been
       successful in an appeal against a decision to remove her  to  Eritrea
       on the basis that she faced a well-founded  fear  of  persecution  in
       Eritrea. After her appeal the Secretary of State issued fresh removal
       directions for  Ethiopia.  The  appellant  judicially  reviewed  this
       decision on the basis that the Tribunal found her to be a refugee and
       the Secretary of State was bound by that decision and it was unlawful
       for the Secretary of State to decline to grant the appellant  refugee
       status on the basis that she could safely  return  to  Ethiopia.  The
       Court of Appeal distinguished the protection offered by  Articles  32
       and 33 of the Refugee Convention and concluded that a refugee is  not
       entitled to the protection of Article 32 unless he or  she  has  been
       granted the right of lawful presence in the UK. On examination of the
       relevant legislation and authorities the Court  of  Appeal  concluded
       that Article 32 applies only to a refugee who has been granted  leave
       to enter and stay in the United Kingdom in accordance with  paragraph
       334 of the immigration rules. I pause to note that the  appellant  in
       the instant appeal has not been granted leave to enter  and  stay  in
       the United Kingdom in accordance with the relevant immigration rules.
       The Court of Appeal found that the grounds specified  in  section  84
       (1)(c) and (g) of the 2002 Act related to whether a person's  removal
       would breach the U.K.'s obligations under the Refugee Convention.  In
       light of this judgement the Tribunal in RR (Syria) stated, at [19]

           "[SSHD v ST] makes abundantly clear that the fact of being found
           to be a refugee does not of itself entitle  a  claimant  to  the
           grant of asylum and that Article 32 only applies  to  a  refugee
           who has been given the right lawfully to stay in the Contracting
           State in question."

   15. The Upper Tribunal additionally noted that in  ZN  (Afghanistan)  and
       Ors v Entry Clearance Officer (Karachi) [2010] UKSC 21  Lord  Clarke,
       delivering the judgment of the Court, approved observations  made  by
       Laws LJ in the court below that it is no part of  the  definition  of
       "refugee" that the subject be formally recognised as such in the form
       of a grant of asylum; the latter was a separate event (paragraph 20).
       The Upper  Tribunal  also  considered  that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
       judgement clarified how sections 84(1)(c) and (g) were to be  applied
       when the Secretary of State indicated in the  course  of  the  appeal
       proceedings that there was more than one country  to  which  she  was
       proposing to make removal directions (paragraph 21),

           "In  ST  (Eritrea),  so  far  as  the  appeal  proceedings  were
           concerned, removal directions were only ever  proposed  for  one
           country (Eritrea), but the logic of what Burnton LJ said in [56]-
           [57] is that  if  the  Secretary  of  State  has  identified  an
           alternative country of  proposed  removal  (country  B)  in  the
           context of asylum appeal proceedings, then an immigration  judge
           should only allow an asylum appeal if satisfied not only that  a
           claimant is a refugee from country A but  also  that  return  to
           country B would also be contrary to Article 33  of  the  Refugee
           Convention."

   16. I acknowledge that RR (Syria) and SSHD v ST were  decided  under  the
       previous appeal regime, that the Secretary of  State  made  decisions
       for the removal of each appellant and that she explicitly  identified
       the countries to which she believed the appellants could be  removed.
       The issues in contention however in RR (Syria) did not revolve around
       the trigger for  the  right  of  appeal  (the  immigration  decisions
       contained in s.82  of  the  2002  Act)  but  the  grounds  of  appeal
       contained in s.84 (see paragraphs 5, 18 and 21).

   17. Despite the significant changes to the appeal regime  brought  in  by
       the Immigration Act 2014, the grounds of appeal remain very  similar.
       S.84(g) of the pre-2014 version of the 2002 Act included a ground,

           '... that removal of the appellant from the  United  Kingdom  in
           consequence of the immigration decision would breach the  United
           Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention or  would  be
           unlawful under section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998  as  being
           incompatible with the appellant's Convention rights."

   18. Section 84(1)(a) of the post-2014 version of the 2002  Act  indicates
       that an appeal must be brought on the grounds, inter alia,

      that removal of the appellant from the United Kingdom would breach the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention;

   19. The only difference is that under the  previous  appeals  regime  the
       removal of the appellant had to be 'in consequence of the immigration
       decision' that was the trigger for the right of  appeal,  such  as  a
       decision to remove. The decision to remove would usually identify the
       country of removal. The new  version  of  s.82  has  done  away  with
       specific immigration decisions, including decisions  to  remove,  and
       the trigger for a right of appeal is  the  refusal  of  a  protection
       claim (s.82(1)(a)). S.82(2) now states,

           '... a "protection claim" is a claim made by a person ("P") that
           removal of P from the United Kingdom-

           (i)    would breach the United Kingdom's obligations  under  the
           Refugee Convention, or

           (ii)   would breach the United Kingdom's obligations in relation
           to persons eligible for a grant of humanitarian protection;

           The focus however has always remained on the consequences of the
           person's removal from the UK in respect of a  country  that  the
           respondent has  identified,  in  the  context  of  the  appealed
           decision or appeal proceedings, to which the  appellant  can  be
           returned.'

   20. The appellant is someone who is unarguably liable  to  removal  under
       s.10 of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, as  amended
       by the Immigration Act 2014 (he is a person  who  requires  leave  to
       enter or remain in the UK but does not have it). The appellant is not
       a person who is lawfully present in the UK and cannot therefore avail
       himself of the full range of protections  available  through  Article
       32(1) of the Refugee Convention  (see  ST  (Eritrea)).  The  UK  must
       nevertheless ensure that he  is  not  refouled  (Article  33  of  the
       Refugee Convention). Sections 8 and 10  of  Schedule  2  entitle  the
       respondent or an immigration officer to issue removal  directions  in
       respect of a person if that person has been refused  leave  to  enter
       and there is reason to believe  that  they  will  be  admitted  to  a
       country specified in those  removal  directions.  Under  s.7  of  the
       Immigration and Asylum Act 1999  the  respondent  or  an  Immigration
       Officer may give any such direction  for  the  removal  of  a  person
       without leave to enter or remain as may be given under  paragraphs  8
       to 10  of  Schedule  2  to  the  Immigration  Act  1971.  No  removal
       directions have been issued by the respondent. Sections 8 and  10  of
       Schedule 2 and s.7 of  the  1999  Act  however  envisage  the  future
       issuance of removal directions.

   21. The fact that a right of appeal no longer attaches to a  decision  to
       remove a person does not, in  my  judgement,  render  irrelevant  the
       cases of RR and ST. The new right of appeal attaches to a refusal  of
       a protection claim which is a claim made by a  person  that  removing
       them would breach the UK's obligations under the Refugee  Convention.
       The decision that is under challenge is therefore a  rejection  of  a
       person's claim that their removal would cause the UK to be in  breach
       of its international obligations. A person's anticipated  removal  or
       the possibility of requiring them to leave the  UK  is  therefore  an
       essential element in the appealable decision, even if a decision  has
       not been taken to remove them. As the judge pointed out at [30],  the
       actual removal directions were not an appealable decision  under  the
       previous appeals regime. The fact that the right of appeal no  longer
       attaches to a decision to remove  does  not  mean  that  a  judge  is
       obliged to allow an appeal in circumstances where the respondent  has
       identified a country that she believes  a  person  has  a  sufficient
       connection rendering it reasonable for  the  person  to  go  to  that
       country.

   22.  The  grounds  of  appeal  do  not  take  issue  with   the   judge's
       consideration of Article 27 of Council Directive 2005/85/EC.  Nor  do
       the grounds  take  issue  with  the  Upper  Tribunal's  reliance  and
       application of Article 27 in RR. At [32] the  judge  made  clear  his
       understanding that the respondent was applying Article  27  and  that
       Russia had been identified as a third country in respect of which  it
       would be reasonable  for  the  appellant  to  go  by  virtue  of  his
       connection through marriage  to  a  Russian  national.  Although  the
       respondent has not expressly indicated  that  she  proposes  to  make
       removal directions for  the  appellant's  removal  to  Russia  it  is
       readily apparent,  and  irresistibly  implicit  in  the  respondent's
       decision, that she is contemplating Russia as a  safe  third  country
       that the appellant could be reasonably expected  to  go  pursuant  to
       Article 27.

   23. In her decision the respondent gave detailed reasons  for  concluding
       that the appellant was a person  who  would  be  able  to  reside  in
       Russia. The respondent identified background  information  indicating
       that a foreigner married to a Russian citizen residing in the Russian
       Federation may apply for and be  granted  a  temporary  or  permanent
       residence permit. Mr Saeed contends that the appellant's marriage  to
       a Russian national was insufficient to entitle the judge to find that
       Russia was a country to  which  the  appellant  could  reasonably  be
       expected to go as his wife was not residing in Russia and he did  not
       have a visa to enter Russia. At [40] the judge found however that the
       appellant's wife was only visiting China for fertility treatment  and
       that at the time of the screening interview she was  in  Oman,  which
       was in a temporary capacity. The judge  was  rationally  entitled  to
       conclude that the appellant's wife would be able to return to  Russia
       and that it would be reasonable to expect the appellant to go to that
       country. No satisfactory reasons were advanced before the judge as to
       why the appellant's wife  could  not  return  to  Russia.  The  judge
       additionally noted, at [43], that the appellant failed to produce any
       evidence that he had contacted the Russian authorities with a view to
       obtaining a residence permit and had not applied  for  any  visa.  In
       these circumstances the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
       appellant could be reasonably expected to go to Russia on  the  basis
       of his connection to that country. The respondent additionally relied
       on background information referring to a federal  law  on  the  legal
       position of foreign citizens indicating that  a  permanent  residence
       permit  could  be  obtained  after  having  resided  in  the  Russian
       Federation for at least one year on  a  temporary  residence  permit.
       Additional  background  information  indicated  that  there  was   no
       requirement that the marriage  certificate  that  could  be  used  to
       obtain temporary residence had to have been issued in Russia.

   24. For these reasons I find that the change in the appeals  regime  does
       not materially alter the relevance of the  decisions  in  RR  or  the
       decisions of both the Court of Appeal and the Supreme  Court  in  ST.
       The judge did not err in law and the appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed


[pic]    20 March 2018
Signed   Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
