
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06210/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 May 2018                            |On 14 May 2018                     |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [A H]
                          (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Spencer Bolton, Manuel Bravo Project


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, [AH], was born on [ ] 1977 and is an  ethnic
    Kurd and a citizen of Iraq.  He appealed  against  a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 12 June 2017 refusing his protection claim.  The First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge O'Neill) in a decision promulgated on  2  February
    2018, allowed the  appeal  on  humanitarian  protection  grounds.   The
    Secretary of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.



 2. I find that the appeal should be dismissed.  The appellant is a  former
    resident of the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR).  At  [51]  the  judge
    found that it would be unsafe for "the appellant to travel from Baghdad
    to the IKR without papers  in  the  current  security  climate  in  the
    Baghdad Belt which would put him at risk of harm by way of serious  and
    individual threat to his life by reason of indiscriminate violence from
    the internal armed conflict".   The  judge  had  found  [49]  that  the
    appellant had "little prospect of securing a CSID card in Baghdad  with
    no-one to vouch for him [there]".  The appellant also had no  passport.
    At [47], the judge had found that the appellant could "only  return  to
    Sulayamanyah or Erbil via Baghdad.  There is no means of access through
    the airports in those IKR cities  which  are  closed  to  international
    flights (UN report pursuant to Resolution 2367 -  October  2017).   The
    appellant would face insurmountable difficulties trying  to  reach  the
    IKR from Baghdad without a CSID".

 3. I was assisted at the Upper Tribunal initial hearing by Mr Diwnycz, who
    appeared for the Secretary of State, who told me  that  the  judge  had
    been correct to find that  IKR  airports  were  shut  to  international
    flights as at the date of the hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    He told me that Erbil Airport had  reopened  to  international  traffic
    only as recently as March 2018.  He also confirmed that  the  Secretary
    of State's policy of returning individuals to Iraq via Baghdad remained
    in place.  As a consequence, the judge's  finding  that  the  appellant
    would be returned to Baghdad and that he would be at risk there  albeit
    whilst in transit to  Erbil  because  he  did  not  have  a  CSID,  was
    accurate.  In consequence, the judge did  not  err  in  law  either  as
    asserted in the grounds of appeal or at all.   Having  said  that,  the
    period of humanitarian protection which  may  now  be  granted  to  the
    appellant may be brief; now that Erbil Airport is open to international
    traffic then, if the Secretary of State changes her policy on  returns,
    it may soon be possible for the appellant  to  fly  directly  from  the
    United Kingdom or elsewhere in Europe to Erbil without passing  through
    Baghdad at all.  However, I am here  only  concerned  with  considering
    whether the First-tier Tribunal erred in law and I have concluded  that
    it did not.

Notice of Decision

 4. This appeal is dismissed.

 5. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 6 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 6 MAY 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

