
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number: PA/06191/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 September 2020                 |On 23 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     IO

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



For the appellant:     Mr J Greer, instructed by Fisher Stone Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Presenting Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)




This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing. At the conclusion of the hearing  I
reserved my decisions  and  reasons,  which  I  now  give.  The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.

1. The appellant, who is a Nigerian national with date  of  birth  given  as
   13.5.83, has appealed with permission to the Upper Tribunal  against  the
   decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated 28.10.19,  dismissing  on
   all grounds his appeal against the decision of the  Secretary  of  State,
   dated 30.4.18, to refuse his claim made  on  30.10.17  for  international
   protection on the basis of a risk of harm from his father-in-law  because
   of the alleged disappearance of the appellant's wife, and on the basis of
   a risk of harm arising from his ill-health.

2. The appeal was originally listed to be heard on 1.4.20, a date which  had
   to be vacated because of the  COVID-19  pandemic.  Following  submissions
   from both parties, on 17.7.20 the Upper Tribunal  issued  directions  for
   the error of law issue to be determined in a remote hearing.

3. I have carefully considered the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the  written  and  oral  submissions,  and  the  grounds  of
   application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

4. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on  13.12.19.
   However, when the application was renewed to the  Upper  Tribunal,  Upper
   Tribunal Judge  Gill  granted  permission  on  13.12.19,  considering  it
   arguable that although the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  very
   detailed, it appeared not to refer  to  the  report  of  the  independent
   social worker, Ms Ann Buckley, dated 8.10.19. Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill
   stated, "It is at least arguable that he may have materially erred in law
   by failing to take it into account, in view of the  evidence  as  to  the
   appellant's mental health and that it appears  that  there  is  no  clear
   findings as to whether or not the appellant and his wife have separated."

5. The appellant's case was that his wife disappeared unexpectedly,  leaving
   him to care for their two children alone, and that as  a  consequence  of
   her disappearance he received threats from his father-in-law in  Nigeria,
   and suffered a mental breakdown. The respondent's  refusal  decision  had
   accepted that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the father-
   in-law had made  threats  against  the  appellant  as  a  result  of  the
   disappearance of the  appellant's  wife.  However,  this  concession  was
   withdrawn  at  the  appeal  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,   the
   respondent arguing  that  the  disappearance  was  a  fiction  which  the
   appellant did not genuinely believe. The appellant has not  appealed  the
   withdrawal of the respondent's concession.

6. At [38] of the decision, the judge noted Mr Greer's concession on  behalf
   of the appellant that if the judge found on the evidence that,

         "the  appellant's  wife  had  never  disappeared,  but  had  simply
         returned to Nigeria at the conclusion of her course, and  that  the
         appellant had been unwilling to do so,  there  was  in  reality  no
         substance to the appeal, whether it  was  framed  as  a  protection
         claim, or, as an Article 8 claim."

7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did reject the appellant's account  of  his
   separation from his wife, finding at [92] that the appellant had not told
   the truth, or even what he believed to be true. At [96] the judge was not
   satisfied that  the  appellant  had  ever  believed  that  his  wife  had
   disappeared and found,

         "The evidence points overwhelmingly to a disagreement between  them
         as to whether the family should return to Nigeria at the conclusion
         of her studies, as she desired to do, and to  his  insistence  that
         the family should remain in  the  UK,  against  her  wishes.  I  am
         satisfied that it is in that context that the  appellant  has  been
         contacted by both his own mother, and by his father in law,  in  an
         attempt to persuade him to return to Nigeria with his children."

8. The judge went on at [97] to reject the account of  threats  against  the
   appellant emanating from his father-in-law, "because I am  not  satisfied
   that his wife has disappeared, so the basis for the threat he has claimed
   was made simply never existed."  Neither did the  judge  accept  that  he
   would be at risk on return from any other family member. It  is  implicit
   from the decision that the appellant was not on bad terms with either his
   own family or that of his wife. The judge specifically stated that he was
   satisfied that the appellant remained in contact with his own mother.

9. It follows that the suggestion in the grant of permission that there  was
   no clear finding as to whether the appellant and his wife  had  separated
   cannot be sustained. Obviously, if she had returned to  Nigeria  and  the
   appellant refused to return with her,  as  the  judge  found,  they  were
   physically separated from each other. Whether they  remained  in  contact
   and whether a relationship is continuing or may continue is not clear but
   was not an issue in the appeal to be resolved. However,  it  must  follow
   from the findings made that the appellant had not demonstrate that  there
   was any breakdown in the relationship with his wife, his claim  that  she
   had disappeared having been entirely rejected. I note from  [36]  of  the
   decision that the respondent's representative argued that  there  was  no
   reason why the children would not be  able  to  be  brought  up  by  both
   parents and with the  support  of  the  extended  family,  in  their  own
   culture. In any event, at [99] the judge considered that  in  alternative
   "even if the appellant would find himself a single  father  upon  return,
   rather than reconcile with his wife", the claim also failed, on the basis
   that treatment for the appellant's mental health would be  available  and
   the judge being satisfied that the children would have support from  both
   maternal and paternal families, who would ensure that the  children  were
   not left educated  for  lack  of  funds.  On  the  judge's  findings  the
   protection claim failed entirely. Further, on the concession of Mr Greer,
   as the judge referred to again at [101] of the  decision,  there  was  no
   viable free-standing article 8 appeal once the protection claim failed.

10. Mr Greer now seeks to go behind that concession, arguing that the  judge
   failed to take into account the report from the independent social worker
   as to the best interests of  the  two  children  to  remain  in  the  UK,
   notwithstanding  the  finding  that  their  mother  in  Nigeria  had  not
   disappeared and that there was no reason why  they  would  not  have  the
   support of both paternal and maternal families.

11. In this regard, the First-tier Tribunal Judge considering permission  to
   appeal had refused, suggesting that although the social work  report  was
   short it was not material to the overall findings and would have made  no
   difference. However, it may be that that judge was  not  looking  at  the
   correct document, stating that the report was relatively short. In  fact,
   the report is some 16 pages in length.

12. Mr Tan accepted that there is no reference  to  the  independent  social
   worker report in the decision of the Tribunal. However,  he  argued  that
   the omission is not material, relying  on  Mr  Jarvis'  response  to  the
   grounds of appeal, to which Mr Greer made  further  written  submissions,
   dated 6.6.20.

13. Mr Jarvis points to Mr  Greer's  concession,  which  Mr  Greer  has  not
   suggested was misrecorded in the decision and which he has not sought  to
   withdraw. I accept the argument that the judge cannot be  criticised  for
   dismissing the article 8  appeal  where  the  appellant's  representative
   accepted such a claim had no merit. It follows, submits  Mr  Jarvis,  the
   independent social work report is wholly irrelevant.

14. As it happens, between [89] and [91] of  the  decision,  the  judge  did
   consider the best interests of the appellant's two children,  neither  of
   whom is a qualifying child for the purposes of s117B of the 2002 Act. The
   older child only entered the UK in August 2016 still only  2  years  old,
   and the younger child was born here in July 2016.  Unsurprisingly,  given
   the other findings  rejecting  the  appellant's  core  claim,  the  judge
   concluded that their best interests were best served  by  being  able  to
   grow up in their own culture, "able at least to have contact  with  their
   mother, and to enjoy and develop relationships with the members of  their
   extended family." There could not be a clearer statement that  the  judge
   found that on return the children would be able to at the very least have
   contact with their mother. That is  a  scenario  far  removed  from  that
   considered by the independent social worker.

15. The purpose of the report was ostensibly to evaluate the effect  of  the
   possibility of the appellant and his two children, then  aged  3  and  6,
   being relocated to Nigeria and assess whether  this  was  in  their  best
   interests. However, it is clear that the report proceeds on the basis  of
   the appellant's claim that his wife had disappeared,  leaving  him  in  a
   state of shock when she did not return after three weeks. The  author  of
   the report believed that  the  appellant  and  his  children  would  have
   nothing to go back to in Nigeria and no contact with their mother or  any
   wider family support. None of that is sustainable, given the findings  of
   the judge. It  follows  that  the  premise  of  the  report  is  entirely
   undermined,  the  First-tier  Tribunal  rejecting  the  appellant's  core
   account of his wife having disappeared, so that even if  the  report  had
   been considered in detail, I am satisfied that the weight to be  attached
   to it was very limited.

16. I am not satisfied that the report is objective or independent and  find
   it overly sympathetic and biased  towards  the  appellant.  I  note,  for
   example, the assertion at [33] that it was a "miracle" that the appellant
   and his boys survived in the absence of their mother as some of the  time
   they lived on the streets. At [34] the author described support  provided
   as having "turned a  seemingly  sad  and  hopeless  family  case  into  a
   positive outcome." Similarly, at [34] the report states that there  is  a
   consensus of opinion from professionals and friends of  the  family  that
   relocation to Nigeria would not be in their best interests adding, "but I
   would go further than that to say it would be  a  disaster."  The  author
   goes on at [35] to state that it is clear that the  appellant  needs  his
   network of people to support and assist him and at [36] that if  returned
   to Nigeria the appellant would deteriorate  very  quickly  "and  all  the
   stability and contentment the boys have now would  be  immediately  lost.
   They would not understand why they have to leave the people they love and
   all their friends. This family has nothing to go back  to,  and  although
   (the appellant) is not sure what has happened to his wife, her family  or
   his own, he is sure it  would  be  unsafe  to  return  for  him  and  his
   children." The report concludes that to return the appellant and his sons
   to Nigeria would not be in their best interests and would  not  meet  the
   boys' needs. "I would hope the Appeal Court will allow them to remain  in
   Britain."

17. I am satisfied that the way in which the report has  been  prepared  and
   the  opinions  of  the  author  expressed  is   neither   objective   nor
   independent. For that reason, even if the judge  had  taken  this  report
   into account, I am satisfied that little weight could have been  accorded
   to it.

18. Even if the report had been couched in more measured tones, the  opinion
   that the best interests of the children were to remain in the UK was  not
   determinative  of  the  article  8  proportionality  balancing  exercise,
   especially  given  the  ages  of  the  children  and  that  neither  were
   qualifying children. It is obvious that at such  young  ages,  they  were
   very unlikely to have established any private life outside  their  family
   home. Given that there was no basis for the appellant himself  to  remain
   in the UK, in the "real world" assessment it is  entirely  reasonable  to
   expect the children to accompany their father to  the  country  of  their
   ethnic and cultural background and nationality, where they would, on  the
   judge's findings, have at the very least contact with  their  mother  and
   support from the wider family on both paternal and maternal sides.  There
   were no exceptional or compelling compassionate circumstances  justifying
   allowing the appellant and his children to remain  in  the  UK  when  the
   basis of his protection claim had entirely failed. It was not  surprising
   that Mr Greer made the concession he did that there was no  merit  in  an
   article 8 claim where the judge rejected the claim that  the  appellant's
   wife had disappeared but returned to Nigeria of her own  accord.  In  his
   submissions to me, Mr Greer attempted to  skirt  around  his  concession,
   suggesting that the judge failed to make clear what he made of the family
   circumstances and appeared to accept that he would be returning as single
   father, and therefore that there was a risk of the children  being  taken
   into care. For the reasons set out above, I reject that submission  as  a
   misconstrued assessment of the impugned decision.

19. Neither is there any merit  in  the  further  argument  that  the  judge
   failed to accord sufficient weight to the vulnerability of the  appellant
   when assessing his credibility. As is clear from the decision,  including
   at [22] and  [53],  the  judge  made  full  allowance  for  vulnerability
   including in the assessment of what he said in interview, but  found,  in
   fact, that the appellant demonstrated that he was able to  give  evidence
   clearly, at length  and  in  detail,  with  no  problem  or  distress  in
   recalling detail.

20. In the circumstances and for the  reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  no
   material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so  that
   it must be set aside.

Decision

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve any  error  of
      law.

      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  stands  and  the  appellant's
      appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

      I make no order for costs.


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       20 September 2020






Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."


Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       20 September 2020





