
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06821/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 January 2019                            |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   ANI [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Isherwood, HOPO
For the Respondent:    Ms V Easty, Counsel


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State  has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chana  who  in  a   decision
    promulgated on 1 October  2018,  allowed  the  respondent's  appeal  on
    humanitarian grounds.

2.   For ease of reference the respondent will from now on  be  referred  to
    as the applicant.

3.   The applicant is a citizen of Armenia born on  [~]  1991.   She  has  a
    daughter born on [~] 2017 who is her dependant.

4.   The applicant arrived in the UK clandestinely on  5  March  2017.   She
    claimed asylum and humanitarian protection on 6 March 2017.

5.   She claimed that she entered into a relationship  with  a  national  of
    Azerbaijan, [E], who told her that he was an Armenian and later claimed
    that he was a national of Azerbaijan.

6.   The applicant said she met [E] in the  summer  of  2016  at  a  holiday
    resort near the Sevana River in Armenia.  They were together  for  five
    to six months.  Her problems started when she realised she was pregnant
    after one month of the start of the relationship and the father of  her
    baby was a national of Azerbaijan.  Her parents came to know in January
    2017 when she was about two months pregnant.  Alternatively, she  ended
    her relationship with [E] in January  2017  before  she  knew  she  was
    pregnant.  Alternatively, her relationship ended in  December  and  her
    problems started in  February  2017.   Her  parents  were  against  the
    applicant having a baby with an Azerbaijan national  and  told  her  to
    have an abortion.  Her father and brother became aggressive towards her
    and her father raised his hand towards her.  Her brother also wanted to
    do the same but did not.  She  started  working  in  January  2017  and
    people found out about her pregnancy.  She went to the  police  at  the
    end of February 2017.  They laughed at her and told her that they could
    not help her.  She left Armenia on 1 March 2017 illegally with the help
    of an agent.  She cannot return to Armenia  because  she  will  not  be
    accepted by her family or the Armenian community.  Returning to Armenia
    as a single woman would put her and her child at risk.

7.   In respect of the credibility  of  the  applicant's  claim,  the  judge
    found as follows:

         "33.     I find that the  core  of  the  appellant's  claim  to  be
             credible  although  there  are  some  inconsistencies  in  the
             evidence.  I accept that she started a  relationship  with  an
             Azerbaijan national and had a child with him.  I  accept  that
             her parents  did  not  approve  of  the  relationship  or  her
             pregnancy and wanted her to have an abortion which she refused
             to do.  I accept her evidence that she  was  beaten,  and  her
             father and brother wanted to forcibly take her to a clinic  to
             have an abortion and she ran away.  Therefore, having accepted
             this evidence, I now  must  determine  whether  returning  the
             appellant with a child by an Azerbaijan man to  Armenia  would
             expose her to risk of persecution and violence at the hands of
             her father, brother and the community at large."

8.   The judge considered the background evidence.   At  paragraph  30,  the
    judge said the background evidence clearly states there  is  a  growing
    conflict  between  the  Armenians  and  the  Azerbaijanis.   The  judge
    outlined in detail the history of the conflict.  At paragraph  32,  the
    judge considered the Freedom House report 2018 which states that  there
    is discrimination based on  race  in  Armenia.   Domestic  violence  is
    common and not adequately prosecuted.  Evidence  of  honour  crimes  is
    increasing in Armenia.  There are only 29 Azeris living in  Armenia  as
    the rest have been forcibly displaced.  At paragraph 34, the judge  set
    out more background evidence of violence against  women,  and  evidence
    that Armenia has no law criminalising domestic violence.  At  paragraph
    35,  the  judge  set  out  the  respondent's  referral  to   background
    information found at Refworld/Law  in  his  reasons  for  refusing  the
    applicant's application.

9.   The judge then concluded as follows:


         "36.     This report does indicate that there is  violence  against
             women in Armenia although  attempts  are  now  being  made  to
             combat it and to assist the women.  There is a child  born  in
             this country who will have to return with the  appellant.   In
             that regard I must consider the best interests of  the  second
             appellant who is a child.


         37.  The appellant will return to Armenia without  the  support  of
             her parents.  Not only that they consider that  the  appellant
             has dishonoured them by having a child out of wedlock with  an
             Azerbaijan  man.   The  appellant  will  be  a  single   woman
             returning to a country which is known  for  domestic  violence
             and honour killings.  This will put the child at some risk and
             any risk to the child is not acceptable for a  child  born  in
             this country even though she is not a British citizen.


         38.  Applying the standard of proof required  in  asylum  cases,  I
             find that the appellant has  demonstrated  that  she  and  her
             child would be at risk on their return  to  Armenia.   In  the
             absence of a country guidance case setting out the  extent  of
             the risk to the appellant in her circumstances and her  child,
             I find that the appellant has demonstrated that  she  and  her
             child are entitled to humanitarian protection  in  the  United
             Kingdom."


10.  At paragraph 39 the judge  cited  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules which sets out the requirements to be satisfied by  an  applicant
    in order to be entitled to Humanitarian Protection.  An applicant  must
    show a real risk of suffering serious harm.  At paragraph 40 the  judge
    accepted the applicant's claim that she risks domestic violence and the
    possibility of an honour killing by her family if returned to  Armenia.
    She concluded that the applicant and her  child  will  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm in Armenia.  She therefore found that  the  applicant  and
    her child are entitled to humanitarian protection in this country.

11.  Permission to appeal the judge's decision  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Page who was satisfied that an arguable error  has  been
    identified in the judge's decision at paragraph 33 that could cause the
    Upper Tribunal to interfere.  Judge Page said  that  the  Secretary  of
    State's two grounds of appeal were arguable in saying  that  the  judge
    has not provided adequate reasons for accepting  the  applicant's  core
    account and that the judge has  failed  to  engage  with  the  specific
    reasons the respondent gave for refusing the applicant's asylum  claim.
    He said the Secretary of State was entitled to know why the applicant's
    core account was found credible;  and  moreover  why  the  respondent's
    reasons for refusing were displaced by the applicant's evidence.

12.  Ms Isherwood  relied  on  the  grant  of  permission  and  the  grounds
    submitted by the Secretary of State.

13.  The Secretary of State relied on  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)  [2013]
    Pakistan UKUT 00641 (IAC) head note 2 of which states

         "If a Tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
         unreliable or a document to be worth no weight  whatsoever,  it  is
         necessary to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to
         be supported by reasons.  A bare statement that a witness  was  not
         believed or that a document was afforded no weight is  unlikely  to
         satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

14.  I find that this head note does not apply  to  this  decision  for  the
    simple reason that the applicant's evidence was accepted by the  judge.



15.  The Secretary of State relied  on  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Budhathoki (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) paragraph 14
    of which states

         "... it is however, necessary for  First-tier  Tribunal  Judges  to
         identify and resolve the key conflicts in the evidence and  explain
         in clear and brief terms their reasons for preferring one  case  to
         the other so that the parties can understand why they have  won  or
         lost."

16.  The grounds relied on paragraph 28 of the Reasons  for  Refusal  Letter
    which it was submitted stated why the  Secretary  of  State  found  the
    applicant's evidence to be internally inconsistent. It was argued  that
    the judge  did  not  take  into  account  or  resolve  the  highlighted
    inconsistencies in the applicant's account when finding  the  applicant
    credible.

17.  Ms Easty relied on the skeleton argument she had put before  the  judge
    in which she had argued that  there  were  no  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence given by the applicant and  averring  that  the  Secretary  of
    State considered the case on the basis of inherent probability.

18.  Ms Easty submitted that the basis for the  applicant's  claim  is  that
    she was duped by [E] as to what his nationality was and it was when the
    applicant realised that he was not  an  Armenian  that  she  ended  the
    relationship by which time she was pregnant with the child.   Ms  Easty
    said that there was only one inconsistency at paragraph 28,  which  was
    the timing of the applicant's pregnancy.  She said this was due to  her
    misunderstanding set out at paragraph 24 of the applicant's  statement.



19.  I set out paragraph 28; it states

         "For example you were asked how your parents reacted  to  the  news
         and you said 'because my father was in the war with Azerbaijan  and
         he could not see that his grandchild could be Azerbaijani race  and
         they wanted me to abort the child after a month.  My  parents  were
         saying that not only us but our community would  be  against'  (AIR
         72).  You were asked when your parents started to question you  and
         how far along your pregnancy you were and you said 'it was  January
         2017 and my parents started questioning  me  about  the  situation'
         (AIR 68) and 'about two months' (AIR 69).  You were also asked  how
         far into the relationship you were before you found out  about  his
         nationality and you said 'after five to six months later' (AIR 65).
          It is also noted that you said  'I  stopped  our  relationship  in
         January before I knew I was pregnant.  In December our relationship
         stopped' (AIR 110).  He also said 'the day he told me that  he  was
         Armenian and I left him accommodation and  I  could  not  take  the
         situation and I did not see him after that'  (AIR  111).   This  is
         internally  inconsistent  as  you  previously  said  that  you  got
         pregnant one month into your relationship which was in summer  2016
         and it is not credible that you were two months pregnant in January
         2017  when  your  parents  found  out   and   this   damages   your
         credibility."

20.  I find that the internal inconsistency in relation  to  the  timing  of
    her pregnancy was explained by Ms Easty who said that this was due to a
    misunderstanding set out at paragraph 24 of the applicant's  statement.



21.  Ms Isherwood drew my attention to paragraphs 23 to 25 of the  Secretary
    of State's Reasons for Refusal Letter which formed  the  basis  of  the
    rejection of the applicant's claim.  I note that these  paragraphs  did
    not form part of the Secretary of State's grounds.  In any event I find
    that at paragraph 23 the Secretary of State was merely setting out what
    the applicant said was the basis of her claim.

22.  At paragraph 24 the Secretary of State further  cited  the  applicant's
    claim about  the  nationality  of  [E].   Then  went  on  to  cite  the
    applicant's evidence as to where and when she  met  [E]  to  which  she
    answered summer 2016 in Armenia near Sevana River.  She met him at  the
    holiday resort as he was on holiday.  They were together for about five
    to six months.  The respondent said that it was  reasonable  to  expect
    that the applicant would give a detailed account of where and when  she
    met [E].  She was unable to provide specific dates when asked  and  her
    narrative of where they met was vague.  This damaged  her  credibility.
    When I asked Ms Isherwood what further details the applicant could have
    provided she was unable to answer the question.

23.  Miss Isherwood argued that the issues raised by the Secretary of  State
    at paragraph 25 were not resolved.   I find that in paragraph  25  the
    Secretary of State was questioning the applicant's judgment and not her
    credibility when the Secretary of State said it was expected  that  the
    applicant would be more  hesitant  to  accept  his  claim  to  be  from
    Azerbaijan based on the fact that he had been circumcised given that he
    had initially given her  two  different  accounts  of  his  nationality
    before telling her that he was from Azerbaijan.  The Secretary of State
    claimed the applicant was unable to give a reasonable explanation as to
    why she accepted his account on this occasion.  I  find  that  she  had
    given an explanation which was that she had discovered that he had been
    circumcised and that led her to accept [E]'s claim  that  he  was  from
    Azerbaijan.

24.  I can only hazard a  guess  that  the  inconsistencies  the  judge  was
    referring to at paragraph 33 were those she recorded at paragraph 16 of
    her decision as follows:


         "The appellant's problem started when she realised she was pregnant
         after one month of the start of the relationship and the father  of
         her baby was a national of Azerbaijan.  She asked her  friends  for
         some advice and her parents came to know in January 2017  when  she
         was about  two  months  pregnant.   Alternatively,  she  ended  her
         relationship with [E] in January  2017  before  she  knew  she  was
         pregnant.  Alternatively, her relationship ended  in  December  and
         her problem started in February 2017".

25.  I find that these inconsistencies do not  undermine  the  core  of  the
    applicant's claim, which is that she was duped by [E] as  to  what  his
    nationality was, and it was when the applicant realised that he was not
    an Armenian that she ended the relationship, by which time was she  was
    pregnant with  the  child.   I  find  that  the  judge  considered  the
    applicant's claimed risk in the context of her oral  evidence  and  the
    objective evidence and accepted that she would be at risk  of  harm  on
    return to Armenia.

 26. Consequently, I find that the  judge's  failure  to  consider  internal
    relocation or sufficiency of protection does not  materially  undermine
    her decision.

27.  The judge's decision allowing the applicant's appeal shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date:  19 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun

