
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06974/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow Upper Tribunal      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 11 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                 MR JOHN [W]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr W Criggie, Solicitor


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. I shall continue to refer to Mr John [W] as the appellant.  This is  an
    appeal by the Secretary of State.  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge  Clapham
    allowed the appellant's appeal in terms of the Refugee  Convention  and
    Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR in a  decision  promulgated  on  11  March
    2019. Grounds of application  were  lodged  and  permission  to  appeal
    granted by Designated Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Woodcraft  in  a
    decision dated 25 March 2019.  Thus, the appeal came before me  on  the
    above date.

 2. For the Secretary of State Mr Govan relied on his grounds.  It was said
    that the Judge had made a material error in law  in  finding  that  the
    appellant was a genuine convert and that Christian converts are at risk
    in Somalia.  The appellant's previous asylum account was "shot  through
    with discrepancies and inconsistencies" (IJ French).  Reference is made
    to well-known case law.

 3. The grounds say there is "no evidence recorded in the determination  of
    baptism with reliance of  a  claimed  conversion  being  based  on  the
    evidence of the claimed partner and letters."  There was no  supporting
    oral evidence from an official of the church.  Even  if  the  appellant
    was a genuine convert  the  appellant  would  face  discrimination  and
    harassment and, however unpalatable these may be, they do not amount to
    persecution or a breach of Article 2 or 3 of ECHR.  Mr Govan  asked  me
    to uphold the appeal.

 4. For the appellant Mr Criggie submitted that the grounds represented  no
    more than a disagreement with the  Judge's  findings.   The  Judge  had
    explained (paragraph 70)  why  Christians  suffered  more  than  simply
    discrimination.   The  Judge  had  referred  to   background   material
    informing that view.

 5. The Judge had  also  considered  whether  the  conversion  was  genuine
    (paragraph 71) referring to documentary evidence which  supported  that
    view.  The Judge had  also  found  evidence  from  his  partner  to  be
    credible and that both she and the appellant were practicing Christians
    who had both attended the Heart for the City Church in Glasgow.   There
    was ample evidence to support the Judge's findings which were sound and
    well-reasoned and the decision should stand.

 6. I reserved my decision.



Conclusions

 7. The Judge  found  that  the  appellant  was  from  Somalia  as  claimed
    (paragraph 69) and there is no challenge to that  finding.   The  Judge
    went on to evaluate if he were returned to Somalia whether he would  be
    at risk because of his alleged Christian conversion.  The Judge  refers
    to considerable background material in paragraph 70 informing the  view
    that Christians suffered from more than simply discrimination and  that
    they were in fact persecuted in Somalia.  The  Judge  went  on  to  ask
    herself whether the appellant  had  indeed  converted  to  Christianity
    (paragraph 71).  The Judge referred to  a  letter  from  the  Heart  of
    Africa stating that he converted to Christianity and  they  have  known
    the appellant for many years.  It also referred to the  fact  that  the
    appellant legally changed his name via deed poll.  There was  a  letter
    from Dennis Munai who confirmed that he  and  the  appellant  had  been
    friendly for the past six years and that they were members of the  same
    church.  There  was  also  a  letter  from  Reverend  Dr  Njenga  which
    confirmed that he  had  known  the  appellant  for  several  years  and
    confirmed the conversion.  The Judge also had sight of  the  change  of
    name.  As mentioned above  she  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant's
    partner whom she found to  be  a  credible  witness  and  that  witness
    confirmed that both she and the appellant  were  practising  Christians
    who attended church in Glasgow.

 8. Notwithstanding that the appellant's previous account, per the grounds,
    had been shot through with discrepancies and inconsistencies, the Judge
    has given many reasons for finding that the appellant's conversion  was
    genuine.  There were several different strands of evidence, which taken
    together,  justified  the  Judge  concluding   that   the   appellant's
    conversion to Christianity was genuine, notwithstanding the  fact  that
    his previous account to require international protection was  not  well
    founded.

 9. The Judge took all the evidence into account and on the evidence before
    her was entitled to conclude that the appellant's account  was  genuine
    and that he faced persecution if returned to Somalia.

10. As such there is no error of law in the  Judge's  decision  which  must
    stand.



Notice of Decision

11. The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did not involve a
    making of an error on a point of law.

12. I do not set aside the decision.


Signed    JG Macdonald Date   4th June 2019

J G Macdonald
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



