
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06990/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 1 June 2017                           |On 12 June 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE

                                   Between

                                     ME
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Shaikh, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, ME, was born in 1972 and is a male citizen of Iran.  The
    appellant arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum  in  January
    2016.  By a decision dated 17 June 2016,  the  respondent  refused  the
    appellant's application.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge O'Hanlon)  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    December 2016, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be  set
    aside.  I find that the judge has erred in law.  I  have  reached  that
    conclusion for the following reasons.  The appellant  had  produced  in
    evidence a document purporting to be a summons for him to attend before
    the Iranian Revolutionary Guard which the appellant  claimed  had  been
    issued to him two days after an  incident  on  5  December  2015  when,
    whilst attempting to distribute leaflets regarding  the  prevention  of
    HIV/aids, the appellant had been assaulted by men whom he considered to
    be members of the Basij who had taken him to  a  police  station.   The
    appellant had been released without charge but had received the summons
    two days later and had decided not to attend interrogation but  instead
    to seek asylum in the United Kingdom.  At [42], Judge O'Hanlon wrote:

         The  appellant  has  stated  that  he  is  wanted  by  the  Iranian
         authorities for distributing leaflets or being possession of a book
         that states that the Shia faith is made  up  for  political  power.
         The appellant has submitted a copy of a document  translated  on  7
         March 2016 which is stated to be a summons  against  the  appellant
         for him to attend the Iranian Revolutionary Guards  on  28  October
         2015.  The document is produced at D1 of  the  respondent's  bundle
         and is dated 27 October 2015 which is before the problems that  the
         appellant states he experienced on 5 December 2015.  In his witness
         statement the appellant states that the translation  was  incorrect
         and that he had provided the correct translation to  his  solicitor
         but the appellant does not state in his statement the nature of the
         incorrect translation and on the basis of the document before me it
         is dated 27 October 2015.   I  note  that  the  document  does  not
         specify the nature of any allegations  which  may  have  been  made
         against the appellant.  In accordance  with  the  case  of  Tanveer
         Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 having considered this document generally,
         I do not find that significant weight could be placed upon it.

 3. Judge O'Hanlon is correct to say that the translation of  the  document
    which appears in the papers does show 27 October 2015.  I am,  however,
    struggling to understand quite what the  judge  means  in  the  passage
    which I have quoted above where he says, "the appellant does not  state
    in his statement the nature of the incorrect translation ..." I  assume
    he is referring to the reason why the  document  had  been  incorrectly
    translated.  I take judicial notice of the fact that some  inaccuracies
    do occur in translating dates from an Iranian calendar to the Gregorian
    calendar.  The fact is that the appellant did,  the  parties  agree  as
    soon as he was aware, notify the respondent of the  incorrect  date  on
    the translated warrant.  More importantly, the judge fails  to  mention
    the fact that at the hearing before him the court interpreter was asked
    to examine a copy of the original Farsi document and to provide his own
    translation.  Neither of the parties  objected  to  his  doing  so.  In
    court, the interpreter gave a date of 7 December 2015, that is two days
    after the alleged incident described by the  appellant  on  5  December
    2015.  I find that the judge should, at the least, in his decision have
    referred to that translating of the document by  the  interpreter.   To
    have doggedly kept to the date shown on the original  translation  into
    English and  to  make  no  reference  to  the  interpreter's  important
    involvement was, in my opinion, unfair to the appellant.   Further,  at
    [43],  the  judge  reaches  findings  as  to  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account  but  fails  to  deal  with  the  explanations  for
    apparent inconsistencies in his account which the appellant  had  given
    at his substantive asylum interview.  The judge  was,  of  course,  not
    obliged to accept those explanations but he should  have  attempted  to
    deal with the explanations, if only to reject them.

 4. There is a further ground of appeal concerning the appellant's  claimed
    conversion to Christianity.  The judge noted at [48] that the appellant
    had given his evidence in Farsi  and  he  therefore  doubted  that  the
    appellant had been able to discuss  theology  with  the  witness  David
    Lanstrome.  This, in turn, cast  doubt  upon  the  appellant's  claimed
    conversion.  I accept that there may be some force in  the  appellant's
    assertion that, whilst he may require a formal  interpreter  to  assist
    him at a court hearing, his English language skills were sufficient  to
    discuss religion with a friend. The ground  alone,  however,  would  be
    insufficient to vitiate the decision.

 5. Whether or not  the  warrant  document  is  a  genuine  remains  to  be
    determined but I find that its lack of authenticity does not turn  upon
    the incorrect translation of the date on the translation which  appears
    in the Tribunal papers.  The fact that the court  interpreter  examined
    the original Farsi document and translated the  consistently  with  the
    appellant's account seems  to  me  quite  forceful  evidence  that  the
    document should not be discounted, at least for the  reasons  given  by
    Judge O'Hanlon.  Further, I find it difficult to disentangle the weight
    given to this documentary evidence from  the  oral  and  other  written
    evidence adduced by the appellant and, in consequence, I consider  that
    the only prudent course of action is to set aside all the  findings  of
    fact, including the finding favourable to the appellant namely that the
    judge accepted he had been involved in  the  distribution  of  HIV/aids
    leaflets as he claimed.  The  next  Tribunal  will  need  to  make  new
    findings of fact ab initio.  I stress that  none  of  the  observations
    which I make in this decision should condition  the  next  fact-finding
    exercise save for my observation regarding the dating  of  the  English
    translation of the warrant.  However, I stress that even  that  finding
    does not prevent the next Tribunal concluding that the warrant document
    is not genuine or that its contents may not be relied upon.   Likewise,
    there is nothing in this decision which in itself should lead the  next
    Tribunal to conclude  that  the  appellant  is  a  genuine  convert  to
    Christianity.

    Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  14
    December 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge  O'Hanlon)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 10 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.








Signed                              Date 10 June 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane

