
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06307/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16th March 2018                       |  On 09th April 2018               |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                mr mowiz noor
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Jones, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 20th December 1990.  The
    Appellant claims to have arrived in the UK in December 2010.   On  21st
    December 2016 he was served  with  notice  as  an  overstayer,  claimed
    asylum and attended his screening interview.  His claim for asylum  was
    based on a purported well-founded fear of persecution  in  Pakistan  on
    the basis of his imputed political opinion.   He  also  brought  claims
    pursuant to the European Convention of Human Rights.   His  application
    was refused by Notice of Refusal dated 21st June 2017.   The  Appellant
    appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Aziz sitting at Birmingham on  31st  July  2017.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 25th August  2017  the  Appellant's  appeal  was
    dismissed on all grounds.

 2. On 14th August  2017  Grounds  of  Appeal  were  lodged  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  Those Grounds of Appeal referred to the fact that whilst the
    judge was not obliged to accept that there was Article 8 family life he
    was obliged to give consideration to the finding that there was not one
    that was adequate in all the circumstances.  The judge had  found  that
    the couple had married and that they were in a relationship although he
    doubted how durable this relationship was and he had not found it to be
    a sham.

 3. On 30th October 2017 First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Mark  Davies  refused
    permission to appeal pointing out that the grounds totally ignored  the
    judge's findings that he did not find the Appellant to  be  a  credible
    and reliable witness and Judge Davies considered  that  the  judge  had
    made clear and cogent findings regarding the Appellant's claimed family
    life.  Renewed Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper  Tribunal  on
    15th November 2017.

 4. On 18th December  2017  Judge  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Grubb  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Grubb noticed  that  the  ground  did  not
    challenge the dismissal  of  the  international  protection  claim  but
    focused on the judge's finding that the Appellant and his wife (through
    a religious marriage) did not have "family life"  for  the  purpose  of
    Article 8.  Judge Grubb considered that it was arguable that given  the
    judge's findings that the relationship  was  genuine,  that  they  were
    married but did not cohabit (potentially for an explicable reason), and
    that it was arguably irrational to find that they did not enjoy  family
    life.  Further he considered that that the judge had made no finding on
    Article 8.2 and so it was unclear what view he  would  have  taken  and
    whether Article 8 will be breached if he  had  found  family  life  did
    exist.  In those circumstances he was  not  confident  that  any  error
    would not be material to his dismissal  of  the  Article  8  claim  and
    consequently granted permission in respect of the  Article  8  decision
    alone.

 5. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel Ms Jones.  The Respondent appears by her instructed Home Office
    Presenting Officer Mr Tarlow.

 6. I am considerably assisted in this matter by the approach adopted by Mr
    Tarlow.  He advises that he has given due and proper  consideration  to
    the Grounds of Appeal and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
    and he is of the view that the judge has failed to give proper and  due
    consideration to the issues relating to Article 8 or to  give  findings
    and reasons.  He consequently invites  me  to  find  that  there  is  a
    material error of law and to remit the matter back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing solely on the aspect relating to the  Article  8
    appeal.

 7. Ms Jones indicates that she is agreeable to such a course of action.





The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. The matter is quite properly addressed by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb in
    his grant of permission.  This is a judge who unfortunately  failed  to
    make findings on Article 8(2) and consequently it is unclear what  view
    he would have taken on whether Article 8 would be breached  if  he  had
    found family life did exist.  The judge has failed to  give  due,  full
    and proper consideration to  Article  8  and  that  is  a  matter  that
    constitutes a material error of law.  That is conceded by Mr Tarlow.

11. In such circumstances the correct approach is to find a material  error
    of law, to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  and
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Decision and Reasons

12. On finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside and the  matter  is
    remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.  The  following
    directions are to apply:

      1) That the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
         reheard solely relating  to  the  Appellant's  appeal  pursuant  to
         Article 8 of the European Convention of Human Rights.   So  far  as
         those grounds are concerned no findings of fact are preserved.

      2) That the appeal be remitted to be heard  at  Taylor  House  on  the
         first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of two  hours.   The
         hearing is to be before any First-tier Tribunal  Judge  other  than
         Immigration Judge Aziz.

      3) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a  bundle  of
         such further subjective and/or objective evidence upon  which  they
         seek to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

      4) That an Urdu interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 6 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date 6 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



