
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06589/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   mr F X
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sharif, Fountains Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a claimed national of Iran born on 16 March 1997.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum.  That application was
    refused on 4 May 2017.  He  appealed  against  that  decision  and  his
    appeal came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  V  A  Cox  at  the
    hearing on 14 November 2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on
    28 November 2017, the judge dismissed the appeal.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis of three  grounds:
    firstly, that the judge had failed to apply  the  correct  standard  of
    proof in assessing the  Appellant's  nationality;  secondly,  that  the
    judge had materially misdirected herself in respect of  the  assessment
    of the risk on return to the  Appellant  as  a  Kurdish  failed  asylum
    seeker in light of the judgment in SSH and  HR  (Illegal  exit:  failed
    asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 00308 (IAC) and  thirdly,  that  the
    judge had materially misdirected herself in failing  to  give  adequate
    reasons for findings on material aspects of the case.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Doyle  on
    10 January 2018 on the basis that the grounds of appeal were  arguable.
    A Rule 24 response was submitted by the Respondent on 6  February  2018
    which asserted that the judge gave adequate  reasons  for  finding  the
    Appellant was not credible at [34] to [48].  The judge considered  risk
    on return at [49] to [50] and the judge agreed  with  the  Respondent's
    conclusion that the Appellant was from  Iran  at  [35].   Notably  that
    should read  "the  Appellant  was  not  from  Iran"  as  that  was  the
    Respondent's case and the findings of the judge.

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I raised with Mr  Sharif  the
    point that the Tribunal decision in Hamza [2002] UKIAT  05185  did  not
    perhaps bear the meaning ascribed to it, in that the Tribunal  in  that
    case found that if a judge was going to make a positive finding against
    the Appellant in respect of his or her nationality then this should  be
    made on the higher standard which would be a balance of  probabilities.
    Mr Sharif maintained his submission that  the  judge  had  applied  the
    wrong standard of proof, that he was unaware of any subsequent case law
    and that his colleagues had been  relying  on  the  case  of  Hamza  on
    numerous occasions over the past few years.  This is in relation to the
    judge's finding at [35] where the judge found "I do not  find  that  he
    has through the history of his claim and  in  his  evidence  before  me
    provided evidence that does on a balance of probabilities mean that  he
    is from Iran".  He sought to submit that the judge had also erroneously
    assessed  the  entirety  of  the  asylum  claim  on  the   balance   of
    probabilities which was clearly an error of law as that  is  the  wrong
    higher standard of proof  and  that  this  was  evidenced  through  the
    reference of the history of the Appellant's claim.

 5. In respect of the second ground of appeal, Mr Sharif sought to rely  on
    the ground as  pleaded.  He  submitted  that  the  Appellant's  Kurdish
    ethnicity puts him at an enhanced risk on return if I were to find  the
    substantive claim was made out in light of the judgment in SSH  and  HR
    (op. cit.) at 34 and that the judge  at  [47]  had  accepted  that  the
    Appellant is a Kurd.

 6. In relation to the third ground of appeal, Mr Sharif submitted that, in
    his view, this was the strongest of the grounds of appeal and that  was
    the inadequacy of the judge's reasoning for rejecting  the  credibility
    of the Appellant's claim.  He submitted that if one reads  the  judge's
    findings at [40] to [42] that clearly  inadequate  reasoning  had  been
    provided for not  accepting  the  Appellant's  account  as  to  how  he
    obtained the leaflets.  It is  not  sufficient  to  simply  say  it  is
    incredible and the judge had failed at [41] to give adequate  reasoning
    as to why  the  Appellant's  account  is  not  credible.   Nor  was  it
    sufficient at [42] simply to cite the Appellant's answer as provided at
    question 73 of the Asylum Interview Record.  At [46] to [47] Mr  Sharif
    submitted that the judge had failed to provide adequate reasons for not
    accepting as credible that the Appellant was not aware of his  father's
    political activities until after his death.  The judge  has  failed  to
    give a reason as to why she has come to that conclusion and her finding
    is not supported by adequate reasons.  In relation to  the  finding  at
    [48] that the judge states she found on the evidence  before  her  that
    the Appellant had given an inconsistent  account  and  made  incredible
    claims, once again the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for so
    finding.  Mr Sharif submitted if one looked at the interview record and
    refusal letter, along with the alleged inconsistencies, these were  not
    significant and it was not sufficient for the judge to simply  state  a
    claim was inconsistent when it is  broadly  consistent  and  thus  that
    amounted to a material error of law.

 7. In his submissions, Mr Tan stated  that,  having  considered  the  Home
    Office guidance dated October 2017 in relation to proof of  nationality
    in an asylum claim, the Respondent's position is  that  the  burden  of
    proof rests with the Appellant to prove his nationality  to  the  lower
    standard.  In cases where the Home Office assert that an individual has
    another nationality the burden is then on the Home Office to  prove  to
    the higher standard what that nationality is.  The difficulty  in  this
    case is that the Respondent's refusal letter did not  assert  that  the
    Appellant had another nationality, simply that it was not accepted that
    he was Iranian.  It was only  at  the  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  at  [30]  that  the  Presenting  Officer  asserted  that  the
    Appellant is Iraqi, but Mr Tan accepted there was no evidence  to  this
    effect. At [31] the Appellant's then representative invited  the  judge
    to find on the balance of  probabilities  that  the  Appellant  is  not
    Iraqi.  Mr Tan accepted that there clearly  had  been  some  confusion,
    however he submitted this was not material given that the asylum  claim
    had been considered in the context of Iran in any event and thus it was
    a moot point.

 8. In relation to the second ground of appeal, he submitted there  was  no
    merit in this ground given that the Appellant's claim to be at  a  risk
    of persecution on political grounds had been rejected by the First-tier
    Tribunal.  And in  respect  of  the  third  ground  of  appeal  Mr  Tan
    submitted that [40] to [48] should be read as a whole and not  isolated
    in the manner put to the Upper Tribunal today.  He submitted that  [40]
    is quite clearly reasoned  in  [41]  where  the  judge  considered  the
    context of the claim and clearly considered the fact that the Appellant
    had  accompanied  Mohammad  the  neighbour,  but  did  not   previously
    appreciate that leaflets and  papers  had  been  placed  in  the  goods
    transported  amounted  to  an  inconsistency   which   undermined   his
    credibility. Similarly at [43] the judge noted the previous claim  that
    the Appellant's mother had received leaflets in  the  family  home  and
    that it was unlikely that family members would  not  know  about  this.
    This also relates to the  Appellant's  claim  not  to  know  about  his
    father's political activities until after his  death  in  circumstances
    where all the family members appear to have been  aware  and  involved,
    albeit indirectly, in his activities before his death.  It was open  to
    the judge to find if the Appellant was a Kurd  living  and  working  in
    that area he would have some knowledge of the KDPI and that [48] was no
    more than a summary paragraph.  He  submitted  there  was  no  material
    error of law in the judge's decision.  Mr  Sharif  in  reply  submitted
    briefly that it was clear in respect of ground 1 if [30] and  [35]  are
    read together, that this is a material error.

     Findings and reasons

 9. I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

10. In respect of ground 1 and the Appellant's nationality the  judge  held
    as follows at [35]:

         "In dealing with  the  Appellant's  nationality  I  note  that  the
         Respondent rightly identified  that  the  Appellant  claims  as  at
         paragraph 14 to be a national of Iran and will be removed  to  Iran
         as that is his claimed nationality.  I do  not  find  that  he  has
         through the history of his claim and  in  his  evidence  before  me
         provided evidence that does on a balance of probabilities mean that
         he is from Iran."

    I find that this does not amount to a material error of law in light of
    the standard of proof applied by the judge, which was  the  balance  of
    probabilities.  Moreover, even if it were an error,  it  would  not  be
    material given that the judge  went  on  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    asylum claim in the context of Iran.

11. In relation  to  the  second  ground  of  appeal,  I  accept  Mr  Tan's
    submission there is no merit in respect of this  particular  aspect  of
    the case in that it is clear from the  decision  in  SSH  and  HR  that
    Kurdish ethnicity is simply an aggravating feature if there  are  other
    reasons why the Appellant would be wanted on return.  In light  of  the
    judge's findings that there is no risk to the  Appellant  if  returned,
    this aspect of the appeal does not avail him.

12. In relation to the judge's reasoning underlying her  rejection  of  the
    credibility of the claim, the judge found as follows:

         "40. In respect of the  core  of  his  account  that  he  had  been
             involved in hiding papers or leaflets question 52 AIR  I  find
             that this is incredible.

         41.  The Appellant described  Mohammad  as  not  wishing  to  cease
             political activities as he did not want  to  give  up  on  the
             Appellant's father's legacy and yet the  Appellant  incredibly
             suggests that he has on occasion accompanied Mohammad but  had
             not appreciated that leaflets and papers were being placed  in
             the goods that were being transported.

         42.  I find that there is no adequate explanation  as  to  why  the
             Appellant would suddenly have continued to act in the  illegal
             way he claims that his father had acted and to store the same.
              I find it incredible that he suggests that  a  person  called
             Ishmael would collect them and yet previously he knew  nothing
             of the same despite claiming question 73 that his father  used
             to help the party.

         43.  I find his evidence in respect of the  arrest  warrant  to  be
             inconsistent.  At question 77 despite saying that  his  mother
             did not know of his activities or indeed of his father's,  the
             Appellant clearly said that if Ishmael came  to  the  property
             his mother would give them the letters and goods.  I find that
             incredible given the Appellant's insistence  that  neither  he
             nor his father had told his mother of  the  existence  of  the
             letters.

         44.  The Appellant maintained that it was Mohammad who had told him
             of the arrest warrant.  His evidence  before  me  was,  as  Mr
             Malcolm identified, inconsistent in respect of  the  existence
             of that warrant and I specifically reminded  myself  that  the
             absence of the  same  and  the  challenges  that  many  asylum
             seekers seek in providing  documentary  evidence  for  aspects
             including   core   aspects,   of   their   claim   cannot   be
             underestimated.  I  find  in  this  case,  however,  that  the
             Appellant has manufactured this  claim  and  that  the  arrest
             warrant does not exist.

         45.  I find the Appellant's claim that he never asked Mohammad  why
             he did not keep the political materials in his own home to  be
             incredible.

         46.  I do not find it credible that the Appellant,  who  claims  to
             have no background of political involvement, was not aware  of
             the details of his father's political activity until after his
             death.

         47.  He suggests that he is not a member of the  KDPI  and  has  no
             knowledge of the party and yet he claims he  would  take  such
             risks and would expose himself and his mother to  risk  simply
             on the apparent request of a neighbour or  in  memory  of  his
             father.  I find it unsurprising that the Appellant would  have
             knowledge of the KDPI since I find that he is a  Kurd.   I  do
             not find it is credible that having that knowledge and being a
             Kurd  would  persuade  him  to  suddenly  become  so  involved
             following the death of his father and to take such significant
             risks.

         48.  I have found as indicated above on the evidence before me that
             the Appellant has  given  an  inconsistent  account  and  made
             incredible claims.

         49.  He has delayed his claim for asylum and I do not find that  he
             is at risk as a result of his claimed political activities."

13. Mr Sharif challenged the adequacy of the reasons  put  forward  by  the
    Judge for finding the Appellant not to  be  credible.  However,  as  is
    apparent from the Judge's analysis set out at  [12]  above,  the  Judge
    provided clearly provided cogent reasons for rejecting the  Appellant's
    credibility.

14. The grounds of appeal amount to no more than a  disagreement  with  the
    Judge's findings of fact, which were open to her on the evidence before
    her and were properly reasoned.



Notice of Decision

15. I find no material errors of law in the decision of First tier  Tribunal
Judge Cox. The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 22 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
