
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA063482016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 May 2017                                 |On 22 May 2017                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM

                                   Between

                                    H H R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson of Counsel, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
(London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kandola, Home Office Presenting Officer


                    DECISION AND REASONS ON ERROR OF LAW


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish  ethnicity.  This  appeal
    focuses on the Kurdish Region of Iraq.  She appeals with the permission
    of the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Jerromes promulgated  on  12  December  2016  dismissing  on  all
    grounds her appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse her
    protection and human rights claim.

 2. In very brief summary, the appellant fears she will be killed  or  ill-
    treated on return to the KRI as a  result  of  her  previous  political
    activities with the Communist Party of Kurdistan  and  as  an  activist
    supporting women's rights.  She fears the main political parties in the
    KRI and also members of her own family who vehemently disapprove of her
    against whom she says she could receive no protection.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge  accepted  the  appellant  had  been  a  member  of  the
    Communist  Party  of  Kurdistan  and  also  that  she  had  joined   an
    organisation  campaigning  for  women's  rights.   She   accepted   the
    appellant had been in an  abusive  marriage.  However,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge regarded certain matters as undermining the  appellant's
    credibility, not least her delay claiming asylum.

 3. In view of the country background information, the Judge  accepted  the
    appellant's evidence that her activities had  drawn  adverse  attention
    from  various  factions  for  both  political  and  religious  reasons.
    However, she did not accept the appellant had received specific threats
    to her person from these factions because her account  had  been  vague
    and it had not been supported by other evidence.  She also rejected the
    appellant's claim that her younger brothers had threatened her and that
    one of them had assaulted her seriously.  The judge concluded that  the
    appellant's profile would not place her at a real risk  on  return  for
    any of the reasons put forward.

 4. The written grounds seeking permission to appeal can be  summarised  as
    follows:

      1) The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  misdirected  herself  in  law  by
         misapplying paragraph 339L of the Immigration Rules. In particular,
         the judge had construed the Rules as if they were  binding  on  her
         deliberations and had imposed a requirement for corroboration.

      2) The Judge had further erred in stating that the appellant  had  not
         provided supporting evidence because she had  in  fact  provided  a
         letter from the Pishdar District Committee of the  Communist  Party
         of Kurdistan which mentioned that the appellant had  received  many
         death threats.  Alternatively, the reason given by  the  judge  for
         giving no weight to this evidence was spurious.

      3) In assessing the risk on return, the Judge had failed to take  full
         account of the appellant's profile given  the  background  evidence
         concerning attacks by Sunni extremists on  female  journalists  and
         politicians.

      4) Finally, the grounds argued  that  the  Judge's  finding  that  the
         appellant could be protected by her elderly father  was  inadequate
         and unsafe. Equally the finding that  the  appellant  could  obtain
         protection  from  the  authorities  failed  to  engage   with   the
         background evidence to the contrary.

 5. The respondent filed a Rule 24 response opposing the appeal.

 6.  I  heard  oral  submissions  from  the  representatives.   Mr  Hodson,
    expanding on the written grounds, argued the judge had placed  herself,
    to  borrow  a  phrase,  in  a  forensic  straightjacket  by   requiring
    supporting evidence, thereby misapplying paragraph 339L of  the  Rules.
    He argued this error had had a material effect on the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

 7. More generally he sought to argue the Judge's findings were not  sound.
    The Judge accepted the appellant's profile  and  even  that  she  would
    receive adverse attention as a result of it but his  finding  that  she
    was not at a real risk ignored background evidence showing  attacks  on
    people of similar profiles.

 8. In reply Mr Kandola agreed the Judge had perhaps  misapplied  paragraph
    339L but said her findings were not infected  by  any  error  and  were
    sustainable.  Alternatively, the Judge had looked at the  case  at  its
    highest and was entitled to reach the conclusion she reached.

 9. In response  to  those  submissions,  Mr  Hodson  took  me  to  certain
    background evidence on attacks on journalists in the KRI,  specifically
    that found in the US State Department Report  of  2016.   This  can  be
    found at page A17 of the appellant's appeal bundle.

10. I have carefully taken account of the submissions made to me but I have
    decided the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  does  not  contain  a
    material error of law and I dismiss the appellant's appeal.  My reasons
    are as follows.

11. Overall it is clear  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  gave  very
    thorough and careful consideration to the evidence and submissions made
    to her at the hearing.   She  correctly  directed  herself  as  to  the
    relevant date, burden and standard  of  proof  in  paragraph  12.   She
    carefully set out the appellant's claim and  noted  all  matters  which
    were accepted by the respondent.  In her list of  the  documents  which
    she had taken into account she set out, among other things, the  letter
    from the Communist Party of Kurdistan dated 13 November 2016.  She  set
    out the part of it referring to  the  appellant  being  the  target  of
    fundamentalist Islamic parties and receiving many death threats.

12. At paragraph 37.2 the Judge noted the delay in the  appellant  claiming
    asylum and gave cogent reasons for regarding this  as  something  which
    undermined the appellant's general credibility.  No arguments had  been
    made against that finding.

13. In the following paragraph she said this:

         "In accordance with paragraph 339MA applications for  asylum  shall
         neither be rejected nor  excluded  from  examination  on  the  sole
         ground  that  they  have  not  been  made  as  soon  as   possible.
         Nevertheless, in view of the delay, not all of  the  conditions  in
         339L are met and therefore aspects of her claim  not  supported  by
         documentary or other evidence require confirmation."

14. In making findings on the threats which the appellant claimed had  been
    made to her the Judge said this at paragraph 39.5.

         "In view of  the  country  background  information,  I  accept  her
         evidence that her activities drew adverse  attention  from  various
         factions (for both political and religious reasons) but  I  am  not
         persuaded even to the lower standard of proof that she received any
         specific threats to her person from these factions as she is  vague
         in her account  and  has  not  produced  any  supporting  evidence.
         Whilst corroboration is not required in an asylum claim, in view of
         her delay in claiming asylum, aspects of her claim not supported by
         documentary or other evidence require  confirmation  and  there  is
         none in this case.  I believe  that  such  evidence  is  ordinarily
         available in the form of a supporting statement from her father who
         has been a fellow activist and her stalwart supporter."

15. Of course, Mr Hodson has argued that the reference there to the failure
    of the appellant to claim asylum at the earliest  possible  time  shows
    that the judge misdirected  herself  by  regarding  paragraph  339L  as
    imposing a requirement  for  corroboration.   I  agree  with  him  that
    paragraph 339L does not constrain the Tribunal to require corroborating
    evidence in the circumstances that any of the conditions  numbered  (i)
    to (v) are shown to be met.   Paragraph  339L  simply  transposes  into
    domestic law Article 4 or 5 of  the  Qualification  Directive.   It  is
    directed at the practice of member states.

16. The judge may have misunderstood this. However, I  do  not  regard  the
    Judge's decision properly understood as  demonstrating  that  she  fell
    into the error of misdirecting herself in the  manner  suggested  in  a
    material way.  In the passage from paragraph 39.5  set  out  above  the
    Judge expressly reminded herself that corroboration is not required.

17. Furthermore, she directed herself correctly at paragraph 38 as follows:



         "Having concluded that  aspects  of  her  claim  not  supported  by
         documentary evidence require confirmation, I have proceeded to make
         specific findings of fact on the matters in dispute.  Throughout my
         consideration of the facts I have reminded myself that  great  care
         must be taken before making adverse  findings  of  credibility  and
         should only be made where justified in  the  circumstances  of  the
         case.  Taking into account all the evidence and considering  it  in
         the round and having reminded myself that the standard of proof  is
         the lower standard, I find the following."

18. Even if it were shown that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had misapplied
    339L in the sense that corroboration was required, it cannot  seriously
    be maintained that the decision shows she disregarded the  letter  from
    the party.  As said, she described it in paragraph  34(1)(ii)  and,  at
    paragraph 42.3, she stated she could place no weight on it because  the
    author was unidentified.  If she was entitled to place no weight on the
    letter any error of the kind argued by Mr Hodson would not be  material
    in any event.

19. Having looked at the letter in question, it is fair  to  say  that  its
    contents are not clear in as much as  the  document  does  not  provide
    specific examples and instances of the threats referred to. The  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge was perfectly entitled to find the fact the  author
    of  the  letter  had  not  identified  him  or  herself  was  a  matter
    undermining  its  reliability.   A  document  purporting   to   provide
    confirmation of an asylum  seeker's  account  emanating  from  a  legal
    political organisation  can  safely  be  expected  to  contain  minimum
    requirements  failing  which  its  usefulness  will  be   significantly
    undermined.  Identifying the author of the document is one such minimum
    requirement.

20. I see no material error in the First-tier Tribunal's Judge's  approach.
    She considered the evidence in the round, directed herself correctly in
    law  and  reached  a  conclusion  regarding  the  claim  to  have  been
    threatened which she was entitled to reach.  That disposes of the first
    two grounds.

21. The third ground is, in essence, a disagreement with  the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge regarding the risk on  return  to  people
    with a similar profile  to  this  appellant.   I  have  looked  at  the
    references to documents in the appellant's bundle and also the US State
    Department Report as mentioned.   It  does  appear  that  most  of  the
    references are  to  attacks  on  female  journalists,  politicians  and
    activists in other areas of Iraq with the exception  of  the  US  State
    Department Report. The Judge states she  has  had  regard  to  all  the
    background evidence and her failure to note one  entry  in  one  report
    cannot render her entire decision erroneous.

22. The fourth ground was not mentioned  in  the  grant  of  permission  to
    appeal.  I have proceeded on the assumption that the intention  was  to
    grant permission on all grounds. However, this ground  is  also  in  my
    judgment no more than mere disagreement with the First-tier  Tribunal's
    Judge's findings.

23. The appellant gave evidence that she had been protected by  her  father
    who is still alive.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not believe that
    the appellant had lost touch with him.  She  noted  in  paragraph  39.6
    that the appellant had said her father was still farming and  the  head
    of the household.  He had not provided a  letter  confirming  the  risk
    from his sons and the Judge was entitled to regard  this  risk  as  not
    being made out.

24. Regarding the possibility of protection from the authorities the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge noted that the appellant had called the  police  in
    2014 and they had responded.  This indicated  to  the  Judge  that  the
    authorities took complaints seriously and the appellant did  have  some
    trust in the police.

25. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made  an  anonymity  direction  which  is
    continued.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  a  material  error
of law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                                  Date 12 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date 12 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Froom
