
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06416/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 April 2018                          |On 03 May 2018                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     KY
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Hodson, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by KY against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
     Judge Lucas, promulgated on 23 August 2017, in which he dismissed  KY's
     appeal against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse a  grant  of
     asylum.


 2. I have made an anonymity  direction,  given  that  this  is  an  asylum
    appeal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    witness statement in which he gives details of his religious activities
    in Iran, explains his tattoo and gives an account of how he left  Iran.
    It is arguable that the Judge misunderstands the  Appellant's  evidence
    at paragraphs 29 and 30 and his conclusion that the Appellant's account
    was vague and lacking in  detail  was  arguably  irrational  given  the
    contents  of  the  Appellant's  witness  statement.   The  grounds  are
    arguable."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Error of law


 5. I have carefully considered the grounds of  appeal  and  the  decision,
    together with the witness statement of the Appellant.  I find that  the
    grounds are made out with reference to the  treatment  of  the  witness
    statement and the Appellant's evidence as set out there.


  6. At [29] the Judge states:


     "The Appellant's account of his religious activities in Iran  is  vague
     and lacking in any real detail.  Given the lack of any general evidence
     relating to his circumstances there, it is not accepted that his  uncle
     had any significant role in his religious or other life there.  Even if
     the account were accurate, the simple discovery of a bible by him would
     and could not have lead to the conclusion  that  the  Appellant  was  a
     Christian  convert  who  attended  a  house  church  on  at  least  ten
     occasions.  This is no more likely than the association of him having a
     tattoo with his alleged Christian conversion.  It may well be that  the
     Appellant's uncle - if he did have any role in the Appellant's  life  -
     was simply an inappropriately violent individual.  That is  unfortunate
     for the Appellant but does not lead to the conclusion that there  is  a
     general risk for him upon return to Iran."


  7. I have considered the Appellant's witness statement.  At [15]  to  [23]
     he describes how he was introduced to Christianity, his friendship with
     K, his attendance at the house church, the gift of the bible,  and  his
     feelings about Christianity.  It is not "vague", and it does  not  lack
     detail.  For example, he explains how and where he met K in order to be
     driven to the house church [18] to [20], he gives the  exact  dates  of
     his first two attendances at the house church [18], [19], and he  gives
     the name of the pastor [18].  He describes how Christianity  makes  him
     feel [16], [21], [23].  There is no reference to this evidence  in  the
     decision.


  8. It is further clear that the Judge  has  not  taken  into  account  the
     witness statement when he states at [27] "he remains  in  contact  with
     his mother".  At [28] of his statement the Appellant says:


     "Since leaving Iran I have been in touch  with  my  mother  only  once.
     This happened before my main asylum interview.   I  telephoned  her  at
     home and we spoke for a short time.  She told me not to come  back  and
     that I was in danger from my uncle.  She told me not to call her  again
     and I have respected her wishes."


  9. I find that the Judge is wrong therefore to state that the Appellant is
     in contact with his mother.  He has not referred to the evidence in the
     witness statement, not event to state that he rejects it.


 10. I find that, as set out in ground 2, the Judge has failed to take  into
     account the totality  of  the  Appellant's  evidence.   He  has  failed
     properly to  consider  his  witness  statement  and  has  made  adverse
     findings as a result.


 11. In relation to ground 3, errors  of  fact  and  misunderstandings,  the
     witness statement is again relevant.  In relation to  the  tattoo,  the
     Judge states that there is an "association of him having a tattoo  with
     his alleged Christian conversion"  [29].   However,  this  is  not  the
     Appellant's case, as can be seen from his description of the tattoo  at
     [21] of his statement.  "I had  a  tattoo  made  in  around  Azar  1394
     [November 2015].  The tattoo said "ANA" which means "mother" in Azeri."
      First, the tattoo does not have any Christian significance.  Secondly,
     he  got  the  tattoo  in  November  2015,  and  did  not  even  discuss
     Christianity with K until June 2016 [15] of his witness statement.  The
     Judge has associated the tattoo with the Appellant's  conversion,  when
     there is no connection, as is clear from reading the witness statement.




 12. At [30] the Judge refers to the Appellant's account  of  leaving  Iran.
     He states:


     "The Appellant's account of how he left Iran lacks credibility.   After
     being attacked by his uncle, he says, he then travelled to his friend's
     house and thereafter to another town, where, by chance, he was able  to
     locate a friend of his fathers who arranged  for  him  to  leave  Iran.
     This is an unlikely scenario."


 13. At [25] of his witness statement he states:


     "My mother then told K's father that I should go to Orumiyah  where  my
     father had a friend called AK whom my father had known a long time.  He
     had kept in touch with us after my father had passed away but my  uncle
     did not know him."


 14. At [26] he describes how he travelled to Orumiyah and went to meet  AK.
     There was therefore no chance involved  in  the  Appellant  locating  a
     friend of his father.  The Judge has erred in this finding.  Again,  he
     has made no reference to  the  Appellant's  evidence  set  out  in  the
     statement, not even to state that he rejects it.


 15. I find that the Judge has made material errors in his consideration  of
     the  Appellant's  evidence,  stemming  from  his  failure  properly  to
     consider the witness statement.


 16. Further, in relation to the Judge's treatment of the evidence,  I  find
     that he has erred in his failure to deal adequately with  the  evidence
     from the Appellant's church, specifically the evidence of  Dr.  B,  the
     Dorodian witness.  At [35] he states:


     "None of the documentary evidence provided by Dr M or Dr B states  that
     the Appellant has actually converted to Christianity  or  that  he  has
     been or is in the process of being baptised into the  faith.   "A  keen
     interest" and an assertion that  he  has  "left  Islam  and  turned  to
     Christianity" is not evidence of a genuine  and  rooted  conversion  to
     Christianity.  It is noted that the Appellant has only  been  attending
     the church since January/February of 2017  and  there  is  no  evidence
     provided at all to show that there was an  Iranian  background  to  his
     Christian conversion."


 17. I have considered the witness statement of  Dr.  B,  who  attended  the
     hearing to give evidence.  It was submitted in the  grounds  of  appeal
     that the Judge discouraged the Respondent's representative from  asking
     any questions, and that Dr. B had to make a short speech in support  of
     the Appellant.  The Judge's Record of Proceedings does  not  appear  to
     record Dr. B giving evidence at all.  The  record  of  the  proceedings
     provided by Mr. Hodson indicates that the Judge asked the  Respondent's
     representative whether he wished to ask any questions of  the  witness,
     to which the answer was no.  It then records that Dr. B  made  a  short
     speech.  Mr. Hodson's note indicates that the hearing only  lasted  for
     20 minutes in total and, while there are no times stated on the Judge's
     Record of Proceedings, it is only four and a half pages in length.


 18. The witness statement provided by Dr. B states that he has had "several
     personal  conversations"  with  the  Appellant.   It  states  that  the
     Appellant has "left Islam and turned to Christianity".  It states  that
     he is "keen to learn and knows about his new found faith" [6].


 19. The letter from Dr. M dated 26 July 2017 is referred to by the Judge at
     [7].  This letter states that the Appellant has been attending services
     since January 2017.  He also attends the meeting  for  Farsi  speakers,
     and outreach Bible studies.  It states that Dr. B, "the leader  of  our
     Farsi ministry" reports that the  Appellant  has  a  keen  interest  in
     studying the Bible, and how his notes indicate a growing  understanding
     "of the Bible and the teachings of Jesus Christ".


 20. The Judge finds that the evidence from Dr. M and Dr. B does  not  state
     that the Appellant has actually converted to Christianity.  He attaches
     no weight to it at all.  He fails to take into account what is said  by
     Dr. M and Dr. B about the Appellant's participation at the church,  and
     the belief of Dr. B that the Appellant has left Islam for Christianity.
      Further, when considering their evidence he states  that  no  evidence
     was provided to show "that there  was  an  Iranian  background  to  his
     Christian conversion".  It is not entirely clear what this  means,  but
     the Appellant had provided evidence of how he  discovered  Christianity
     in Iran.  There was also evidence that he was  involved  in  the  Farsi
     speaking ministry at the church.  It is not clear why  this  should  be
     considered to detract from the evidence from the church in any event.


 21. There was a clear statement from Dr. B  that  the  Appellant  had  left
     Islam.  No reasons are given for rejecting this  evidence.   The  Judge
     has alighted on the phrase that the  Appellant  is  "a  "baby"  in  the
     faith", and indeed this phrase is found in the Record  of  Proceedings,
     although it is not attributed to Dr. B.  However, even  if  Dr.  B  had
     used this phrase, it does not contradict the  Appellant's  evidence  of
     his conversion to Christianity in Iran, and his continued participation
     in Christian worship in the United Kingdom.


 22. I find that the Judge has failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting
     the evidence of the Dorodian  witness,  and  has  relied  on  semantics
     regarding  the  wording  used  rather  than  properly  considering  the
     evidence as a whole.  I find that this is a material  error,  going  to
     the core of the Appellant's claim.


 23. I do not need to examine the other grounds given that I have found that
     the Judge materially erred in his consideration of the evidence of  the
     Appellant and his witness.


 24. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of law.
      I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February 2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given the extent of  fact  finding  necessary  in
     order to remake this appeal, having regard to the overriding objective,
     I find that it is appropriate to remit  this  case  to  the  First-tier
     Tribunal.


Decision


 25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
     errors of law and I set the decision aside.


 26. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 27. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Lucas.



Signed                                  Date 27 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

