
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06859/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 April 2019                               |On 11 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Jain, Neil & Ruddy
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision   of
    Designated Judge Murray promulgated on 25  July  2018,  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent dated 20 May 2018.

 2. The appellant's case is that he and his partner were at risk  from  his
    wife's tribe because they had had a sexual relationship and  had  plans
    to marry without permission.  Having fled from their  home  area,  they
    travelled to Hyderabad but were kidnapped and taken  back  to  Karachi.
    They were allowed to marry on condition that they gave the tribe  their
    first daughter and pay a 1 million rupee penalty for dishonouring them.

 3. The couple married in 2003 and in 2010 had a daughter.  Shortly  before
    she was 4, the appellant  brought  her  and  the  wife  to  the  United
    Kingdom, the appellant having been previously granted leave  to  remain
    as  a  Tier  1  (Entrepreneur)  Migrant  from  2013  until  2016.    An
    application for an  extension  in  that  capacity  was  refused  on  18
    November 2016 as was  an  application  for  reconsideration  which  was
    refused on 13 September 2017.  On 1 December 2017 the appellant claimed
    asylum.

 4. The Secretary of State did not accept the appellant's account  of  what
    had happened to him and his wife in Pakistan nor was  it  was  accepted
    they were at risk of an honour killing in Pakistan.

 5. At the hearing on 2 July 2018 the appellant made an application for  an
    adjournment to permit the arrival of two warrants for his arrest  which
    had been served the day  before  in  Pakistan  together  with  a  First
    Information Report ("FIR").

 6. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and his  wife  as  well  as
    submissions from both representatives.  The judge concluded that:-

      i) the burden of proof was on the appellant and the standard of  proof
         was a balance of probabilities [56];

     ii) if the appellant's account is to be believed, then his appeals will
         succeed [58];

    iii) the appellant's credibility was undermined by  the  delay  in  this
         case as was a failure to mention in  the  screening  interview  the
         agreement made between the appellant and his  wife  and  her  tribe
         [59];

     iv) it was difficult to find that the appellant did not know  his  wife
         was a member of Khaskheli tribe, there being an inconsistency as to
         how she was dressed when they met [60];

      v) it was more  likely  based  on  the  objective  evidence  that  the
         appellant would have been killed  when  he  admitted  to  having  a
         sexual relationship before marriage to his wife who may  also  have
         been killed [63], the judge finding that the terms of the agreement
         lacked credibility;

     vi) there is state protection available to the appellant and  his  wife
         on return and/or that they could relocate internally [65];

    vii) because of the lack of credibility throughout the claim she doubted
         the genuineness of the documents, that is the arrest  warrants  and
         FIR, which were not before her it being too much of  a  coincidence
         that they would have been  served  just  before  the  hearing,  the
         appellant possibly trying to bolster his claim by stating  that  he
         firmly fears not only his wife's tribe but also the state.

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had erred:-

      i) in directing herself to the wrong standard of proof [3];

     ii) in making a mistake of fact at paragraphs  [59]  and  [62]  of  the
         determination in that the appellant had in fact mentioned the order
         during his screening interview at Q4.1 [4];

    iii) that the judge had erred in taking Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and
         Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004  as  a  starting
         point for the consideration of credibility;

     iv) that the judge had failed to exercise anxious scrutiny in correctly
         recording an incident in which the appellant's wife's family  found
         out of their relationship, stating  incorrectly  that  it  was  the
         appellant's family who found out about it and beat him;

      v) in refusing the adjournment request, and error  compounded  by  the
         judge making findings with respect to the documents he  had  sought
         to adduce through the adjournment.

 8. On 19 November 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Gill granted permission noting
    that it was at least arguable the judge  may  have  applied  the  wrong
    standard of proof in assessing the appellant's credibility.

 9. Having heard submissions from both parties, I deal with the grounds  of
    appeal in turn.

10. Ms O'Brien accepted that what is stated at paragraph  [56]  is  clearly
    wrong but submitted that the judge  had  simply  made  a  slip,  having
    corrected herself properly when making findings at paragraphs [67]  and
    [69].

11. In response Mr Caskie submitted that there were other  bases  on  which
    the judge's decision could be impugned in that at [63]  the  judge  had
    said that it was more likely that the appellant would have been  killed
    indicating a higher  test  than  the  correct  standard.  He  submitted
    further that the self-direction and other findings needed to be seen in
    the context of the other errors reached  by  the  judge  in  particular
    ground 4 (lack of anxious scrutiny).

12. In essence, the Secretary of State's case is that the judge despite the
    self-direction at [56] did in fact apply the correct standard of proof.
     But there is equally merit in Mr Caskie's  submission  that  paragraph
    [67] is somewhat formulaic.

13. Given the self-direction at [58] that credibility was an issue, if  not
    the only issue in this case, the judge stating that if the account were
    to be believed then he would succeed, then the nature of  the  apparent
    error is  more  significant.   On  considering  the  findings  made  at
    paragraphs [59] to [64], the judge considers the delay  counts  against
    credibility and then goes on at [61] to [63] to reject aspects  of  the
    claim in terms which are said to be credible but, are whether the judge
    found the account plausible.

14. In the circumstances, I am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  misdirect
    herself as to the standard of proof and that in itself is sufficient to
    amount to a material error of law.

15. For the sake of completeness, I consider it necessary to record that  I
    did not consider that the judge improperly made reference to Section  8
    of the 2004 Act there being no reason why she was not entitled to  rely
    on delay or to commence her assessment of credibility at that point.

16. Turning to the  adjournment  request,  I  bear  in  mind  Ms  O'Brien's
    submission that this is properly reasoned and that it was open  to  the
    judge to refuse to adjourn the matter and the reasoning  for  this  was
    sound.

17. The nature of the evidence  in  this  case  was  such  that  it  would,
    apparently, change the focus in that given an arrest warrant  had  been
    issued, it suggested that the state would either be used  in  order  to
    punish the appellant and his wife or for them to be tracked down by the
    wife's tribe.  Given that it was said that the grounds had been  served
    the day before the hearing, the  judge's  reference  to  the  appellant
    having been in the United Kingdom since 2014  [8]  is  not  a  relevant
    consideration when considering whether or not to adjourn the case.   It
    is unclear why in  the  circumstances  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    evidence on the file was sufficient for her  to  determine  the  appeal
    given that the new  evidence  indicated  a  separate  issue  which,  if
    proven, would go both as to sufficiency of protection  and  ability  to
    relocate.

18. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the judge's approach to the  issue  of
    the adjournment was also wrong in law.

19. For these reasons, I am satisfied that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law both in the failure  to
    adjourn the case and in the self-misdirection as  to  the  standard  of
    proof.  In the circumstances, given that no findings  of  fact  can  be
    preserved there will need  to  be  a  fresh  fact-finding  exercise  in
    respect of all aspects of the appeal, I am satisfied that it  would  be
    appropriate,  given  not  least  that  the  failure  to  adjourn  is  a
    procedural error, to remit the decision to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a rehearing de novo.

Notice of Decision

1.   The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error of law and I set it aside.

2.   The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  heard  afresh
    by a judge other than Designated Judge Murray.  For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt, none of the findings of fact are preserved.

3.   I make an anonymity order.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 8 April 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
