
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA063222016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On  13th July 2017                         |                                |
|                                           |On 14th July 2017               |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KELLY

                                   Between

                                    A H K
                             (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               the secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss S Khan, Counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Dwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on the 15th August  1987.
   He  appeals  against  the  decision  of   First-tier   Tribunal   Fowell,
   promulgated on the 5th December 2016, to dismiss his appeal  against  the
   respondent's refusal of his Protection  Claim.  I  extend  the  anonymity
   direction that was made in the First-tier Tribunal.

2. There are four grounds of appeal. The first  ground  complains  that  the
   Tribunal failed to assess the feasibility of the  appellant's  return  to
   Iraq. This is argued to be a material error of law because the outcome of
   this assessment is critical to the relevance or  otherwise  of  the  fact
   that the appellant does not possess a CSID. The second  ground  complains
   that the judge failed to assess the impact that the  absence  of  a  CSID
   would have upon the appellant's ability  to  relocate  internally  within
   Iraq should it prove feasible for him to be  returned  to  that  country.
   Both those grounds were based upon the Tribunal's failure to  follow  the
   country guidance in AA (Article 15(c)  [2015  UKUT  544  (IAC).  However,
   since those grounds were settled, the Court of Appeal has held that it is
   necessary to decide whether the claimant has a CSID (or will be  able  to
   obtain one reasonably soon after  arrival  in  Iraq)  regardless  of  the
   feasibility of his return. The  consequence  of  that  decision  is  that
   ground 1 is now otiose and the appeal must in any event succeed on ground
   2.  The  third  ground  argues  that  the  Tribunal  excluded  from   its
   consideration a number  of  other  factors  that  were  critical  to  the
   assessment of the reasonableness of internal relocation within  Iraq.  It
   is thus intimately linked to the argument in the second ground,  which  I
   have held is bound to succeed for the reasons already given. I  therefore
   set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

3. It is clear that Judge Fowell did not  make  the  necessary  findings  of
   fact that would have enabled me to apply  the  amended  country  guidance
   that was handed down by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA  Civ
   944. It is therefore appropriate to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier
   Tribunal for it to make those  findings  and  thereafter  to  apply  that
   guidance. This will include consideration of the matters that are set out
   in paragraphs 10 and 11 as well as the  factors  that  are  listed  under
   paragraph 15 of the amended guidance. For the avoidance of doubt, none of
   the findings of the First-tier Tribunal (such as  they  are)  are  to  be
   preserved.

Notice of Decision

4. The appeal is allowed, the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  set
   aside, and the case is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  the
   decision to be remade by any judge save Judge Fowell.

5. Any further directions will be a matter for the Acting Resident Judge  at
   Bradford.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date: 13th July 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Kelly
