
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06837/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 31 January 2019              |On 25 February 2019             |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     R F
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R. Halim, counsel instructed by Fadiga & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on 9.9.98. He arrived in the
United Kingdom on 21.12.15 and claimed asylum the following day. The basis
of his claim is that he is of Kurdish ethnicity and a Sunni Muslim and was
born and grew up in Baghdad. He stated that his father was kidnapped in
June 2015 as a consequence of his membership of the Ba'ath party and that
they had heard no news of him since. He further claimed to have been
targeted as a result of his Kurdish ethnicity whilst growing up in Baghdad
and that he had been attacked and physically injured. His mother arranged
for him to leave because she was very concerned that he too would be
kidnapped by Shia militia groups if he remained.

2. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused in a decision dated
16.6.16. The Appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal came
before the First tier Tribunal for hearing on 19.6.17 and was dismissed,
however, following a successful application for permission to appeal to the
Upper Tribunal, the appeal was on 18.1.18 remitted for a hearing de novo.

3. The appeal came before First tier Tribunal Judge Carroll for hearing on
16.7.18. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 27.7.18 she dismissed the
appeal on the basis that she was not satisfied that the Appellant was
credible as to the circumstances in which he claimed he was compelled to
flee Iraq or as to his claimed fear of return [19].

4. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought, in time, on the
basis that the Judge failed to undertake an assessment as to whether the
Appellant is at a general risk of kidnapping on the basis of his individual
characteristics as outlined in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT
00018 (IAC) at headnotes [iv] and [v] in particular, as a returnee from the
West, of Sunni faith and Kurdish ethnicity and this point was made
expressly in the Appellant's skeleton argument at [22].

5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted by Deputy Upper
Tribunal Judge O'Ryan in a decision dated 18.12.18.

Hearing

6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Bramble fairly conceded at
the outset that he agreed that the Judge had made material errors of law in
failing to address the issue raised in the grounds of appeal. Both parties
were content that the decision be re-made in the Upper Tribunal on the
narrow basis identified in the grounds of appeal, the Judge's findings of
fact, being unchallenged, are preserved.

7. Thus the issue to be determined is whether the Appellant would face a
real risk of persecution or a breach of Article 15C of the QD if returned
to Baghdad in light of his Kurdish ethnicity and Sunni religion, in light
of the country guidance decision in BA (returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017]
UKUT 00018 (IAC). The material parts of the headnotes provide inter alia as
follows:

"(iv) Kidnapping has been, and remains, a significant and persistent
problem contributing to the breakdown of law and order in Iraq. Incidents
of kidnapping are likely to be underreported. Kidnappings might be linked
to a political or sectarian motive; other kidnappings are rooted in
criminal activity for a purely financial motive. Whether a returnee from
the West is likely to be perceived as a potential target for kidnapping in
Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has been away from Iraq. Each case
will be fact sensitive, but in principle, the longer a person has spent
abroad the greater the risk. However, the evidence does not show a real
risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this ground alone.

(v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of US-led
coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels seen in 2006-2007. A
Shia dominated government is supported by Shia militias in Baghdad. The
evidence indicates that Sunni men are more likely to be targeted as
suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni
identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious
harm.

vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create a real
risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real risk for
the purpose of the Refugee Convention, Article 15(c) of the Qualification
Directive or Article 3 of the ECHR if assessed on a cumulative basis. The
assessment will depend on the facts of each case.

(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
Sunni complainants, are likely to be unwilling to provide sufficient
protection."

At [118] and [121] the Upper Tribunal held:

"However, the evidence indicates that young men are more likely to be
viewed as suspected supporters of Sunni insurgent groups. The incidents of
kidnapping and killing of Sunnis largely appear to involve young men
targeted by Shia militias in revenge for ISIL attacks in the city...

For the reasons outlined above, his profile as a young Sunni man who is
more likely to be travelling across the city on a regular basis does
enhance the risk over and above the mere fact of his Sunni identity. This
factor is not sufficient on its own, but the evidence shows that there is
some level of risk albeit that it is relatively low."

8. The Appellant is now 20 years of age. He states that he left Iraq in
September 2015 for Turkey and arrived in the United Kingdom in December
2015 aged 17. He has thus been absent from Iraq for just under 3 and a half
years. He is from Baghdad and claims that was targeted on account of his
Kurdish ethnicity whilst growing up there, a point which was not
specifically addressed by the First tier Tribunal Judge in her findings.
The Appellant has previously had an Iraqi ID card and it is reasonable to
suppose he would be able to obtain one again. The First tier Tribunal Judge
found it would be unduly harsh to expect the Appellant to relocate to the
IKR.

9. It is necessary to consider the Appellant's individual characteristics
on a cumulative basis. These are: his Kurdish ethnicity, his Sunni
religion, the fact he will be a returnee from the West and his youth and
gender.

10. I have concluded that, when considered cumulatively, the Appellant's
individual characteristics, particularly his Sunni religion; the fact he is
a returnee from the West and that he is both Sunni and a young man would
give rise to a reasonable degree of likelihood or a real risk of
persecution in the form of kidnapping or targeted attack if he were to be
returned to Iraq. I further find that the same factors would give rise to
an enhanced individual risk for the purpose of Humanitarian Protection
under Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive or for the purpose of
Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

Decision

11. The decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Carroll contained material
errors of law. I set that decision aside and re-make it, allowing the
appeal.


Rebecca Chapman

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

20 February 2019
