
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06503/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 November 2018                           |On 28 November 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                 Kataneh [S]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Behbahani of Behbahani & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Mrs [S] against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which in a decision promulgated in  July  2018  dismissed  her
    appeal against the Secretary of State's decision refusing asylum on  10
    May 2018.

2.   The basis of the  claim  risk  on  return  to  Iran  is  that  she  has
    converted to Christianity and faces risk on that account in Iran.   She
    gave an account of being helped by a friend in 2012  after  her  father
    died who gave her various Christian religious items and she has in  the
    meantime been a regular visitor to the United Kingdom  since  May  2002
    having been here for two years in April 2011 to 2013 and again for  two
    years from July 2013 to July 2015 and then came  again  to  the  United
    Kingdom in May 2017.

3.   It was during that visit to the United Kingdom that she says due  to  a
    pipe bursting in or near a  storage  container  where  she  had  stored
    Christian religious items these matters were discovered when her sister-
    in-law was informed and this created a problem for her because she said
    that  her  sister-in-law  was  a  fundamentalist.   There  were  family
    difficulties over property in light of the death of her  husband  given
    the provisions of Iranian law about division of property on death of  a
    spouse where there are no children.  And so this accentuated  she  said
    in effect the risk factor to her that there was the  animosity  of  her
    sister-in-law who had become aware of her interest in Christianity.

4.   Since coming to the United Kingdom  she  started  attending  church  in
    October 2017 shortly before she claimed asylum  and  provided  evidence
    from various people, one witness from the church, a witness who is  the
    wife of the appellant's nephew and has known  her  for  over  seventeen
    years and has regularly visited Iran and she gave  evidence  about  the
    relationship between the appellant and her late  husband's  family  and
    the fact that she was attending church.  There was also  evidence  from
    the appellant's sister and Mr Ahmadian who corroborated the evidence of
    the other witnesses.

5.   The judge considered the evidence and concluded that it  had  not  been
    shown that a real risk claim was made out.  It seemed to the judge that
    it was at least important to the appellant that  she  was  experiencing
    difficulties in the resolution of her late husband's estate.  The judge
    said that if her religious conversion was well under way by 2012 it was
    a striking feature that the first time she ever visited a church in the
    United Kingdom was in 2017 and this was after the time that she claimed
    the religious materials were obtained.

6.   The judge also said in relation to the evidence that  all  the  answers
    she gave in the interview and indeed in  the  rather  prosaic  language
    used in her witness statements must be seen in  the  context  of  being
    capable of being essentially self-serving material designed to  provide
    her with the wherewithal  to  demonstrate  that  she  was  a  Christian
    convert.

7.   So the judge  dismissed  the  appeal,  finding  the  claimant  to  lack
    credibility and his decision is challenged on a number  of  bases,  the
    first of which is in the claimed failure properly to consider  or  make
    specific findings on the unchallenged corroborative evidence  presented
    by the appellant in  support  of  her  appeal.   That  relates  to  the
    evidence of the four witnesses and we have set out what the judge  said
    about that.  Ms Kenny's point is that essentially this evidence was all
    second-hand and the witnesses were simply reporting on  what  they  had
    been told but Mr Behbahani says well that is  certainly  not  the  case
    with regard to the witness from the church nor from the family  members
    who had observed what had been going on and so  it  was  not  simply  a
    matter of repetition.

8.   We are concerned by what the judge  had  to  say  about  the  evidence.
    Having set it out in some detail really nothing was said about it other
    than the sentence quoted above earlier on, and it is ambiguous  whether
    her reference to witness statements refers to the  appellant's  witness
    statement or the witness statements provided on her behalf  and  saying
    as the judge did that it must be seen in the context of  being  capable
    of being essentially self-serving, thus as, Judge Latter  said  in  the
    course of argument, essentially it seemed to be moving towards making a
    finding which never actually occurred in relation to  that  point.   We
    think there is force in what Mr Behbahani  says  about  the  extent  to
    which the evidence of at least turned the witnesses was based on  their
    individual observation of the  appellant  and  the  situation  both  as
    regards her conversion and regards the circumstances in Iran and we see
    force in that and what was said in TF and MA  [2018]  CSIH  58  by  the
    Court of Session concerning the need to exercise care  and  make  clear
    findings on the evidence.  There is also the associated point that  the
    risk element is enhanced or at least potentially enhanced by  animosity
    on the part of the family.  It is  not  simply  a  case  taken  at  its
    highest of a person who converted but  a  person  whose  conversion  is
    known to people who are not favourably disposed towards her.

9.   So we see weaknesses in the judge's decision as  regards  ground  1  in
    particular.  That is sufficient in our view for us to find  a  material
    error of law in the decision.  We are also concerned though by the fact
    that there was not  evidence  to  show  that  the  appellant  said  her
    religious conversion was well under way by 2012.  That appears to  have
    been a starting point, and there is a quotation at paragraph 11 of  the
    grounds from her answer to  question  18  at  the  interview  that  she
    "slowly slowly" began to move towards conversion rather than  it  being
    an instant matter.  Certainly the judge was entitled to note the timing
    of her first going to church in light of the events in Iran but  as  it
    seems to us these matters need to be much more clearly  and  thoroughly
    reasoned than was done in this case.

10.  So, bringing these matters together the judge  simply  failed  to  give
    proper consideration to the evidence of  the  witnesses  in  this  case
    which was of clear materiality or at least potential materiality and so
    as a consequence we consider that it must  be  right  as  Mr  Behbahani
    argues that not only is there a material error of law  but  that  given
    the extent of remaking that needs to be  made  in  this  case,  as  the
    evidence goes to both the conversion and the associated  issue  of  the
    attitude of the family in Iran that the matter will have to be  reheard
    in its entirety in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed to the extent set out above.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date 2 November 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
