
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06592/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2019                   |On 3 December 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                REGINALD [K]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howarth
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 25 December 1986 and is  a  male  citizen  of
    Botswana. He appealed the First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the
    respondent dated 5 July 2019 refusing him international protection. The
    First-tier Tribunal, in a  decision  promulgated  on  28  August  2019,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The appellant asserts that the judge  erred  in  law  by  refusing  his
    application to adjourn the First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  The  reasons
    advanced for the adjournment application are set out in the grounds  of
    appeal at [6]. The  reasons  include  the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    current solicitors, Duncan Lewis, were  only  instructed  on  8  August
    2019, that is four  working  days  prior  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    hearing. The appellant's previous solicitors had failed to  attend  his
    asylum interview or prepare a witness statement. The appellant contends
    that his previous solicitors had seriously let him down and that he had
    insufficient time to  provide  instructions  or  obtain  the  necessary
    papers from the previous solicitors so that Duncan Lewis might be  able
    to present his case adequately to the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Moreover,
    the appellant has a British child who has mental health  problems.  The
    refusal of the Tribunal to grant the adjournment meant that it was  not
    possible to obtain a witness statement from mother of the child  or  to
    obtain expert evidence concerning Botswana.

 3. Mr Diwnycz who appeared for the Secretary of  State  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal offered no oral submissions seeking to defend  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision.

 4. I have considered the grounds of appeal and the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal carefully. In my opinion, this is a relatively rare  case
    where the failure of the judge to  grant  an  adjournment  has  led  to
    unfairness which has infected the hearing of the appellant's appeal. It
    is apparent from the papers that the  appellant's  previous  solicitors
    had failed to carry out a thorough and professional preparation of  his
    appeal. It is also incontrovertible that the new  solicitors  had  only
    four  days  between  being  instructed  and  attending  the  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing to present the appellant's case.  Given  that  it  was
    necessary to obtain witness statements and arguably an expert report on
    Botswana, it should have been apparent to  the  judge  that  there  was
    simply not enough  time  for  the  solicitors  to  prepare  the  appeal
    properly. The Upper Tribunal  should  hesitate  before  identifying  an
    error of law in a  refusal  of  a  First-tier  Tribunal  to  adjourn  a
    hearing. However, given all the circumstances, I am satisfied that  the
    appellant has been denied a fair  hearing  and  that  the  decision  to
    refuse the adjournment, whilst robust, led the judge to fall into legal
    error. I am also satisfied that  the  judge  directed  herself  to  the
    incorrect and now out of date First-tier Tribunal Procedure Rules, that
    is, the rules dating from 2005 rather than those of 2014.  The  grounds
    of appeal are correct to point out that the presumption  in  favour  of
    refusing adjournment in the 2005 rules has not been replicated  in  the
    current procedure rules.

 5. There will need to be a fresh hearing before the First-tier Tribunal to
    which Tribunal this appeal is now  returned  for  the  decision  to  be
    remade following a hearing de novo.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.


Signed                              Date 2 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
