
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06897/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th July 2019                    |On 6th August 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                         Mariat Ssebigomba Nakisekka
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose of Broudie Jackson Canter
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Uganda who was born on 20th  July  1976.
    She made application to the respondent for recognition as a refugee but
    the respondent refused to grant recognition  on  21st  May  2018.   The
    appellant appealed and her First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge A J Parker in Manchester on 6th March, 2017.



2.   The appellant was contacted by the Immigration Appeal Tribunal  on  4th
    June, 2018 and invited to reply to directions.  She requested that  the
    appeal proceed to an oral hearing.  She  indicated  that  she  did  not
    intend to give evidence and did not intend to call witnesses.  She said
    that she did required a Luganda interpreter.

3.   The appellant was then sent notice of prehearing review by first  class
    prepaid post on 4th June 2018 advising her of a  prehearing  review  on
    18th June 2018.  That prehearing review was adjourned because the  Home
    Office had failed to  provide  the  files  to  the  Immigration  Appeal
    Tribunal and so a fresh hearing was arranged for 2nd July 2018.  Notice
    was sent to the appellant on 19th June 2018.

4.   That was also adjourned because the files had not  been  received  from
    the Home Office and so the prehearing review was fixed for Monday  24th
    November 2019.  The appellant was advised by a notice sent  to  her  by
    prepaid post on 11th July 2018.  She completed and returned a reply  to
    the Notice of Hearing in which she indicated  that  she  did  not  have
    representatives.  She did not need any more time to prepare for a  full
    hearing and  that  she  did  intend  to  give  evidence  herself.   She
    indicated that she required a Luganda interpreter.

5.   Following that, on 26th September 2018 the appellant was  notified  by
    first class post of a hearing date on 8th  October.   It  appears  that
    this hearing did not take place.  On  9th  October  2018  the  Tribunal
    again gave notice of  a  prehearing  review  and  the  appellant  again
    responded by completing the  questionnaire  sent  with  the  Notice  of
    Hearing again indicating that she had no legal representatives, she did
    not need any more time to  prepare  for  the  hearing  and  required  a
    Luganda interpreter.  It appears that this hearing may also  have  been
    adjourned because there is another reply on the file dated 8th November
    2018.  The appellant gave the same answers as previously.

6.   The matter was then set down for hearing on  6th  March  2018  and  the
    appellant was sent notice of the hearing by first class  post  on  23rd
    February.  On 25th February 2019 the appellant wrote  to  the  Tribunal
    requesting an adjournment of her case because  she  could  not  find  a
    solicitor or representative to take her  on.   They  were  telling  her
    apparently that she  should  come  back  at  the  end  of  March.   The
    adjournment was refused, because the appellant  had  already  had  over
    nine months in the United Kingdom  to  secure  representation  for  the
    hearing.

7.   The appeal came for hearing before Tribunal Judge Parker on 6th  March,
    and it appears that at the hearing the appellant claimed that  she  was
    not well enough to proceed with the hearing.   She  produced  a  letter
    from a Dr Burkey dated  5th  March  2019  describing  her  symptoms  of
    worsening fatigue, tiredness and headache.  She  suffers  from  type  2
    diabetes and has difficulty controlling  her  diabetes.   The  doctor's
    letter did not say that she was unfit to attend a  hearing  and  indeed
    the appellant had appeared before the judge.  The  judge  records  that
    the hearing took place at 10:10 and finished at 11:10 and  that  during
    the hearing she answered questions and gave a  considerable  amount  of
    detailed information regarding her claim in an intelligent manner.  The
    judge noted that she clearly understood the questions and  at  no  time
    did he feel that the hearing was conducted unfairly.  The  judge  found
    the appellant not to be credible and dismissed her appeal.

8.   She made application  for  permission  to  appeal  in  which  she  said



         "My Article 3 right has  been  breached  as  I  am  not  given  the
         opportunity to adequately engage the use of a legal  representative
         to address all the refusal  reasons.   The  respondent  has  stated
         which are all true to the best of my knowledge when  I  lodged  and
         claimed asylum.

         I seek permission for my appeal to be heard at the  Upper  Tribunal
         by which time I would have had a legal representative to address my
         case.  Refusal would be a breach of my Article 3 under the  Refugee
         Convention that will allow for my  removal  from  the  UK  to  face
         torture and other dehumanising treatment in Uganda.

         I urge the UK  government  and  Secretary  of  State  to  carefully
         consider my case and allow me to stay in the UK and be safe for the
         rest of my life.  I am not a threat to  the  public  and  have  not
         violated Section 117B and 117C of the Nationality, Immigration  and
         Asylum Act 2002".

9.   Mrs Johnrose confirmed that there was no  additional  medical  evidence
    today confirming the state of her health as at the date of the  hearing
    before the judge.

10.  Mrs Johnrose sought  to  persuade  me  that  the  judge  had  erred  by
    proceeding with the hearing.  Matters were  slightly  confused  because
    the judge made credibility findings on the  basis  that  the  appellant
    claimed that threats were received from a telephone call and the  judge
    found this not to  be  credible  because  the  appellant  had  actually
    applied for a visa prior to this telephone call.  Mrs Johnrose  pointed
    out that there were in fact two applications for a visa, but on careful
    examination of visa applications and the record of interview  conducted
    with the appellant, it is clear that in fact the  telephone  call  that
    the judge was referring to had been received  after  the  date  of  her
    first application at the end of July.   Her  first  application  having
    been made at the beginning of July.

11.  Mr Tan  sought  to  persuade  me  to  uphold  the  determination.   The
    Tribunal is  used  to  dealing  with  unrepresented  appellants.   This
    appellant had been in the United Kingdom for some nine months  and  had
    been given every opportunity to seek the representative if that is what
    she wanted.  She had indicated to the Tribunal on no  less  than  three
    occasions that she was not represented.

12.  I agree with the Home Office Presenting  Officer.  This  appellant  has
    had ample opportunity to engage the services  of  lawyers  if  she  had
    wanted to do so.  Nevertheless, the  appellant  had  earlier  indicated
    that she was not  using  lawyers.   It  is  perfectly  clear  from  the
    determination that the appellant was not  in  any  way  inhibited  from
    explaining to the judge why she needed  international  protection.  The
    judge reminded himself of the 2014 Procedure Rules  and  in  particular
    Rule 4 and noted that the overriding objective was to deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly.  I am satisfied that he did just that.  There is  no
    error of law in his determination and I  uphold  it.   The  appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge  Chalkley                                Date  30  July
2019



















