
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06996/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision Promulgated
On 31st May 2019  On 2nd July 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MR A A O
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

     1. The appellant made a claim for protection in November 2017. He
        claimed he was a Kurdish Iraqi national born in June 1985.


     2.  He said that he lived with his parents and two brothers in
        Sulaimaniyah. His father owned family land and when he experienced
        ill-health divided this between his sons, keeping a portion for
        himself. He subsequently gave his share to the appellant for the
        attention he gave him when he was unwell. The appellant had a
        business partner who farmed the land. In 2017 his brothers and his
        uncle became aware of what his father had done. They were resentful
        and threatened the appellant. They assaulted him and on another
        occasion approached him in the car and fired shots of him. His
        mother advised the appellant to leave the country. He said his
        brothers were involved with the PUK. Consequently, he left Iraq on
        24 August 2017 flying to Turkey. He then made his way overland
        arriving in the United Kingdom.


     3. The respondent refused his claim on the 27th May 2018.The family
        dispute was not accepted nor was it accepted that his brothers had
        influence in the IKR.


     4. His appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thomas at
        Birmingham on 3rd of July 2018.In a decision promulgated on 8
        August 2018 his appeal was dismissed. The judge did not find the
        claim established. His failure to claim in a safe country was
        raised in relation to section 8. The judge said the account was not
        credible. If his father had given him his share his brothers and
        uncle could have expressed their displeasure at his father or his
        business partner. There was no evidence that his brothers were
        involved with the PUK.

     5. At hearing the presenting officer submitted there were direct
        flights to the IKR and the appellant's family could help him get a
        CSID. He had indicated he was in contact with his mother and sister
        as well as a maternal cousin. The judge did not make a finding as
        to whether there were direct flights to the IKR but considered his
        return to Baghdad. The judge said he could be return there on a
        laisse passer and from there transfer to the IKR. The judge took
        the view that he could obtain a CSID quickly with the help of his
        family.

The Upper Tribunal

     6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis it was arguable the
        judge failed to explain how he would be able to travel to the IKR
        from Baghdad. This was on the basis there were no direct
        international flights.


     7. At hearing, Mr Howard confirmed that the only issue was the
        question of the documentation for the appellant's return. He
        accepted that the indication was that there are now direct flights
        from the United Kingdom to the IKR.

     8. Mr Tan pointed out there was no challenge to the rejection of the
        underlying claim. Given the appellant's profile as a Kurd from the
        IKR he submitted he would be able to obtain his CSID or a
        replacement without difficulty.

Conclusions

     9. The judge rejected the appellant's underlying claim and there has
        been no challenge to this. The appellant is from the IKR. The only
        issue relates to the practicalities of return.


    10.  His family live in Sulaimaniyah. He said he was in contact with
        his mother and sister. He also indicated having 2 brothers and
        another sister. In his substantive interview he said his Iraqi
        National certificate was with his sister.

    11. On the basis the underlying claim has not been accepted he has
        close family and extended family members to help him in the IKR. No
        reason has been advanced as to why he cannot obtain documentation.
        It has been accepted on his behalf there are direct flights from
        Manchester to the IKR. Given that he is Kurdish and has lived in
        the IKR I can anticipate no difficulties with his return. This
        being the only issue I find no material error of law established.


 Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Thomas. Consequently, the decision dismissing the
appellant's appeal shall stand.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly
30 June 2019














