
[pic]
Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06746/2017



                             THE IMMIGRATION ACT



|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th February 2018                  |On 23rd February 2018                |
|                                       |                                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE



                                   Between

                                     SG

                         (Anonymity Direction made)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle of Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors

For the Respondent :   Mr Walker  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  the  Iran.  Having  considered  all  the
    circumstances,  I  consider  it  appropriate  to  make   an   anonymity
    direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge D Ross.  By the decision promulgated on  14th  September
    2017 Judge Ross dismissed the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
    of the respondent to refuse  her  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  or
    relief otherwise on human rights grounds either under Articles 2 and  3
    or under Article 8.

 3. By decision dated 6 December  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Parkes
    granted permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal.  Thus  the  matter
    appeared before me to determine in the first instance  whether  or  not
    there is a material error of law in the decision.

 4. At the start of the grounds of appeal references are made to  what  are
    clear mistakes within paragraph 2 of the decision. Whether the mistakes
    are due to dictation or typographical errors, the errors  of  their  on
    the face of the papers.

 5. Firstly the appellant being a citizen of Iran has spent all her life in
    Iran or in the UK. However in paragraph 2 there  is  reference  to  the
    fact that the appellant had been to Mexico on 2  or  3  occasions.  The
    appellant has never been to Mexico. Whilst it may be that in dictating,
    mosque has been put down as Mexico is a possibility, there is a failure
    to correct an error, which is evident on the face of the decision.

 6. Further to that in the same paragraph there is reference  to  the  fact
    that the appellant "was a devoted Muslim whilst in  Iraq".  Whilst  the
    reference to Iraq may be merely a slip and should have  read  Iran,  it
    was a matter that should be corrected.

 7. More material  in  that  respect  is  the  general  assessment  of  the
    chronology of events. It is  clear  from  the  appellant's  version  of
    events that she has been  into  hospital  on  2  occasions.  The  first
    occasion at some time in or about 2006/7 when she  was  treated  for  a
    serious back condition and subsequently in 2017 when she  had  a  fall.
    The date is material. In the chronology advanced by the  appellant  she
    began to take an interesting Christianity in or about 2006 after  being
    treated for the pain and serious back condition in hospital. Whilst  in
    hospital she had talked to a lady about  Christianity  and  on  leaving
    hospital the appellant had taken an interest  in  Christian  faith  and
    church.

 8. In the version of events by the judge the appellant had only started to
    take an interesting Christianity after being  treated  in  hospital  in
    2017. That clearly is an error in assessing the factual matrix  of  the
    appellant's case. It is accepted that that is clearly wrong. The  judge
    appears to have taken the references by the appellant to having started
    her interest in Christianity after she had been in  hospital  to  be  a
    reference to the 2017  admission,  when  it  is  clear  that  it  is  a
    reference to much earlier admission.

 9. The judge goes on to indicate that given the timeline  the  appellant's
    account is not credible in the circumstances. The assessment  is  based
    upon a clear error as to the alleged facts  of  the  appellant's  case.
    That clear misunderstanding of the  evidence  that  was  presented  has
    resulted in the judge basing his findings of fact  on  a  wholly  false
    factual basis and premise.

10. It was accepted on behalf of the respondent that  if  it  was  accepted
    that the judge had wholly misunderstood the evidence,  that  undermined
    the  whole  of  the  findings  of  fact  made  by  the  judge.  In  the
    circumstances I am satisfied that the judge has found this findings  of
    fact on a fundamental misunderstanding of the evidence.

11. Further to that medical  reports  were  submitted  in  respect  of  the
    appellant. The medical reports confirm that the appellant is  suffering
    from vascular dementia and  that  the  appellant  has  some  degree  of
    difficulty in remembering  dates  and  specific  events.  The  vascular
    dementia may in part be due to a serious head injury sustained  by  the
    appellant after the fall and hospitalisation in 2017 referred to above.
    However the judge has gone on to make findings of fact indicating  that
    the appellant's account is vague,  inconsistent  and  unconvincing.  In
    making those findings of fact judge appears to refer to the fall and to
    the hospitalisation of the appellant but  makes  no  reference  to  the
    problems that arose because of the significant subdural haemorrhage had
    and the vascular dementia that the appellant is suffering from.  Whilst
    it is not to say that had  the  judge  taken  account  of  the  medical
    evidence the judge would have been entitled to make the  findings  that
    he did, it was necessary for the  judge  to  demonstrate  that  he  had
    considered whether the appellant's recollection may have been  effected
    by her condition. The judge has not taken such into account.

12. Given the failure to properly approach the facts of the case and  given
    the failure to give take account  of  the  medical  evidence  that  the
    appellant is suffering from vascular dementia, I find  that  there  are
    material errors of law within the decision.

13. I considered with the representatives the appropriate  course.  It  was
    accepted that it was necessary for proper findings of fact to be  made.
    It will be necessary for the whole of the evidence to be  heard  again.
    In the light of that I determined to remit the case to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for hearing afresh with none of the findings  of  fact  to  be
    preserved.

    Notice of Decision

14. I find there is a material error of law in the original decision.

15. I set the decision aside.

16. I direct that the appeal be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing afresh.




Signed



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated 15th February 2018







Direction regarding anonymity- rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008



Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the appellant's family.
This direction applies both to the appellant and the respondent. Failure to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings





Signed                                       Date 15th February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure








