

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06216/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                      |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 1st August, 2017, Given            |         On 4th August 2017           |
|Extempore and signed and              |                                      |
|sent to promulgation                  |                                      |
|On 3rd August 2017                    |                                      |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY


                                   Between

                                    M S I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Not represented
For the Respondent:    Mr David Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, who  was  born  on  5th  May
    1974.  He claims that he arrived in the United Kingdom in 2001 and  was
    encountered working illegally in a restaurant on 17th July 2015.

2.   On 15th March 2016, he  was  detained  for  removal  when  he  made  an
    Article 8 human rights claim.  This claim was refused and certified and
    on the same day he made further submissions which were refused on  24th
    March 2016.  On 8th April 2016 he claimed asylum.

3.   On 31st June 2016 his application was refused  by  the  respondent  and
    the refusal of asylum was the subject of an appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 3rd January 2017 heard at Newport  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Suffield-Thompson.  The judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on
    asylum  grounds,  humanitarian  protection  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds and the appellant sought and obtained leave to appeal.

4.   At the hearing today there was no appearance by or  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant  and  at  10:32  I  proceeded  to  hear  the  appeal  in  the
    appellant's absence.

5.   For the respondent, Mr Mills handed to me a copy of a  letter  sent  by
    his previous solicitors to the Upper Tribunal at Field House indicating
    that they were no longer instructed.  He told me that the  Home  Office
    should have applied their policy of not requiring a parent  or  primary
    carer to return to a country outside the EU on the basis that it  would
    be unreasonable to expect a British child to leave the EU with a parent
    or primary carer.  That policy had not been applied in the case of  the
    appellant.  As a result, Mr  Mills  told  me  that  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State for the Home Department he  was  now  conceding  the
    appeal.  This determination appears as a matter of record.

Anonymity order made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley
