
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06047/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and reasons Promulgated     |
|On 1 October 2018                    |On 29th October 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                 Gerald [A]
                        (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Harding of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Candola, Senior Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant a citizen of Albania born on [ ~ ] 1999 appealed  against
    the decision of the respondent dated 26 April 2018  not  to  grant  him
    asylum and humanitarian protection in the  United  Kingdom.  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge MPW Harris dismissed the appellant's appeal for  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Andrew on
    10 August 2018 stating that it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  made  a
    material error of law as he may not have adequately assessed the  issue
    of internal relocation given his findings and the country information.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  made  the  following  findings  in  his
    decision which I summarise. The Judge did not hear oral  evidence  from
    the appellant on the instructions  of  his  legal  representatives,  Mr
    Sharma although the appellant  was  present  at  the  hearing.  It  was
    accepted that the National Referral Mechanism Report  dated  24  August
    2015 decided that the  appellant  was  a  victim  of  trafficking.  The
    appellant's claim for protection was based on his fear of the  criminal
    gang who he worked falling Albania  in  June  and  September  2014.  He
    delivered bags containing drugs for the criminal gang with the help  of
    the police who were corrupted. In  September  2014  the  appellant  was
    carrying two bags of drugs on the bus for the criminal  gang.  He  lost
    one of the bags in transit. He went into hiding and his father  decided
    to take the appellant out of the country. They left Albania 7 September
    2014 and travel to Belgium from where he entered the United Kingdom. He
    claims that he arrived in the United Kingdom when he was 15  years  old
    and claimed asylum the next day.

 4. The respondent does not dispute the  appellant's  account  of  previous
    abuse from his father and former exploitation  by  the  criminal  gang.
    However, the issue is whether the appellant can show that  there  is  a
    lack of state protection in his home area as he fears non-state actors.
    Background evidence in the case of TD & AD (trafficked women) CG [2016]
    UKUT  00092  (IAC)  states  that  the  context  of  female  victims  of
    trafficking, the country guidance indicates  that  generally  there  is
    sufficiency of protection available although there may be  cases  where
    individual circumstances where a person  may  not  be  able  to  access
    protection.

 5. The Judge stated that the  appellant  did  not  give  evidence  at  the
    hearing that does not prevent him  from  accepting  the  bases  of  the
    undisputed evidence that there is a real likelihood that criminals  had
    a relationship with the appellant with the help of  corrupt  police  in
    the appellant's home area. The appellant will not  be  able  to  access
    sufficient protection in his home area and thus remains  at  real  risk
    from the criminal gang.

 6. As the appellant does not claim to have dropped drug  packages  outside
    his home region he can  relocate  to  Tirana.  The  Judge  stated  that
    details given by the appellant in his answers at his interview  and  in
    written evidence is limited. The Judge  however  was  not  prepared  to
    accept that three criminals would have such  power  and  influence  for
    them to learn about  the  appellant's  relocation  within  Albania  and
    target him. The Judge noted again that  the  appellant  has  not  given
    evidence as to the degree of influence the three criminals in his  home
    area have over the authorities in  Tirana.  The  appellant  is  a  male
    victim of trafficking and therefore faces less problems  than  a  woman
    victim of trafficking where patriarchal values remains widespread.

 7. The grounds of appeal state the following which I summarise. There  are
    a series of material errors in the  decision  which,  individually  and
    collectively demonstrate that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
    unsustainable. The Judge made a clear finding that the appellant is "at
    real risk of serious harm in his home area currently.  The  Judge  also
    makes a finding  that  the  appellant  will  not  have  sufficiency  of
    protection in his home area. The Judge then dismisses  the  appellant's
    appeal on the basis that he can internally relocate within Albania  and
    gives unsustainable reasons. The Judge accepts the  factual  matrix  of
    the trafficking claim that the gang have contacts within the police  at
    the highest level. The Judge also ignores the background evidence  from
    the respondent's the  country  policy  and  information  note-  Albania
    background information, including actors of  protection,  and  internal
    relocation of 25 July 2017. The Judge  did  not  consider  that  anyone
    relocating within Albania must transfer  their  civil  registration  in
    Albania to the new area. The corrupt police officers therefore have the
    ability to inform the criminal gang about his whereabouts.

 8. At the hearing I  heard  submissions  from  both  parties.  Mr  Harding
    adopted his grounds of appeal and said that the Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal should have addressed the lack of oral  evidence.  Mr  Condala
    said that the Judge has considered all the points but accepted that the
    appellant's oral evidence was important.

    Decision on whether there is a material error of law in the decision

 9. I do not accept Mr Harding's submission that the Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal should  have  addressed  the  appellant's  lack  of  oral
    evidence. That was the decision made by  his  legal  representative  Mr
    Sharma which  the  appellant  adopted.  The  burden  remains  upon  the
    appellant to prove his case and therefore if he did not  want  to  give
    evidence that was a matter for him. However, having said that,  it  was
    important for the appellant to have given oral evidence to address many
    of the issues raised in this appeal.

10. The Judge made findings that the appellant faced real risk  of  serious
    harm in his home area on his return from the criminal gang for whom  he
    worked delivering drugs. The Judge found that he would be  at  risk  of
    being re-trafficked in his home area and also does not have sufficiency
    of protection in his home area due to the corrupt police  officers  who
    collude with the drug traffickers. However, he found that the appellant
    can relocate to Tirana but did not give adequate  reasons  taking  into
    account the background evidence.

11. The factual matrix of the appellant's claim was accepted. He was  found
    to have been a victim of trafficking and having worked for  a  criminal
    gang in  Albania  transporting  drugs  in  his  home  area.  Therefore,
    relocation for the appellant  was  an  issue  which  should  have  been
    explored within the background evidence. One of the  reasons  for  this
    was that because the appellant  did  not  give  oral  evidence  at  the
    hearing led the Judge to speculate. I was of  the  view  that  fairness
    demands that the appellant given an opportunity to give  oral  evidence
    which can be considered.

12. In the circumstances, I direct that the appeal  be  placed  before  any
    First-tier Tribunal Judge apart  from  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  MPW
    Harris for hearing of the appeal de novo for findings  of  fact  to  be
    made on the strict proviso that the appellant gives  oral  evidence  at
    this renewed hearing.

13. I sought reassurance from Mr Harding that the appellant will give  oral
    evidence at the renewed hearing because that  the  only  reason  I  was
    remitting the appeal. Mr Harding assured me that  the  appellant  would
    give oral evidence.

14. I therefore direct that  the  appellant  gives  oral  evidence  at  the
    renewed hearing at the First-tier Tribunal and  if  he  does  not,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal be upheld because the  only  reason
    why I have remitted this appeal is for the appellant's oral evidence to
    be taken  into  account  in  any  decision  made  for  the  appellant's
    application for protection.

Decision

The appeal be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal




                                         Dated this 21st day of October 2018
Signed by


..........................................
Ms S Chana
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

