
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06979/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 28 July 2021                  |On 01 October 2021               |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                bm (zimbabwe)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bhebhe of Njomane Immigration Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 18 December 2019, a panel of the  Upper  Tribunal  comprising  Upper
    Tribunal Judges O'Connor and Plimmer set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in which the appellant's appeal had been dismissed.
     The panel concluded that the FtT had fallen into procedural  error  in
    refusing to adjourn the hearing and that its decision was in any  event
    inadequately reasoned.  The decision of the FtT was set  aside  in  its
    entirety and the appeal was retained for redetermination de novo in the
    Upper Tribunal so that consideration could be given 'to  the  assertion
    that the Home Office are organising interviews  between  former  asylum
    applicants and the Zimbabwean authorities'.
 2. The rehearing of the appeal has been significantly delayed as a  result
    of the Covid-19 pandemic. On 23 November 2020, the  Principal  Resident
    Judge issued a Transfer Order so that the appeal could be  heard  by  a
    differently constituted Tribunal.  So it was that the  appeal  returned
    before this panel on 28 July 2021.

Background

 3. The appellant is a Zimbabwean national who was born on 8 January  1963.
    He has a lengthy immigration history.


 4. He arrived in the UK, using his own passport, on 24 September 2002.  He
    was given leave to enter for a month.  He applied for further leave  as
    a visitor.  That application was refused  and  an  appeal  against  the
    refusal was dismissed, with appeal  rights  becoming  exhausted  on  26
    September 2005.

 5. The appellant made an application for leave to remain on  human  rights
    grounds (Article 8 ECHR) in October 2013.  The application was  refused
    in the same month, and the appellant was served with  a  notice  as  an
    overstayer (Form IS151A).  The appellant lodged an appeal  against  the
    refusal but he subsequently withdrew the appeal on 2 July 2014.

 6. On 30 October 2014, the appellant claimed asylum.  He asserted that  he
    would be at risk on return to Zimbabwe on account of his membership  of
    the MDC and his sur place activities.  He stated that his  son,  Farai,
    had been targeted by the regime in  his  stead.   The  application  was
    refused on 30 April 2015.  He appealed.  The appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Green on 28  April  2016  and  permission  to
    appeal was refused by the FtT and the Upper  Tribunal.   Appeal  rights
    were exhausted on 1 June 2016.

 7.  The  appellant  made  further  submissions  on  16  March  2017.   The
    respondent refused to treat those further submissions as a fresh  claim
    on 22 March 2017.

 8. The appellant made a second set of  further  submissions  on  22  March
    2019.  The respondent accepted that these  submissions  amounted  to  a
    fresh claim but refused that claim on 10 June 2019.  It is against that
    decision that the appellant appeals.

The Starting Point

 9.  This  being  the  appellant's  second  appeal  against  a  refusal  of
    international protection, we are required by Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1
    to take the earlier decisions as our starting point.


10. The first decision was issued on 16 September 2005 by Immigration Judge
    Beg.  The appellant  did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  her  on  8
    September 2005.  The  Immigration  Judge  noted  that  the  appellant's
    application for leave to remain as a  visitor  had  been  made  shortly
    after his arrival in the UK; that he had made a decision not  to  claim
    asylum; and that his stated intention was to work as a driver of  heavy
    vehicles or buses.  She found no basis for him to  remain  in  the  UK,
    whether under the Immigration Rules or otherwise.


11. The second decision was issued by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Green  (as
    he then was) on 28 April 2016.  Judge Green did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant had been politically active in Zimbabwe or that he  was  been
    persecuted before his departure.  He had delayed in claiming asylum and
    that decision had been motivated solely by  the  chaotic  economic  and
    political situation in Zimbabwe.  He had no  significant  profile  with
    the MDC and he had not established that his sur place activities  would
    render him of interest to the Zimbabwean  authorities.   The  appellant
    was not at that stage said to be in a relationship and there was proper
    justification for interfering with any private life which the appellant
    had accrued in the UK.

The Fresh Claim

12. The appellant's further submissions run to fifteen  pages.   Under  the
    sub-heading 'Difference between the previous  claims  and  the  current
    claim', however, the appellant provided a concise summary of the  basis
    upon which he submitted that he had a fresh claim:


         I was recently  interviewed  by  an  authority  from  Zimbabwe,  in
         connection with my stay in the United Kingdom, and my asylum claim.
          As a result of the interview, the Zimbabwean authorities are aware
         of my identity, my home area, my relatives,  my  asylum  claim,  my
         political activities in the UK, and other details.


         The details which the Zimbabwean authorities extracted  during  the
         interview expose me to risk of persecution  if  I  am  returned  to
         Zimbabwe.  This form of risk has not been considered before.


         Under Article 8, I have private and family  life  with  my  partner
         [RV], a British national who was born on 31 May 1955.  If we return
         to   Zimbabwe,   we   will   face   insurmountable   obstacles   to
         reintegration.   Our  relationship  has  not  been  considered   in
         previous applications.


         Under 276ADE,  I  submit  that  the  conditions  in  Zimbabwe  have
         significantly changed to such an extent that if I  am  returned,  I
         will face very significant difficulties on reintegration.


13. The appellant then provided further particulars  of  his  claim,  which
    included details of the interview which had taken place on Home  Office
    premises and the subsequent attack of  his  uncle  by  members  of  the
    Zimbabwean national army and the CIO.  The appellant submitted that  he
    would be known as an oppositionist on return to Zimbabwe and  would  be
    at risk as such.  He also submitted  that  his  family  life  with  his
    British partner could not continue in  Zimbabwe  because  she  was  HIV
    positive and as dependent upon antiretroviral treatment which she could
    not receive in that country.

The Respondent's Decision

14. The respondent's decision  is  also  lengthy,  setting  out  tracts  of
    background  information  and   reported   decisions.    The   essential
    conclusions were as follows.  In light  of  the  lack  of  detail,  the
    respondent did not accept that the appellant had attended an  interview
    with the Zimbabwean authorities in the UK: [16]-[18].  In  relation  to
    the appellant's sur place activities, the  respondent  considered  that
    there was significantly less politically-motivated violence in Zimbabwe
    and that the appellant  did  not  have  a  profile  which  would  cause
    problems: [19]-[32].  The respondent did not accept that the  appellant
    enjoyed a genuine and subsisting relationship with  RV  or  that  there
    were insurmountable obstacles to the continuation of  the  relationship
    in Zimbabwe:  [43]-[69].   The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant's removal would give rise to very  significant  obstacles  to
    his reintegration to Zimbabwe or to a breach of Article 8  ECHR:  [70]-
    [82].

The Appeal Before the Upper Tribunal

15. The appellant relies on two bundles of evidence.  The first, which  was
    filed in support of his appeal to  the  FtT,  runs  to  184  pages  and
    consists of his witness statement and further evidence  in  support  of
    that statement.  The second, which was identified as the  supplementary
    bundle before us, runs to 148  pages  and  consists  of  an  additional
    witness statement and evidence in support of the same.

16. It has been accepted since a Case Management Hearing  in  January  2020
    that the appellant was indeed interviewed by the Zimbabwean authorities
    on Home Office premises.  A short bundle which was filed and served  in
    preparation for that  hearing  contains  a  list  of  eight  Zimbabwean
    nationals who were interviewed under the  'ZWE  f2f  scheme'  at  Eaton
    House on 11 December 2018.  Also contained  within  that  bundle  is  a
    record of the  outcome  of  the  appellant's  documentation  interview,
    showing that the  appellant  had  been  accepted  to  be  a  Zimbabwean
    national and that he would be issued a travel document.  That  form  is
    dated 7 February 2019.  The bundle also contains an Interim Operational
    Instruction dated September 2018, recording that an official  from  the
    Zimbabwean government had been seconded to the UK and  would  'consider
    and process all [Emergency Travel Document] applications'.   Interviews
    would take place at a variety of locations including reporting centres.
     There is also a 'Returns  Logistics  guide  to  travel  documents  for
    removal to Zimbabwe'.  This document confirmed, amongst  other  things,
    that a 'mandatory  face  to  face  interview  is  required  to  confirm
    nationality before an ETD can be issued'. We note that these procedures
    have subsequently been revisited and  any  such  interviews  must  take
    place in the presence of a Home Office official.


17. In preparation for the hearing before us, the respondent also filed and
    served a bundle containing a skeleton argument and background  material
    in support of it.

18. We heard oral evidence from the appellant  but  not  from  his  British
    partner, who we were told had decided not to  attend  the  hearing  for
    fear of being removed to Zimbabwe.  We do not intend  to  rehearse  the
    oral evidence in this decision.  We will refer to it insofar as  it  is
    necessary to do so to explain our findings of fact.

Submissions

19. Mr Melvin relied on the letter of refusal  and  the  skeleton  argument
    which had been  settled  by  his  colleague.   He  submitted  that  the
    appellant had not been a credible  witness.   The  appellant  had  been
    interviewed by the Zimbabwean authorities in December 2018 but  he  had
    only made his fresh claim in March 2019, after an article had  appeared
    in The Guardian about the Home Office practice of allowing a Zimbabwean
    official  to  interview  asylum  seekers  without   supervision.    The
    appellant had said in evidence that he told his  representatives  about
    the interview straight away.  If he had been placed in fear of his life
    by that interview, that would have been  brought  to  the  respondent's
    attention immediately.  There was no credible  evidence  to  show  that
    anything had happened to  any  member  of  the  appellant's  family  in
    Zimbabwe as a result of the interview.  The account of his uncle having
    been  attacked  was  vague  and   had   been   augmented   by   further
    embellishments during the  appellant's  oral  testimony.   If,  as  the
    appellant  had  claimed  in  evidence,  his  uncle  had  been  targeted
    repeatedly and had decided to flee to Zambia as a  result,  that  would
    have appeared in the supplementary statement  which  was  made  shortly
    before  the  hearing.   There  was  no  witness  statement   from   the
    appellant's uncle or aunt and the photographs in the bundle had  little
    corroborative value.  Notably,  the  letter  from  Chitungwiza  Central
    Hospital stated that the appellant's uncle had been  admitted  to  that
    hospital, as a result of an attack, for three days  in  December  2019.
    On the appellant's account, however, the attack had  occurred  in  2018
    and his uncle was in Zambia at the time that he  was  meant  to  be  in
    Chitungwiza Central Hospital.  The appellant had also given an  account
    of his uncle's children being taken away by Zanu PF  before  his  uncle
    was assaulted but there was no mention of this in his earlier accounts.




20. As for the appellant's sur place activities, it was  apparent  that  he
    had been involved with the Zim Vigil in the past but there was  nothing
    to show that his activities had continued.  There was certainly nothing
    from the group to confirm that the appellant continued to  participate.



21. As for the appellant's relationship, we were invited by  Mr  Melvin  to
    find that it did not exist.  The appellant's partner had  not  attended
    before the FtT or the Upper Tribunal and it was not credible to  assert
    that a British citizen would be afraid of being returned to Zimbabwe.

22. Mr Behbe relied upon his skeleton argument.   The  first  question  was
    whether the appellant qualified for international protection.   It  had
    been accepted by the respondent that the interview with the  Zimbabwean
    authorities had taken place and it had evidently exposed the  appellant
    to an enhanced risk.  In any event, the appellant had adduced  evidence
    that he was involved in a good  deal  of  sur  place  activity.   These
    activities had recently been affected by the pandemic but the appellant
    had remained active, particularly on social media.   The  position  had
    not changed  appreciably  since  the  country  guidance  decisions  and
    Zimbabwe was still a violent and repressive place.

23. Mr Behbe submitted that the appellant would be at  risk  on  return  to
    Zimbabwe even if his account of what had befallen  his  uncle  was  not
    accepted.  The risk to the appellant flowed from  the  interview  which
    had taken place and his sur place activity.

24. It was regrettable, acknowledged Mr Behbe, that the appellant's partner
    had not attended the hearing.  There was  nevertheless  clear  evidence
    that they lived together and they had been a couple  for  three  years.
    It was plausible that she was fearful of being removed from the UK.

25. We retired to consider our decision.  On return, we asked Mr Melvin for
    submissions on the appellant's internet  profile.   He  submitted  that
    there was no evidence that the Zimbabwean authorities (in contrast, for
    example, to the Iranians) asked for  Facebook  passwords  or  conducted
    Google searches about those who  returned.   Mr  Behbe  submitted  that
    there was a real risk  that  the  appellant's  extensive  social  media
    activities would have come to the attention of the authorities or  that
    it would do so upon return.

Analysis

26. A person is a refugee and is therefore entitled to asylum  pursuant  to
    Directive 2004/83/EC, (the Qualification Directive) if, (in  the  words
    of Article 1A of the  Geneva  Convention  relating  to  the  Status  of
    Refugees) owing to well-founded fear of being persecuted for reasons of
    race, religion, nationality or membership of a particular social  group
    or political opinion, he is outside the country of his nationality  and
    is unable or, owing to such fear, unwilling to  avail  himself  of  the
    protection of that country.


27. The appellant bears  the  burden  of  proving  that  he  satisfies  the
    definition above, although the standard of proof  is  a  low  one.   It
    suffices if he can demonstrate that there is  a  reasonable  degree  of
    likelihood or a real risk of his being persecuted: RT (Zimbabwe) [2012]
    3 WLR 345, at [55].

28. Judge Green concluded in 2016 that the  appellant  had  fabricated  his
    account of events in Zimbabwe  and  that  he  had  claimed  asylum  not
    because he feared for his life there but in  an  attempt  to  secure  a
    better life in  the  United  Kingdom.   Having  noted  the  appellant's
    immigration history, which included claiming asylum after being  served
    with a notice to an overstayer, the judge found that the appellant  had
    treated the protection claim as a remedy of last resort and found  that
    he was merely 'clutching at straws'.

29. Having seen and heard the appellant give evidence over the course of  a
    relatively  lengthy  hearing,  we  reach  a  similar  view  as  to  his
    credibility.  We start with his  account  of  being  interviewed  by  a
    Zimbabwean official in December 2018.  It is accepted by the respondent
    that this interview took place on 11 December 2018  and  that  no  Home
    Office official was present during the interview.  To that extent,  the
    appellant's account is not in issue between the parties.

30. What is very much in issue  between  the  parties  is  the  appellant's
    account that the interviewer's questions extended significantly  beyond
    gathering the data required for redocumentation, into  the  details  of
    his family in Zimbabwe and the particulars of  his  asylum  claim.   In
    undertaking our assessment of this aspect of the appellant's claim,  we
    have taken careful account of what is said in the  background  material
    about the adverse interest  shown  by  the  Zimbabwean  regime  in  its
    political opponents, as recorded in the respondent's Country Policy and
    Information Note  entitled  Zimbabwe:  Opposition  to  the  government,
    version 4, February 2019 and the extant  country  guidance  in  CM  (EM
    country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 59 (IAC).

31. As Mr Melvin submitted, it is notable that the appellant did  not  seek
    to raise any concerns about the December  2018  interview  until  March
    2019, after an article had been published in  The  Guardian  about  the
    Home Office's practice of arranging  such  interviews.   The  appellant
    confirmed in evidence before us that he was legally represented at  the
    time of the interview.  He claimed that he had told his representatives
    about the interview shortly after it had taken place.  If the appellant
    had told  his  legal  representatives  that  he  was  subjected  to  an
    interview with a Zimbabwean official in which he was pressed to  reveal
    details of his asylum claim in the UK, we  consider  that  a  complaint
    would have been made about his treatment, and that it would  have  been
    made immediately.  The fact that nothing was said about  the  interview
    until the article had appeared in The Guardian  suggests  that  nothing
    untoward passed between the appellant and the  Zimbabwean  official  at
    Eaton House on 11  December  2018.   Whilst  it  is  plausible  that  a
    seconded official from the Zimbabwean government would show an interest
    in the activities of the Zimbabwean diaspora, we consider  the  absence
    of a complaint from a legally represented individual to be particularly
    telling.


32. We have similar concerns in relation to the  appellant's  account  that
    his uncle was targeted after the interview took place.   The  appellant
    maintained in his fresh claim and in his witness  statements  that  his
    uncle and aunt were targeted by pro-regime  actors  shortly  after  the
    interview.  In evidence, he said that the attack had taken place on  18
    December 2018.  In his supplementary statement, the appellant  referred
    to medical evidence he had obtained from Zimbabwe in  support  of  this
    claim.  This evidence - from Chitungwiza Central Hospital - serves only
    to contradict the appellant's account.  It states that  his  uncle  was
    admitted to the hospital between 18 December and 22 December 2019 after
    having been assaulted by  Zanu  PF  supporters.  The  letter  therefore
    suggests that the attack took place in 2019, not in 2018, as maintained
    by the appellant.

33. As Mr Melvin noted in his oral submissions, there is a paucity of other
    evidence to confirm these important aspects of the  appellant's  claim.
    There is no statement from his uncle or his aunt, despite his claim  in
    oral evidence that he remains in contact with her and that it  was  she
    who went to the hospital to obtain the letter which we have  considered
    above.  There are some photographs of an injured man  in  the  original
    bundle but there is nothing to establish the identity of the individual
    who appears in the photographs.  There is  a  poor  photocopy  of  what
    appears to be some medical notes in an exercise book but, again,  there
    is nothing more than the appellant's evidence to establish  that  these
    relate to his uncle.  In any event, the notes  bear  a  date  in  2018,
    thereby contradicting the letter from the hospital.

34. There are further difficulties with  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    uncle and aunt having  been  attacked  in  Zimbabwe  in  the  immediate
    aftermath of his interview with a Zimbabwean official.   The  first  is
    that he took no action  in  response  to  the  information,  which  was
    supposedly communicated to him  on  19  December,  the  day  after  the
    attack.  In the appellant's first witness statement, he states that his
    aunt told him about these events and said that he would be killed if he
    returned to Zimbabwe.  Nevertheless,  the  appellant  made  no  further
    claim for asylum at that point, and waited a further three months or so
    to do so.  The appellant's inaction causes us to doubt the truthfulness
    of his account, particularly when it is borne in mind that he  was,  by
    that stage, a legally represented man with a working knowledge  of  the
    immigration and asylum system in the United Kingdom.

35. The second difficulty with the appellant's account of what  befell  his
    uncle is that he demonstrably embellished  that  account  in  his  oral
    evidence.  He stated that the Zanu PF supporters who had  gone  to  his
    uncle's house had made arrangements for  his  uncle's  children  to  be
    taken away before he was beaten, whereas there was no suggestion of any
    such safeguarding concerns in any of the appellant's written  accounts.



36. More significantly, the appellant said in evidence before us  that  his
    uncle had  returned  home  after  the  attack  to  find  that  Zanu  PF
    supporters had taken to singing pro-regime  songs  in  his  yard.   The
    appellant stated that this group was known in the area for  undertaking
    what he described as political 'cleansing'.  He said that the  repeated
    presence of the group caused  his  uncle  to  fear  that  he  would  be
    attacked again.  Such was his fear that he decided to flee  to  Zambia,
    either in 2019 or during the first  Covid-19  lockdown  (the  appellant
    could not be more precise in his oral evidence).  There was no  mention
    in any of the appellant's written accounts  of  this  ongoing  pressure
    from Zanu PF.  Nor was there any suggestion  in  the  written  evidence
    that his uncle had been compelled to leave  the  country.   That  is  a
    significant detail, the omission of which  from  his  detailed  written
    accounts casts further doubt on the narrative as a whole.

37. In common  with  Judge  Green,  who  dismissed  the  appellant's  first
    protection appeal in 2016,  we  have  significant  concerns  about  the
    truthfulness of the appellant's version of events in Zimbabwe  and  the
    UK.  With those concerns in mind, we consider the appellant's sur place
    activity.

38. Judge Green expressed a number of concerns about the  evidence  adduced
    before him in support of the sur place activity.  At  that  stage,  the
    appellant stated that he was a member of the MDC but,  as  Judge  Green
    observed, at [22],  there  were  difficulties  with  that  claim.   The
    evidence which was said to emanate from the MDC did  not  confirm  with
    any specificity when the appellant was said to have joined in Zimbabwe,
    nor did it state when the appellant had become a member in the UK.

39. The same letters from the MDC appear before us, and  seem  to  indicate
    that the appellant's MDC membership in the UK began after he  had  been
    served with an overstayer's notice in October 2013.   There  is  little
    mention of any anti-regime activity in the UK in the period between the
    appellant's arrival in 2002 and his attempts to regularise  his  status
    from 2013 onwards.  The only reference we have been able to  detect  is
    to the appellant having  signed  the  register  at  the  Zim  Vigil  in
    December 2010 (the letter from Zim Vigil of 21 December  2019  refers).
    That letter also confirms that the vigil has been  taking  place  since
    2002, so there were eight years in which the appellant is not  recorded
    as having taken any part.  The subsequent letters (11 February 2017 and
    30 January 2017) confirm that the appellant  'is  a  supporter  of  the
    vigil' and that he 'attends the Zimbabwe Vigil', without any indication
    of the frequency of his attendance or when it  began  in  earnest.   As
    with the MDC, it appears that the appellant's interest in the Zim Vigil
    intensified when it most benefited his protection claim.

40. The same is true of the appellant's membership of  the  charity  called
    Restoration of Human Rights (ROHR)  Zimbabwe,  which  confirms  in  its
    letter of 2 December 2019 that the appellant joined in 2015.  Mr  Tapa,
    the President and  Founder  of  ROHR,  speaks  in  the  letter  to  the
    appellant having risen to become a part of the organising team  of  the
    organisation in 2017 and to his becoming a  'key  member'  of  the  Zim
    Vigil.  We note that Mr Tapa writes of  the  appellant's  'very  strong
    passion in support of human rights programs in Zimbabwe'.   We  do  not
    consider the appellant to have any such passion.  We consider that  the
    appellant has intensified his participation in these movements so as to
    improve his chances of securing asylum and not because of  any  genuine
    commitment to their cause.

41. We note that the appellant has also  been  active  in  his  own  right,
    outside his participation in the MDC, Zim Vigil  and  ROHR.   Submitted
    with  the  appellant's  further  submissions  were   pages   from   the
    www.zimbabwevoice.org  website,  showing  that  the  appellant  had   a
    presence on the website which was described as  [BM]  TV.  These  pages
    were printed in August 2014 and we note the concerns expressed by Judge
    Green in 2016, that the appellant had been unable to access the site at
    the hearing before him and that there was inadequate evidence  to  show
    that the site was still live.  In the pages, the appellant speaks about
    his supposed commitment to  the  downfall  of  Robert  Mugabe.   He  is
    described as '[BM], Dissident Human Rights Activist'.

42. Another document which was submitted to the respondent  in  support  of
    the fresh claim  is  a  printout  from  YouTube  dated  26  June  2014,
    containing an interview with the appellant described as 'Zimbabwe Human
    Rights Activist [BM] is adamant that Mugabe regime must go'.   We  were
    not asked to view this interview.  We proceed on  the  basis  that  the
    title is an accurate reflection of the contents, and that the interview
    is  still  present  on  YouTube.   We  have  no  basis  for  concluding
    otherwise.  Again, however, the timing of this interview is  revealing,
    having been uploaded shortly before the appellant  withdrew  his  human
    rights appeal in favour of claiming asylum in 2014.

43. We also note that the appellant is identified as  the  author  of  some
    articles on the internet such  as  one  at  p34  of  the  supplementary
    bundle, published on the 3 February 2017  on  The  Zimbabwean  website.
    The article is very short and the thrust of it is encapsulated  in  the
    title 'Mugabe must be forced to go'.

44. The photographs which appear at pp38 are of the appellant sitting in an
    armchair and holding small signs bearing slogans such as  'No  to  Zanu
    PF, No to abduction & Torture'.  The first image appears to  have  been
    emailed to the Zim Vigil Co-ordinator in July  2020.   The  second  and
    third appear to have been published on the  Zim  Vigil's  page  on  the
    photography website Flickr.  There are  also  some  'Tweets'  from  the
    appellant in December 2019, expressing fairly robust of the  government
    of Zimbabwe.

45. There is therefore evidence of relatively recent activity on  the  part
    of the appellant, which has been published on the  internet.   We  note
    also that the appellant's name features regularly on the pages  of  the
    internet site of the  Zim  Vigil,  where  he  is  thanked  for  various
    contributions and assistance that he has rendered to the movement.

46. Also in the supplementary bundle is a printout of a  Google  Search  on
    the  appellant's  name.  The  search  was  undertaken  on  8  July,  in
    preparation for  the  hearing  before  us.   The  appellant's  name  is
    detected on a variety of different websites, including Zim  Vigil,  The
    Zimbabwean and WhatsoninHarare.  The links are to articles with  titles
    such as 'Mugabe's mega delusions' and 'Zanupf  is  the  cancer  killing
    Zimbabwe' and to  various  photographs,  on  Flickr  and  other  sites,
    particularly showing the appellant protesting  outside  the  Zimbabwean
    Embassy.  There are seventeen such links produced by the Google Search.

47. Drawing these threads together, we can summarise our  primary  findings
    of fact quite shortly.  Judge  Green's  assessment  from  2016  is  our
    starting point and we see no reason to move beyond it  in  relation  to
    the  appellant's  account   of   historical   MDC   participation   and
    difficulties arising therefrom.  That claim was a  cynical  attempt  to
    manipulate the asylum system to his advantage after he had been  served
    with  an  overstayer's  notice.   We  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    interviewed by a Zimbabwean official on 11 December 2018 but we do  not
    accept that the  interview  progressed  beyond  questions  relating  to
    documentation.  The appellant's account of those events and the  events
    which were said to have befallen his family in Zimbabwe as a result  is
    problematic for the range of reasons we have set out above and  we  are
    unable to accept it on the lower standard.  The appellant's  sur  place
    activity has been carried out in bad faith from first to  last.   There
    is no credible evidence to confirm that he had  any  interest  in  such
    activity before he was concerned that he was at risk  of  removal  from
    the UK and he has endeavoured to increase that activity as he continues
    to attempt to prevent his removal from  the  UK.   Insofar  as  he  has
    persuaded individuals who have written letters of support that he has a
    passion for changing Zimbabwe, we come firmly to  the  conclusion  that
    those people have been hoodwinked.


48. The appellant will not be at risk on return to Zimbabwe as a result  of
    anything he did in that country before he left in 2002.  He will not be
    at risk as a result of the interview  with  a  Zimbabwean  official  in
    2018.  We do not accept that his family in  Zimbabwe  have  experienced
    any problems as a result of anything he has said or done in Zimbabwe or
    in the UK.  The sole question, therefore, is that which we  put  to  Mr
    Melvin at the end of the hearing: whether the appellant will be at risk
    on return to  Zimbabwe  as  a  result  of  his  association,  published
    extensively on the internet,  with  websites  and  articles  which  are
    critical of the Zimbabwean regime.  The  answer  to  that  question  is
    reached in two steps, both of which are established by authority.


49. The first step is to recognise that the Zimbabwean regime has  invested
    considerable resources in seeking to infiltrate groups  in  the  United
    Kingdom to identify  those  who  support  the  opposition  or  who  are
    activists in the country.  That was the conclusion of the AIT at  [104]
    of HS (returning asylum seekers) Zimbabwe CG [2007] UKAIT 94 and it was
    confirmed at [202] of CM (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe  CG
    [2013] UKUT 00059 (IAC) that HS remains the country  guidance  decision
    regarding risk at the point of return in Zimbabwe.  Given the extent of
    the appellant's activity within the diaspora and  online,  we  consider
    that it  is  reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant  will  have  been
    identified as an opponent of the regime,  notwithstanding  our  finding
    that all of his activities in the UK have been in bad faith.

50. The second step also follows the guidance in HS, which records at [265]-
    [266] that the CIO at the airport will have identified in advance, from
    the passenger  manifest,  those  in  whom  there  might  be  a  further
    interest.  That includes 'those in respect of whom there is any  reason
    to suspect an adverse political, criminal  or  military  profile.'   We
    find it reasonably likely that the appellant's  cynical  activities  in
    the UK will have placed him in this category.  He will not  be  treated
    merely as a failed asylum seeker, as was HS herself, and  will  instead
    be a person in whom the CIO have sufficient  interest  to  justify  the
    type of interrogation which has been accepted in HS and  other  country
    guidance decisions to carry with it a real risk of ill-treatment.

51. There is nothing in the more recent material adduced by the  respondent
    which persuades us that the circumstances have altered materially since
    HS was decided.  That decision was cited without any such caveat in the
    respondent's skeleton. Whilst we note that there is significantly  less
    politically motivated violence than there was at the time that  HS  was
    decided, it continues to be the country guidance in  respect  of  these
    issues and it is clear from the CPIN that the regime continues to  take
    repressive action against those who are actively critical  of  it.   We
    note, in fact, that the CPIN contains examples of individuals who  have
    been targeted for online activity which is critical of the  government.
    At 4.9.3, there is an example of a US citizen who was arrested  over  a
    tweet which insulted Mugabe and at 7.2.17, there is an  example  of  an
    individual who was arrested for posting statements  on  Facebook  which
    were insulting to the  current  President.   The  posts  to  which  the
    appellant is linked - including that which  refers  to  Zanu  PF  as  a
    'cancer' - clearly falls within the same bracket.

52. It is as a result of these conclusions, which we reach with the  utmost
    reluctance, that we conclude that the appellant  will  be  at  risk  on
    return to  Zimbabwe  on  account  of  his  imputed  political  opinion.
    Through his cynical activities since he was served with Form IS151A  in
    2013, the appellant has generated a  profile  for  himself  which  will
    already be known to the Zimbabwean authorities and  which  will  expose
    him to a risk of  politically-motivated  violence  at  the  airport  in
    Harare.  His appeal will consequently be allowed on Refugee  Convention
    and Article 3 ECHR grounds.

53. It is unnecessary, in those circumstances, for  us  to  say  very  much
    about the alternative arguments advanced  by  Mr  Behbe.   We  are  not
    persuaded  that  the  appellant  would  experience   very   significant
    difficulties to reintegration to Zimbabwe.  He spent most of  his  life
    in that country and he has (even on his own account) one relative there
    to whom he can turn for support.  He is a  diabetic  but  there  is  no
    evidence to show that he could not receive treatment  for  that  common
    condition there.  He speaks the language of the country  and  he  could
    find employment in due course.

54. Nor do we consider that the appellant has an Article 8  ECHR  claim  on
    family life grounds.  We  note  the  statements  made  by  his  claimed
    partner.  We note that there is  also  some  evidence  that  they  live
    together in Surrey.  She did not attend the hearing before the FtT  and
    she did not attend the hearing before us, however.  We  do  not  accept
    the appellant's evidence that she was too scared to come to the hearing
    because she feared that she might be removed from the UK.  Even  making
    allowance for the fact that she might not have any  real  knowledge  of
    immigration law, we cannot accept that she was in any such fear as  she
    is a British citizen.   We  do  not  consider  the  appellant  to  have
    discharged the burden on him of establishing that he is  in  a  genuine
    and subsisting relationship with a British citizen.


Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum and human rights grounds (Article  3  ECHR).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court  proceedings.   We  make
this direction because this is a protection appeal.


                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber


                                                            6 September 2021



















