
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06400/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 December 2018                    |On 19 December 2018                 |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    A R A
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Sarah Rogers, Counsel instructed by IAS
(Middlesbrough)
For the respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order
The Upper Tribunal has made an anonymity order pursuant to Rule  14  of  the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless  the  Upper  Tribunal
or a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form  of
publication thereof shall identify the original appellant, whether  directly
or indirectly. This order applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.  Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.

Decision and reasons

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's refusal to
    grant him international protection on asylum or humanitarian protection
    grounds, or leave to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  on  human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Iraq and is a Kurd from Kirkuk.



Background

 2. The appellant has never held an Iraqi passport.  The appellant  has  in
    Iraq his CSID, his Iraqi National Identity Cert and  an  Iraqi  Driving
    licence. The appellant is young and healthy and able to work,  once  he
    has his documents.  He spent most of his life in Iraq,  coming  to  the
    United Kingdom only in November 2017 when he was 26 years old.

 3. The appellant is not in contact with his parents, since  he  left,  nor
    with three of his uncles, but he is in regular and  supportive  contact
    with one paternal uncle living in Kirkuk.  That uncle has recently been
    helpful in sending over from Iraq additional documents for  the  First-
    tier Tribunal hearing.  The uncle has a CSID and may be  able  to  find
    the appellant's CSID or help him apply for a replacement.

 4.  The  appellant  came  to  the  United  Kingdom  seeking  international
    protection on 7 November 2017. He claimed  to  have  trained  with  the
    Peshmerga and worked with them as a driver, putting him  at  risk  from
    ISIS because the British Army would have uploaded  photographs  of  him
    with soldiers in army uniform.

First-tier Tribunal decision

 5. The First-tier Judge analysed the evidence produced and found that  the
    appellant's core account was vague and lacking in credibility.  He then
    went on to consider the Article  15(c)  risk  to  the  appellant,  with
    reference to all available country guidance and the  respondent's  CPIN
    of September 2017 entitled Iraq: Return/internal relocation.

 6. The Judge found that the respondent had accepted, at least  implicitly,
    that the appellant came from an area of the Kirkuk  Governorate  in  or
    near Hawija.   He found, applying  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  Court  of
    Appeal's country guidance and the respondent's CPIN that the  appellant
    had established a risk in his home area, but that the  appellant  could
    use his own, or a newly issued, CSID card to travel to the  IKR,  where
    he would be safe.

 7. The First-tier Judge also found that the  appellant  would  not  be  at
    Article 3 ECHR or Article 15(c) risk on return and  would  be  able  to
    reach the IKR and enter it without  difficulty.  The  First-tier  Judge
    dismissed the appeal.

 8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.



Permission to appeal

 9. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was not  open  to
    the First-tier Judge to dismiss the  appeal  with  reference  to  newer
    country guidance than that available at the hearing, without giving the
    appellant's representatives an opportunity to make submissions thereon.
     The Upper Tribunal had issued updated country guidance in  AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 212 (IAC),  which  was
    handed down on 26 June 2018, just over a week after the hearing  but  1
    day before the promulgation of the present decision.

10. The permission grant states that:

         "Relevant to the Judge's decision was her finding that the internal
         relocation was available to the appellant.  ...The  Judge  did  not
         afford the appellant  by  his  representatives  an  opportunity  to
         consider the [AAH] decision and moreover  to  consider  whether  to
         adduce further  evidence  or  make  further  submissions,  and  the
         Judge's  failure  to  do  so  arguably  amounted  to  a  procedural
         irregularity capable of making a material difference to the outcome
         or the fairness of the proceedings."


Rule 24 Reply

11. The respondent in his Rule 24 Reply, after the ux standard  submission,
    said this:

         "3.  Given the findings of the First-tier Judge it is hard  to  see
         what difference, if any, the new CG case  would  have  had  on  the
         Judge's conclusion, even if the parties had been recalled  to  make
         submissions on this point.


         4.   The First-tier Tribunal clearly found  the  appellant's  uncle
         could either post the CSID card or obtain a  replacement  for  him.
         It is submitted the fact this issue was not put to the appellant is
         immaterial, given the contact with the uncle very near the  hearing
         date of the appeal,  and  that  the  uncle  had  already  sent  the
         appellant other documents - the Judge  was  entitled  to  make  the
         inference she did. ..."


12. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

13. At the error  of  law  hearing  today,  Ms  Rogers  said  that  further
    documents  had  been  obtained  to  meet  the  criticisms  of  lack  of
    corroboration by the First-tier Tribunal in its decision.   I  observed
    that new documents could not render the decision made in their  absence
    even arguably wrong in law.

14. Ms Rogers had written to the  respondent  (the  respondent  received  a
    letter on 4 December 2018) and accepted that the arguments  she  wished
    to pursue amounted to an assertion  of  a  fresh  claim  on  which  the
    respondent had not yet been invited to make a decision.  She  undertook
    to make a paragraph 353 fresh claim following the hearing.



Analysis

15. The First-tier Judge was unarguably  entitled,  indeed  rqid,  to  have
    regard to the country guidance in AAH (Iraq) on internal relocation. In
    the light of the guidance there given, this appeal in its present  form
    was hopeless.  Ms Rogers was not able to identify any manner in  which,
    had the appellant been invited to make submissions  after  the  handing
    down of AAH, the outcome of the  appeal  on  the  facts,  evidence  and
    arguments before the First-tier Tribunal, would have been different.

16. Obviously it would have been better to give the parties an  opportunity
    to comment on AAH, but applying AAH was not an error of law and even if
    it were, on this factual matrix, such error would have been immaterial.

17. The appeal is dismissed and the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    stands.

DECISION

18. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error  on
    a point of law

    I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.


Date:         11 December 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson



