
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06110/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision on Papers (P)                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 2 December 2020                           |On: 09 December 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     AAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Pears, promulgated on 29 January 2020. Permission to appeal was granted
    by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce on 18 May 2020.

Anonymity

 2. An anonymity direction was made  previously  and  is  reiterated  below
    because the appeal concerns children as well as disclosing  details  of
    the appellant's medical history.



Background

 3. The appellant obtained entry clearance in order to study in the UK. She
    entered on 11 October 2014. She remained without leave when  her  leave
    to enter expired. She gave birth to two children in the United  Kingdom
    during 2017 and 2018.  The appellant made a protection and human rights
    claim in August 2017. That claim was based on the appellant's  fear  of
    further abuse at the hands of her family as well  as  medical  grounds.
    The Secretary of State refused that claim in a decision dated  14  June
    2019 primarily because it considered that the appellant's  account  was
    lacking in credibility as it was inconsistent, vague and lacked detail.
    It was considered that the appellant would be able  to  obtain  medical
    treatment for her medical  conditions,  namely  HIV,  Hepatitis  B  and
    depression.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 4. By the time of the appeal,  the  appellant  raised  protection  issues,
    including FGM,  trafficking  and  that  she  was  a  victim  of  sexual
    violence. The appellant did not attend the hearing  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, albeit she was present with her children. The respondent
    was not represented. The  judge  refused  the  appellant's  request  to
    adjourn the hearing pending a further child  protection  assessment  by
    the  local  authority.  Therefore,  the  appeal  proceeded  by  way  of
    submissions on behalf  of  the  appellant  and  was  dismissed  on  all
    grounds.

The grounds of appeal

 5. The grounds of appeal raised three issues. Firstly, that the failure to
    adjourn resulted in a procedural irregularity.  Secondly,  the  judge's
    credibility assessment was erroneous. Lastly, there was  a  failure  to
    apply Country Guidance in relation to the trafficking issue.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted principally owing to  the  failure  to
    adjourn the appeal.  Permission was not refused on any ground.

Procedure

 7. Directions were served on the parties by post on  8  June  2020,  which
    stated that a provisional view had been taken that the matter could  be
    decided without a hearing and  invited  written  submissions  regarding
    whether the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law and  whether  that
    decision should be set aside.  The  parties  were  further  invited  to
    submit reasons if it was considered that a hearing was necessary.

 8. The respondent provided a Rule 24 response dated 17 June 2020. In which
    it was accepted that the First-tier Tribunal  may  have  erred  in  not
    adjourning the matter to await the outcome of the assessment by  social
    services. Disagreement was expressed in relation to the other  grounds.
    No comment was made by the respondent with regard to whether the  error
    of law decision could be made on the papers. As for  the  appellant,  a
    quantity of documents which emanated  from  the  local  authority  were
    enclosed with correspondence dated 20 July 2020.

 9. Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic issued further  directions  on  8  September
    2020 which gave the parties further time to comply  with  the  previous
    directions, failing which the Tribunal would decide whether  the  error
    of law issue could be decided on the papers and if so, would  determine
    it. The appellant's response was to state that she would be relying  on
    the grounds of appeal and no submissions would be filed. The  Secretary
    responded on 25 September  2020,  indicating  that  it  was  no  longer
    accepted that the failure to adjourn amounted to a  material  error  of
    law because the local authority assessment concerned only  an  isolated
    incident that was not material to an assessment of the  best  interests
    of the appellant's children.

10. Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008  states
    that the Upper Tribunal may make any decision with or without a hearing
    but must have regard to any view expressed by  a  party  when  deciding
    whether to do.  Neither party has expressed a clear view  despite  more
    than one opportunity to do so.

11. I have considered the judgment in JCWI v The  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal [2020] EWHC 3103 (Admin) and conclude that given  my  ultimate
    decision, the appellant has not been disadvantaged by the error of  law
    issue being decided without a hearing in this instance.

Decision on error of law

12. I have taken into consideration all the material on file in reaching my
    decision.

13.  Notwithstanding  the  respondent's  view  of  the  local   authority's
    assessment, the First-tier Tribunal materially erred  in  refusing  the
    application to adjourn for the following reasons.  Firstly,  the  judge
    did not consider whether the refusal of the adjournment  would  deprive
    the appellant of a fair hearing. On  the  contrary,  the  decision  and
    reasons refers only to the delay likely to be caused [5]. Secondly, the
    assessment was due to be completed on a specific date in April 2020 and
    this short delay  was  not  taken  into  consideration  by  the  judge.
    Thirdly, the judge did not mention nor consider that the appellant also
    sought an adjournment to  invoke  the  Family  Protocol  and  that  her
    inability to do so meant that the judge was unlikely  to  have  a  full
    picture of the circumstances of the appellant's children.  Lastly,  the
    appellant was suffering from mental illness and accompanied by her very
    young  children  in  circumstances  where  the  local   authority   had
    instructed her not to leave them with others. The reasons given by  the
    judge therefore demonstrated a failure to take  into  account  material
    considerations, leading to an unfair  hearing  and  thus  amount  to  a
    material error of law.

14. The second ground criticises the judge's credibility assessment.  There
    are certainly issues with inconsistencies in  this  case,  however  the
    judge wrongly took into  consideration  the  appellant's  inability  to
    supply  the  missing  information  regarding  the   outstanding   local
    authority assessment in  making  negative  findings  [50].  He  further
    placed adverse weight  on  the  appellant's  inability  to  attend  the
    hearing and he also failed to treat her as  a  vulnerable  witness,  in
    view of her mental and physical health issues. The judge's  credibility
    assessment contains  minimal  reasons,  is  unstructured  and  includes
    phrases such as her account being "unconvincing" [47], which suggests a
    higher standard of proof being applied, as well as describing her as  a
    "serial liar" [51].

15.  The  third  ground  is  also  meritorious.  Even  if  the  appellant's
    protection claim is rejected, it was not in dispute that she was facing
    removal to Nigeria, as a young woman, a lone mother with  two  children
    under five and suffering from mental  illness,  HIV  and  Hepatitis  B.
    There is no consideration of whether it would be safe for the appellant
    and her children to return  in  these  circumstances,  specifically  in
    connection with the  risks  of  trafficking,  applying  HD  (Trafficked
    women) Nigeria CG [2019] UKUT 454 (IAC).

16. I accordingly find that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
    unsafe and set it aside in its entirety, with no findings preserved.

17. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate  consideration  of  her  protection  and  human
    rights appeal at the First-tier Tribunal and  it  would  be  unfair  to
    deprive her of such consideration.


Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at Hatton Cross IAC, with a time estimate of 3 hours, by  any  judge  except
First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears.


Signed:                                                            Date    2
    December 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

