
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal and First-tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06801/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th September 2019               |On 21st October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE


                                   Between

                                     K N
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Caseley, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

 1. Anonymity having previously been ordered in the First-tier Tribunal (F-
    tT) and there being no application to  remove  the  order,  we  see  no
    reason to do so and the order remains in place.   Unless  and  until  a
    tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the  appellant   is   granted
    anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly
    identify him or any member of his family.  This direction applies  both
    to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Proceedings

 2. The appellant is a 36-year-old Sri Lankan citizen of  Tamil  ethnicity.
    He appeals against the decision of F-tT Judge Boyes promulgated on 16th
    October 2018 whereby he dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  against  a
    decision dated 13th May 2016 refusing  to  regularise  his  immigration
    status as an overstayer following the curtailment of his student  leave
    on 1st March 2013 through  a  grant  of  leave  on  the  basis  of  his
    international protection claim.  An appeal was brought on international
    protection and Article 8 ECHR grounds.

 3. The case has a complex history.  A  previous  decision  of  F-tT  Judge
    Woolley has already been set aside in earlier  proceedings  before  the
    Upper Tribunal (UT) so that the case was dealt with by Judge Boyes as a
    remitted case.  Judge  Boyes  dismissed  the  international  protection
    grounds of appeal, concluding he did not accept the appellant's account
    of historical persecution and  found  the  appellant  did  not  have  a
    profile which would place him at any  real  risk  on  return.  However,
    based on medical evidence pertinent to the appellant's  suffering  PTSD
    and concern about treatment in  Sri  Lanka,  Judge  Boyes  allowed  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds.

 4. On 15th October 2018, the F-tT decision was promulgated.

 5. On 20th October 2018, the respondent granted  the  appellant  leave  to
    remain pursuant to the judge's finding in respect of Art 8.

 6. Rule 16 of the Tribunal Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
    and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 (SI 2014/2604  as  amended)  (the  "F-tT
    Rules") requires that the parties notify the F-tT when an appellant has
    been granted leave to enter of remain. The principal reason for this is
    that, by virtue of s.104(4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
    Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002"), the grant of leave results in any appeal
    being "treated as abandoned".  Notice may, however,  be  served  by  an
    appellant in accordance with the F-tT  or,  if  appropriate,  UT  Rules
    within 28 days (or 30 days in the case of the UT Rules) of the grant of
    leave if the appellant  wishes  to  continue  an  appeal  (which  would
    otherwise be treated as abandoned) on asylum or humanitarian protection
    grounds.

 7. On 30th October 2018, the appellant filed an application with the  F-tT
    for permission to appeal, drafted by counsel, challenging the dismissal
    of the appeal on asylum grounds. The application made no mention of the
    fact that the appellant had been granted leave to remain. There  is  no
    suggestion that counsel had been made aware of the grant of  leave.  No
    notice to continue the appeal was served under the F-tT Rules.

 8.  On 8th November 2018, the F-tT  (DJ  Manuell)  refused  permission  to
    appeal to the UT.

 9. On 4th December 2018, the application for permission was renewed to the
    UT, again drafted by counsel, and again no  mention  of  the  grant  of
    leave was made and again it was not suggested before  us  that  counsel
    was aware of the grant of leave when preparing the  renewed  permission
    grounds.

10. On 23rd January 2019, without  knowing  that  the  appellant  had  been
    granted leave to remain, the UT  (UTJ  Storey)  granted  permission  to
    appeal. Permission was granted on the grounds that Judge Boyes did  not
    apply  the  Presidential  Guidance  about  vulnerable  witnesses,   and
    incorrectly disregarded the medical expert evidence as  to  credibility
    of the account of causation when reaching his own conclusions as to the
    matter.

11. The respondent, when served with Judge Storey's decision, did not  file
    a rule 24 response and again did not notify the UT that  the  appellant
    had been granted leave.

12. The case was set down for an initial oral hearing on 16th May 2019.

13. On 9th May 2019, the appellant notified the UT of the  grant  of  leave
    and applied for:

      i) An extension of time to file the  notice  under  rule  17A  of  The
         Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended), to the
         point that, although  the  Appellant  had  been  granted  leave  to
         remain, his appeal should not be treated as abandoned  pursuant  to
         s.104(4A) of the Act and

     ii) Permission to amend his grounds to rely on the recent  case  of  KV
         (Scarring) v SSHD [2019] UKSC 10.

14. On 10th May 2019, UTJ Rimington determined  both  matters  were  to  be
    decided by the judge at the forthcoming hearing set for 16th May.

15. On 16th May 2019, at the initial hearing before UTJ  Grubb,  permission
    to amend the grounds was granted.   Further,  the  respondent  conceded
    that the F-tT had erred for the reasons identified by Judge Storey  but
    argued  that,  as  the  appeal  had  been  abandoned,  the  UT  had  no
    jurisdiction. The appeal was  adjourned  and  skeleton  arguments  were
    directed on the abandonment issue.  The case was set down  (a  transfer
    order having been made) for a panel hearing on 12th September 2019 when
    the appeal was listed before us.

16. Given the respondent concession on the merits, the principal  issue  is
    whether the appellant's appeal is abandoned by operation  of  s.104(4A)
    of the NIA Act 2002.

The Relevant Legal Provisions

17. The principal legislation is as follows (we have highlighted  the  most
    relevant parts in bold type):

         "Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002


             Pending appeal


             s.104    (1)  An appeal under section 82(1) is pending  during
                  the period-

                      (a)  beginning when it is instituted, and

                      (b)  ending when it is finally determined,  withdrawn
                      or abandoned (or when it lapses under section 99).

                  (2)   An  appeal  under  section  82(1)  is  not   finally
                  determined for the purpose of subsection (1)(b) while-

                      (a)  an application for permission  to  appeal  under
                      section  11  or  13  of  the  Tribunals,  Courts  and
                      Enforcement Act 2007 could be  made  or  is  awaiting
                      determination,

                      (b)  permission  to  appeal  under  either  of  those
                      sections has been granted and the appeal is  awaiting
                      determination, or

                      (c)  an appeal has been remitted under section 12  or
                      14 of that Act and is awaiting determination.

                  (3)  ...

                  (4)  ...

                  (4A) An appeal under section 82(1)  brought  by  a  person
                  while he is in the United  Kingdom  shall  be  treated  as
                  abandoned if the appellant is granted leave  to  enter  or
                  remain in the United Kingdom (subject to subsection (4B)).

                  (4B) Subsection (4A) shall not apply to an  appeal  in  so
                  far as it is brought on a  ground  specified  in  section
                  84(1)(a)  or  (b)  or  84(3)   (asylum   or   humanitarian
                  protection) where the appellant-

                      (a)  ...

                      (b)   gives  notice,  in  accordance  with Tribunal
                      Procedure Rules, that he wishes to pursue the  appeal
                      in so far as it is brought on that ground.

                      (c)  ...

                  (4C) [repealed]

                  (5)  [repealed]"

    Schedule 9 of the Immigration Act 2014 made various  substitutions  and
    deletions from 20 October 2014.

18. The reference in s.104(4B)(b) to the "Tribunal Procedure  Rules"  is  a
    reference to  the  F-tT  Rules  and,  where  applicable,  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698  as  amended)  (the
    "UT Rules").

19. The relevant FtT rule, with our emphasis in bold, provides as follows:

         "The Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and
         Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

             Appeal treated as abandoned or finally determined

             16.- (1) A party must notify the Tribunal if  they  are  aware
                  that-

                      (a)  the appellant has left the United Kingdom;

                      (b)  the appellant has been granted leave to enter or
                      remain in the United Kingdom;

                      (c)  a deportation order has been  made  against  the
                      appellant; or

                      (d)  a document listed in paragraph 4(2) of  Schedule
                      2 to the 2006 Regulations  has  been  issued  to  the
                      appellant.

                  (2)  Where an appeal is treated as abandoned  pursuant  to
                  section 104(4A) of the  2002  Act  or  paragraph  4(2)  of
                  Schedule 2 to 2006 Regulations, the Tribunal must send the
                  parties a notice informing them that the appeal  is  being
                  treated as abandoned or finally determined,  as  the  case
                  may be.

                  (3)  Where an appeal would otherwise fall to be treated as
                  abandoned pursuant to section 104(4A) of the 2002 Act, but
                  the appellant wishes to pursue their appeal, the appellant
                  must provide a notice, which must comply with any relevant
                  practice direction, to the Tribunal and each  other  party
                  so that it is received within 28 days of the date on which
                  the appellant was sent notice of the  grant  of  leave  to
                  enter or remain in the United  Kingdom  or  was  sent  the
                  document listed in paragraph 4(2) of  Schedule  2  to  the
                  2006 Regulations, as the case may be."

20. Rule 1(2) states that the F-tT Rules:

         "apply to proceedings before the Immigration and Asylum Chamber  of
         the First-tier Tribunal."

21. The UT rule, with the most relevant parts in bold, is as follows:

         "The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

             Appeal treated as abandoned or finally determined in an asylum
             case or an immigration case

             17A.-    (1)  A party to an asylum case or an immigration case
                  before the Upper Tribunal must notify the  Upper  Tribunal
                  if they are aware that-

                      (a)  the appellant has left the United Kingdom;

                      (b)  the appellant has been granted leave to enter or
                      remain in the United Kingdom;

                      (c)  a deportation order has been  made  against  the
                      appellant; or

                      (d)  a document listed in paragraph 4(2) of  Schedule
                      2  to  the  Immigration  (European   Economic   Area)
                      Regulations 2006 has been issued to the appellant.

                  (2)  Where an appeal is treated as abandoned  pursuant  to
                  section 104(4) or (4A) of the Nationality, Immigration and
                  Asylum Act 2002 or paragraph 4(2) of  Schedule  2  to  the
                  Immigration (European Economic Area) Regulations 2006,  or
                  as finally determined pursuant to section  104(5)  of  the
                  Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002,  the  Upper
                  Tribunal must send the parties  a  notice  informing  them
                  that the appeal is being treated as abandoned  or  finally
                  determined.

                  (3)  Where an appeal would otherwise fall to be treated as
                  abandoned pursuant to section 104(4A) of the  Nationality,
                  Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, but the appellant  wishes
                  to pursue their appeal, the appellant must send or deliver
                  a notice, which must comply  with  any  relevant  practice
                  directions, to the Upper Tribunal and  the  respondent  so
                  that it is received within thirty  days  of  the  date  on
                  which the notice of the grant of leave to enter or  remain
                  in the United Kingdom was sent to the appellant.

                  (4)  Where a notice of grant of leave to enter  or  remain
                  is sent electronically or delivered personally,  the  time
                  limit in paragraph (3) is twenty eight days.

                  (5)  Notwithstanding rule 5(3)(a) (case management powers)
                  and rule 7(2) (failure to comply  with  rules  etc.),  the
                  Upper  Tribunal  must  not  extend  the  time  limits   in
                  paragraph (3) and (4)."

22. Rule 1(2), so far as relevant, states that the UT Rules:

         "apply to proceedings before the Upper Tribunal...."

23. The "practice direction(s)" referred to  in  both  sets  of  Rules  are
    references to the Senior President's  Practice  Direction:  Immigration
    Asylum Chambers of the First-tier  and  Upper  Tribunal  (Feb  2010  as
    amended). Although dating  back  to  November  2010  when  the  current
    tribunal structure came into existence, it was amended on 13th November
    2014.

24. The relevant provisions are at Part 3  Paragraph  5  headed:  "Pursuing
    appeal after grant of leave". We do not need  to  set  them  out.   Its
    terms are not directly relevant to the issues we have to decide.  As an
    aside we note, however, that ss.104(3), 104(4C) and 104(5) of  the  NIA
    Act 2002 were deleted on  20th  October  2014  by  Schedule  9  to  the
    Immigration Act 2014.  When referring to the abandonment provisions  in
    the 2002 Act, the Practice Direction does not  take  into  account  the
    amendments made in 2014 to the 2002 Act.  In particular the 'rights  of
    appeal' in s.82 and the 'grounds of appeal' in s.84,  reflect  the  now
    repealed provisions of the 2002 Act.

25. It will be readily apparent from reading the F-tT  and  UT  Rules  that
    there is a significant difference between them.   The  UT  Rules  (rule
    17A(5)) exclude the UT's case management powers under rule  5(3)(a)  to
    extend time and the power in rule 7(2) to condone a failure  to  comply
    with a provision in the Rules.  It is specifically stated that  the  UT
    "must not extend the time limits" in rule 17A(3) and (4)  within  which
    an appellant may serve a notice to continue  an  appeal  on  asylum  or
    humanitarian protection grounds.   No  such  exclusion  of  the  F-tT's
    equivalent powers is made in rule 16 of  the  F-tT's  Rules.   In  this
    appeal, boiled down, the issue is whether the out if time notice  which
    the appellant filed on 9 May 2019 was governed by the UT  Rules  or  F-
    tT's Rules - only if it was the latter would there be power  to  extend
    time.  Subject that is, to the appellant's  argument  that  if  the  UT
    Rules apply they are ultra  vires  by  excluding  the  case  management
    powers to extend time.

Discussion

    Introductory points

26. It is common ground between the parties that, under  s.104(4A)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002, this appeal is to be "treated as  abandoned"  unless  the
    appellant has given notice in  accordance  with  the  applicable  rule,
    which would be rule 17A(3) in the UT and rule 16(3) in the F-tT.

27. The rules in both tribunals require an appellant to give  notice  that,
    despite the grant of leave, s/he wants to pursue the appeal  on  asylum
    or humanitarian protection grounds.  The rule in  each  tribunal  gives
    different time limits as to when the notice must be "received"  by  the
    tribunal.  That date is calculated from when the notice of the grant of
    leave was "sent": 28 days later in the F-tT Rules but 30 days in the UT
    Rules (rules 16(3) and 17A(3) of the F-tT and UT  Rules  respectively).
    In relation to the UT, the 30-day period is reduced to 28 days  in  the
    event of electronic or personal service (rule 17A(4),  UT  Rules).  The
    rules applicable in each tribunal require that any notice  to  continue
    the appeal on asylum grounds must comply with the practice direction.

28. It is accepted that the appellant did not give notice within  the  time
    limits set irrespective of which Rule applies.

29. It is also accepted that the F-tT Rules, through  the  case  management
    power in rule 4(3)(a), can extend or shorten time for  compliance  with
    the procedure rules, which would include the time within  which  notice
    must be given by an appellant under rule 16.

30. Further, it is also common ground that the UT, despite having the  same
    case management provisions at rule 5(3)(a) as the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and having further power in rule 7(2) to condone a  failure  to  comply
    with rules, does not have any power under these  provisions  to  extend
    the 30 day time limit for giving a notice specified under s.104 (4A) of
    the NIA Act 20002 and in rule 17A(3) (or rule  17A(4)).  The  power  to
    extend time  is  explicitly  excluded  by  rule  17A(5).  There  is  no
    equivalent exclusion in the F-tT Rules. We were shown  no  material  to
    explain why the two rules differ and we can see no apparent reason  why
    they should, but they obviously do.

    The submissions

31. The principal question we have to decide is: which rule applies in this
    appeal?

32. Ms Caseley submits it is the  FtT's  Rules.   She  submitted  that  the
    relevant date to ascertain which Rules apply is the date of abandonment
    by operation of s.104(4A) of the NIA Act 2002, i.e.  the  date  of  the
    grant of leave which was 20th October 2018 (or 22nd October if "granted
    leave" is understood to mean given by notice  in  writing)  ,  and  the
    appeal was at that time  undoubtedly  still  pending  before  the  F-tT
    because  on  any  basis  the  UT  had  not  yet  become  involved.  The
    application for permission to appeal was not made to the FtT until 30th
    October  2018  and  was  not  refused  until  8  November  2018.   That
    application was governed by the F-tT's Rules.  The renewed  application
    to the UT was made on 4th December 2018.  Whilst that application  was,
    on the face of it, governed by the UT's Rules, Ms Caseley's  submission
    was essentially that by this time, the appeal  had  been  abandoned  by
    virtue of s.104(4A).

33. Accordingly, it is the F-tT Rules which governed any notice seeking  to
    continue the appeal on asylum grounds. Ms  Caseley  submitted  that  we
    should reconstitute ourselves as the F-tT and she invited us  to  treat
    the notice served in the UT as having been  served  in  the  F-tT.   In
    applying rule 16 of the F-tT Rules, the panel (sitting as the F-tT) has
    discretion to extend time, for example, under rule 4(4)(a).

34. In the event that we disagreed and found that the appeal was pending in
    the UT, Ms Caseley, in her skeleton argument and orally at the hearing,
    raised in the alternative that the UT Rules are unlawful  by  excluding
    any discretion to extend time for the giving a notice under s.104(4A).

35. As we pointed out at the oral hearing, we have considerable  difficulty
    with this latter argument as it contemplates the  UT  having  power  to
    conclude a statutory instrument applicable  to  its  own  functions  is
    ultra vires and then disapplying it.  That is quite a different  matter
    from an appellate tribunal concluding a lower tribunal erred in law  in
    applying a statutory instrument which is, as a  matter  of  law,  ultra
    vires (see Chief Adjudication Officer v Foster [1993] AC 754).   Unlike
    that situation, Ms Caseley proposal entails us  performing  a  function
    which forms no part of the UT's appellate jurisdiction which "any point
    of law arising from a decision made by the  First-tier  Tribunal"  (see
    s.11(1), Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007).   A  jurisdiction
    to challenge the vires of statutory instrument is one that the UT  does
    not have even in transferred judicial review proceedings under s.15  of
    the TCE Act 2007 (see Lord Chief Justice's Consolidated  Direction  (21
    August 2013 as amended 17 October 2014), para 3(i)).   In  the  result,
    given the view we take that the FtT rules apply, it is  unnecessary  to
    reach a concluded view on the ultra vires argument.

36. Ms Caseley argued that the effect of notice given  in  accordance  with
    s.104(4B) of the NIA Act 2002 which was served albeit on the UT, if  we
    extend time as the F-tT, is that the  abandoning  effect  of  s.104(4A)
    when leave was granted on 20th  October 2018 is that s.104(4A) now does
    not apply, and the appeal is treated as if it had never been abandoned.
    Consequently, the subsequent acts of the F-tT refusing  permission,  as
    well as the renewal to and grant of permission by the UT,  can  now  be
    seen as having occurred when the appeal is not, in fact, now treated as
    abandoned. The end result of which is that the appeal is now (but  only
    now) pending in the UT.

37. Mr Howells took a slightly different position.  He contended  that  the
    correct rule  was  determined  by  the  time  the  notice  was  served.
    Because, following the grant of permission to  appeal  the  appeal  was
    pending in the UT at the time the notice was served on 9 May  2019,  it
    is the UT Rules which apply. Under those Rules, he submitted, we do not
    have discretion to extend time for the service of a  notice  continuing
    the appellant's appeal. The appeal is abandoned by the operation of law
    under s.104(4A) and we have no jurisdiction.

38. We pause to note that, on this reasoning, it might be thought that  the
    appeal would have moved into the UT when the application for permission
    was renewed to the UT, which would be when the UT Rules began to apply.






    Our conclusions

39. We have not found this issue easy.  We have, however, concluded that in
    large measure Ms Caseley's submissions are to be preferred.

40. The application of each set of  procedural  Rules  is  defined  in  the
    respective Rules as  applying  to  "proceedings  before"  the  relevant
    tribunal whether F-tT or UT (see rule 1(2) of the F-tT Rules  and  rule
    1(2) of the UT Rules).

41. We agree with Ms Caseley that the applicable procedural rule is  to  be
    determined at the date of the abandoning event, i.e. the date of  grant
    of leave.  It is at that point that the  notice  provisions  become  of
    potential importance to an appellant who wishes to continue  an  appeal
    on asylum of humanitarian protection grounds.  Certainty of  which  set
    of Rules apply is best achieved by taking this fixed date derived  from
    the effect of s.104(4A).  If the matter has not reached  the  UT,  then
    the only applicable rule must be that in the F-tT's Rules, namely  rule
    16.  By contrast, if the grant of leave to enter or remain occurs after
    the appeal has reached the UT because a permission application has been
    made under the UT Rules (rule 21) or the appeal has moved  beyond  that
    point in the UT, then the applicable rule will be found in rule 17A  of
    the UT's Rules.

42. That leads us to consider the effect of s.104(4A) and (4B) of  the  NIA
    Act 2002.  Section 104(4A) is, in our judgment, clear and  unambiguous.
    Section 104(4A) states that the grant of leave is an abandoning  event.
    Once leave  is  granted,  the  appeal  is  "treated  as  abandoned"  by
    operation of law. The abandoning effect of s.104(4A) does  not  operate
    if, and only if, notice is not served in accordance with s.104(4B).

43. Mr Howells submitted that the 28-day period for the appellant to  serve
    a notice leading to the appeal continuing should be allowed to  expire,
    which would take the date of abandonment in  this  case,  depending  on
    service, to 17th/19th November. His submissions fail to take account of
    the clear wording of s.104(4A).  We see nothing in  s.104(4A)  or  (4B)
    which defers the statutory abandonment until the expiry of the time for
    service of a notice has expired.  Presumably, if he were  correct,  the
    same logic should be applied to a notice accepted  out  of  time  under
    rule 16(3) but that would create a delay of uncertain, and  potentially
    lengthy, duration before s.104(4A) took effect.  That cannot  be  right
    and s.104(4A) is unambiguous in its terms: an appeal "shall be  treated
    as abandoned" if leave is granted.

44. In any event, Mr Howells' contention is not material here  because,  as
    no notice was served in time, the abandonment happened, and it does not
    make any material difference whether it was 20th/22nd October  2018  or
    17th/19th November 2018.

45. In our judgment, the appeal's "pending" status is  not,  in  some  way,
    suspended or in abeyance awaiting a notice being  served  or  not,  and
    potentially with the need for time to be extended, in  accordance  with
    the Rules. Until a notice is served, the appeal is treated as abandoned
    from that date leave is granted.  The effect of s.104(4B) is that  once
    a notice is served the abandonment, which took effect  under  s.104(4A)
    on the grant of leave, is retrospectively treated as if  it  had  never
    occurred.

46. How does that analysis apply in this appeal?

47. Section 104(4A) applied so that as at 20th October 2018,  the  date  of
    the grant of leave (or 2 days later on deemed service), the appeal  was
    treated as abandoned. At that point, were the "proceedings" before  the
    F-tT or UT?  The answer is, in  our  judgment,  self-evident  -  on  20
    October 2018 the "proceedings" were before the F-tT so the  F-tT  Rules
    applied.

48. Even if the  application  for  permission  and  decision  in  the  F-tT
    occurred within the 28 days, by the time of renewal to the  UT  on  4th
    December 2018 and the grant of permission in the UT  in  January  2019,
    there was no extant appeal upon which the renewed application,  or  the
    subsequent grant of permission, could bite. By that date, the effect of
    s.104(4A), as no notice had  been  served,  was  that  the  appeal  was
    abandoned and no longer "pending" before the FtT and, of course,  there
    was nothing which could be described as an appealable decision  to  the
    UT. As there was no appeal, there could be no effective application  to
    the UT to challenge it.

49. Whilst that might seem to 'fly in the face' of what actually  happened,
    given that permission was granted and the appeal was listed in the  UT,
    that is the effect of the statutory provisions.  We can  see  no  basis
    upon which an appeal which has been abandoned through the operation  of
    law in the F-tT can be considered to have emerged in  the  jurisdiction
    of the UT through a renewed application for permission to appeal  which
    had been processed unwittingly by the UT because the parties failed  to
    advise the UT of the earlier statutory abandonment of the appeal in the
    F-tT.

50. In other words, at all times this appeal was only ever pending in the F-
    tT.  It never reached the UT.  It was abandoned by operation of law  on
    20th October 2018.  However, as the appeal was  governed  by  the  F-tT
    Rules, rule 16(3) must  apply  in  principle  to  the  appeal  for  the
    purposes of giving effect to s.104(4B).

51. It is common ground that, in the event the panel concluded  the  appeal
    was governed by the F-tT's  Rules,  the  notice  of  the  intention  to
    continue the appeal made to the UT should be treated as a  notice  made
    to the F-tT. We agreed, in the context  of  how  the  case  was  argued
    before us, that we would so treat it. We reconstituted ourselves as the
    F-tT to decide whether or not time should  be  extended  to  admit  the
    notice applying the F-tT's case management powers in rule 4(3)(a).

52. There has been no adequate explanation of  either  party's  failure  to
    inform either tribunal of the grant of leave and, in the  case  of  the
    appellant's solicitor  representative,  of  the  late  service  of  the
    notice. The suggestion that the notice has  been  served  late  because
    "the case worker was on leave abroad" is not supported by any statement
    from the case worker as to leave dates etc, and so is,  as  Mr  Howells
    rightly pointed out, unevidenced. The position is, in any event, belied
    by the lodging of the application for leave on 30th October  2018  i.e.
    within the 28-day period.  A notice could have been served at the  same
    time.  Indeed, that would arguably have been the obvious and convenient
    time to do so.   Further, there was continuing failure  to  remedy  the
    position on the return to work by the case worker, no  remedial  action
    being taken until the matter was listed in the UT in May 2019.

53. Mr Howells nonetheless conceded that we should exercise discretion  and
    extend time because:

      a) The appellant was not at fault, albeit his representatives were.

      b) The respondent was also at fault for failing to notify the tribunal
         of the grant of leave.

      c) There was a conceded error of law. The  judge  did  not  apply  the
         Presidential Guidance about vulnerable witnesses,  and  incorrectly
         disregarded the medical expert evidence as to  credibility  of  the
         account of causation when reaching his own conclusions  as  to  the
         matter.

54. In the circumstances, sitting as the F-tT we have decided  to  exercise
    discretion and to extend time for the provision  of  the  notice  under
    rule 16(3).

55. The representatives were in agreement that, if time  was  extended,  we
    should immediately reconstitute ourselves as a UT panel to  decide  the
    error of law. Ms Caseley relied on her previous argument that once  the
    abandonment of the appeal occurred the renewal of  permission  to,  and
    the subsequent grant of permission in, the  UT  operated  so  that  the
    appeal was now in the UT.

56. Albeit that we have some hesitation, we accept  this  submission  which
    has a logical basis in  the  effect  of  s.104(4B).    It  is,  in  our
    judgment, the inevitable effect of  s.104(4B)  when  it  applies  if  a
    notice is served in time or out of time but with an  extension  granted
    to the 28-day period.  Section 104(4B) clearly  states  that  s.104(4A)
    "shall not apply".  Consequently, the appeal  is  not  now  treated  as
    abandoned.

57. We consider that, in effect, as a result the processes  followed  after
    the expunged "abandonment" should be treated as effective  -  in  other
    words,  as  if  the  abandonment  ever  occurred.   The  appellant  has
    permission to appeal from the UT  granted  in  January  2019.   We  are
    satisfied that, in light of the obvious error of law arising  from  the
    judge's assessment of credibility, we should reconstitute ourselves  as
    a panel of the UT.

58. If this were wrong, and a vehicle is needed to bring the matter to  the
    UT, Judge Davidge, sitting as a F-tT judge is authorised to  deal  with
    permission  to  appeal  applications,  and   grants   the   appellant's
    application for permission to appeal.

59. The outcome of this appeal in the UT is as was conceded by Mr Howells.

60. The parties were agreed that we should set aside Judge Boyes'  decision
    and remit the matter to the F-tT.

Decisions

61. On 20th October 2018 the respondent's decision granting  the  appellant
    leave to remain in the UK, by operation of law under s.104(4A)  of  the
    NIA Act 2002, resulted in the appeal being treated as abandoned on that
    date (or 2 days later to take account of deemed service).

62. The notice and application served  on  the  UT  on  10th  May  2019  is
    properly treated as a notice and application for an extension  of  time
    to the F-tT pursuant to rule 16 of F-tT Rules.

63. Sitting in the F-tT exercising our case management  powers  under  rule
    4(3)(a) of the F-tT Rules, we extend time for the provision  of  notice
    under rule 16(3) of those Rules.

64. By virtue of s.104(4B), s.104(4A) shall not apply and the appeal is now
    treated as if it were never abandoned.

65. The appeal is now pending in the UT either a result  of  the  grant  of
    permission by Judge Storey in  January  2019,  or  alternatively  as  a
    result of the grant of permission to appeal by Judge Davidge sitting in
    the F-tT.

66. Sitting as the UT, we find a material error of law in the F-tT decision
    of Judge Boyes dismissing the appellant's appeal and set  the  decision
    aside. We remit the appeal to the F-tT to be reheard de novo by a judge
    other than Judge Boyes.



Signed   [pic]         Date 16 October 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge


