
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06618/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 November 2019                   |On 15 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    'GMF'
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONTINUED)
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Secretary of State:         Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer
For the respondent:             Mr T Bahja, Solicitor


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. These are the approved record of the decision and written reasons which
    were given orally at the end of the hearing on 6 November 2019.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant, who was the respondent in the First-
    tier Tribunal and to avoid  confusion,  will  be  referred  to  as  the
    Secretary of State for the remainder of these reasons.  The  respondent
    was correspondingly the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal  and  will
    be referred to as the 'claimant,' as the party  claiming  international
    protection.

 3. The Secretary of State  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Blake (the 'FtT'), promulgated on  28  August  2019,  by
    which  he  allowed  the  claimant's  asylum   appeal,   dismissed   his
    humanitarian protection appeal; and allowed his  human  rights  appeal.
    The Secretary of State, in refusing the claimant's  applications  in  a
    decision dated 27 June 2019, accepted that the claimant  was  an  Iraqi
    Kurd, but did not accept that he had attempted to marry  a  woman  who,
    unknown to him, was already married, and whose estranged husband was  a
    prominent member of the 'Popular  Mobilisation  Force'  (or  PMF).  The
    Secretary of State did not accept that somebody had  thrown  a  grenade
    into the claimant's shop, injuring the claimant, at the behest  of  his
    partner's husband or that the husband was a man of power and influence,
    working in the intelligence department of the PMF.

 4. The Secretary of State disputed that  the  claimant  had  an  objective
    fear, but that in any event, asserted that the claim was not based on a
    fear  of  persecution  because  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,
    political opinion or membership of a particular social group.  Instead,
    the claimant claimed fear of persecution because he wished to marry the
    former or estranged wife of  a  member  of  the  PMF.   The  respondent
    alternatively concluded that if there were a risk, there was sufficient
    protection provided by the Iraqi authorities or in the alternative, the
    claimant could relocate.  His claims for humanitarian protection and by
    reference to articles 2 and 3  of  the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights ('ECHR') were rejected, along with any claim under article 8, as
    he did not have a partner or children in the UK and there were not very
    significant obstacles to his integration into Iraq, where he still  had
    relatives.

The FtT's decision

 5. The FtT concluded that the  husband  of  the  appellant's  partner  had
    indeed been identified in military uniform and with his  military  card
    and that the claimant had produced video evidence of the partner  being
    beaten by her husband with some brutality. The FtT further  found  that
    the claimant's shop had been destroyed as claimed and that the claimant
    was a credible witness.  The FtT concluded that relocation would not be
    a viable option, given the husband's position and  likely  power.   The
    area of subsequent challenge was that the FtT then went on to  conclude
    that the claimant's claim for asylum should succeed, whereas his appeal
    for humanitarian protection should not.  His  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds also succeeded.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 6. The Secretary of State did not take issue with the FtT's findings,  but
    took  issue  with  the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  satisfied  the
    requirements of the Refugee Convention, which the  FtT  had  failed  to
    explain adequately, bearing in mind  the  fear  was  of  the  estranged
    husband of the claimant's partner.

 7. First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever granted permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal on 25 September  2019,  noting  that  on  the  submitted
    claim, the FtT had  failed  to  explain  why  it  engaged  the  Refugee
    Convention; and also in the FtT's conclusions, the appeal  was  allowed
    on human rights grounds, without specific reference to  articles  2,  3
    and 8 of the ECHR.

The hearing before me

The Secretary of State's position

 8. At the hearing before me, the parties' representatives  confirmed  that
    the FtT's findings of fact were not in dispute. I canvassed  with  them
    whether they accepted that the FtT's decision contained an error of law
    because of the absence of a reasoning as to why the appellant should be
    assessed as a refugee when the nature of his claim did  not  appear  to
    engage with the Refugee Convention.  On  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State, Mr Tarlow accepted that there was an error of law,  which  could
    be resolved by the Upper  Tribunal  merely  remaking  the  decision  to
    confirm that the appellant's claim  should  succeed  on  the  basis  of
    humanitarian protection, rather than the  claimant  being  entitled  to
    refugee status.  Mr Tarlow indicated that the grounds of  challenge  to
    the FtT's decision in relation to the human rights claim were no longer
    pursued by the Secretary of State, so that the FtT's decision that  the
    claimant's appeal on the basis of his human  rights  succeeded,  should
    remain  undisturbed.  The   focus   was   therefore   solely   on   the
    refugee/humanitarian protection issue.

The Claimant's position

 9. While Mr Bahja accepted the position advanced by Mr Tarlow as his fall-
    back position, he asserted that the FtT's error was not  material,  and
    his primary contention was that the claimant was  entitled  to  refugee
    status.   While he candidly accepted that the original  claim  had  not
    been put on the basis that the claimant was a member  of  a  particular
    social group, nevertheless in a skeleton argument that was provided  to
    this Tribunal, he asserted that by virtue  of  being  a  victim  of  an
    honour crime and in particular by reference to the Country  Policy  and
    Information Note (or 'CPIN') Iraq:  Kurdish  'honour'  crimes;  version
    1.0; August 2017 and the CPIN, Iraq: Blood feuds; version  1.0;  August
    2017,  paragraph  [2.1.1]  of  the  latter  dealt  with  the  issue  of
    membership of a  particular  social  group  and  Mr  Bahja  stated  the
    claimant's position in the following terms:-

         "Victims or  potential  victims  of  'honour'  crimes  can  form  a
         particular social group within the  meaning  of  the  1951  Refugee
         Convention.  This  is  because  victims  or  potential  victims  of
         'honour' crimes can  share  a  common  background  that  cannot  be
         changed - the experience  that  they  have  compromised  family  or
         tribal 'honour' - and have a distinct identity that is perceived as
         being different by the surrounding society".

    Whilst I do not repeat the remainder of Mr Bahja's skeleton argument  I
    have  had  the  opportunity  to  consider  it  as  developed  in   oral
    submissions by Mr Bahja.

10. Mr Tarlow indicated in response that the claimant  had  never  asserted
    entitlement before the FtT on the basis of membership of  a  particular
    social group and therefore this was essentially changing the nature  of
    the claim, in hindsight.

Discussion and conclusions

11. As already agreed with the representatives, the FtT's original decision
    did contain an error of law.  Whilst the FtT's findings are undisturbed
    and I preserve them, nevertheless on the basis of  the  nature  of  the
    claim as identified by the FtT, it is unclear at [83] of the  decision,
    how the FtT concluded that the claimant was entitled to refugee status.



12. I accept Mr Tarlow's submissions that the claim was never  put  on  the
    basis of membership of a particular social group and  whilst  the  CPIN
    already referred to indicates  the  possibility  of  somebody  being  a
    member of a particular social  group  by  virtue  of  being  an  honour
    killing,  I  do  not  accept  Mr  Bahja's  submission  that  it  is  an
    'irresistible' inference from the findings of the FtT that the claimant
    must fall within membership of a particular social group.  That  is  an
    assessment that would be fact-specific by reference  to  family  groups
    and there are not sufficient facts on which to base such a  conclusion.



13. It follows from my conclusion that whilst I was invited by Mr Bahja  to
    conclude that the error was not material because I should 'fill in  the
    gaps' in the FtT's  reasoning,  I  concluded  that  the  'irresistible'
    inferences he invited me to draw from the facts were not ones  I  could
    make, so that the error of law was  material.   Instead,  I  concluded,
    based on the FtT's preserved findings, that the error of law meant that
    I should set aside the FtT's conclusions  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
    protection; and remake them by concluding that the claimant's appeal on
    the basis of refugee status fails (bearing in mind it was never put  on
    the basis of membership of a particular social  group);  but  that  his
    appeal on the basis of humanitarian  protection  succeeds.   The  FtT's
    conclusions in relation to the claimant's appeal, on the basis  of  his
    human rights, remain preserved.



Notice of Decision - error of law and remaking

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law in relation to the claimant's claimed refugee  status  and
entitlement to humanitarian protection.  The First-tier Tribunal's  decision
on these two issues alone is set aside and I remake it  by  confirming  that
the claimant's original appeal on the basis of refugee status fails  and  is
dismissed.  His appeal on the basis of humanitarian protection is allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in relation to the claimant's  human
rights appeal did not contain an error of law.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  13 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith
