

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/06412/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision &  Reasons          |
|                                           |Promulgated                    |
|On 1 February 2018                         |  On 15 February 2018          |
|                                           |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH

                                   Between

                                     S A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobewale, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background

    1. The Appellant appeals against  a  decision  of  First-Tier  Tribunal
       Judge Chapman  promulgated  on  16  October  2017  ("the  Decision")
       dismissing the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's
       decision dated 26 February 2016 refusing  his  asylum,  humanitarian
       protection and human rights claim. The Decision was  made  following
       remittal by this Tribunal by a decision  of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal
       Judge Eshun promulgated on 21 April 2017 finding an error of law  in
       the previous decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge James  dismissing
       the appeal.   That decision was therefore set aside.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan. His  date  of  birth  is
       accepted  as  being  1  February  1999.   He  claims  to  have  left
       Afghanistan in June 2015.  He arrived in the UK on 8 July  2014  and
       claimed asylum immediately.


    3. The Appellant says that  he  lived  in  Sheohabuddin  village,  Pule
       Khumri District in Baghlan Province with his parents.   He  had  two
       brothers, one older and one younger and an older sister.  He  claims
       that his older brother worked for the Afghan army and was killed  in
       his home area by the Taliban.  The Appellant claims that the Taliban
       then came to his home to recruit him to  the  Taliban.   His  father
       refused and they  left.   However,  he  claims  that  a  letter  was
       delivered by the Taliban  to  the  local  Mosque  warning  that  all
       children should be taken out of school.  The Appellant says that his
       father then took him out of school and, fearing for the  Appellant's
       life, arranged for the Appellant to be  brought  to  the  UK  by  an
       agent.


    4. The Judge accepted that the Taliban might have sought to recruit the
       Appellant as he said.  Although he noted that there  was  background
       evidence to the effect that forced recruitment of  children  is  now
       rarely used by the Taliban, he accepted that this was outweighed  by
       more recent evidence.  However, he also noted  from  the  background
       evidence that the Taliban were being driven  from  Baghlan  Province
       and he did not accept that there was evidence that they  were  still
       in force in that region.  The  Judge  found  other  aspects  of  the
       Appellant's evidence not to  be  credible.  He  concluded  that  the
       Appellant could return to his home area.


    5. The Appellant's first ground focusses on the Appellant's position as
       a minor when he came to the UK and only just over  eighteen  at  the
       time  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.   The  second   ground
       criticises the finding that the Taliban are  no  longer  in  Baghlan
       Province on the basis of other background evidence which it is  said
       the Judge failed to take into account.


    6. Permission  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Foudy  as
       follows:-


            "[2] The grounds argue that the Judge erred in  his  assessment
           of the risks faced by the Appellant in Afghanistan.
            [3]  It is arguable that the Judge did  not  adequately  assess
           the risks this young Appellant might face on removal, especially
           given his finding that there was a risk of forced recruitment to
           the Taliban.
            [4]  The grounds disclose an arguable error of law."


    7. The matter comes before me to decide whether the Decision contains a
       material error of law and, if so, to re-make the decision  or  remit
       the appeal for rehearing to the First-Tier Tribunal.

      Decision and Reasons


    8. The first ground asserts that the Judge has misdirected  himself  in
       relation to consideration of the Appellant's case.  At [66]  of  the
       Decision, the Judge says this:-
           "I have looked at the evidence in the round and have  considered
           all the documentary and oral  evidence  whether  I  specifically
           refer to it or not.  I have borne in mind  at  all  times  that,
           although the Appellant is no longer a minor, he was a  minor  at
           the time of the events claimed, and have taken this into account
           when assessing his evidence.  Indeed, the Appellant is only  now
           just an adult but a few months, and  because  there  can  be  no
           bright line between childhood and adulthood, I  have  considered
           all aspects of this appeal on the basis that he is a minor."


    9. Mr Sobowale submitted that this passage meant  that  the  Judge  was
       bound to consider the risk to the Appellant as at the  date  of  the
       hearing as if he were still a minor.   I  disagree.   The  Judge  is
       obviously  bound  to  consider  the  risk  on  the  basis   of   the
       circumstances as they pertain at the date of the hearing before  him
       (see R v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  ex  parte
       Ravichandran [1995] EWCA Civ 16).  In the course of his  submissions
       why that should not apply in this case, Mr Sobowale came  perilously
       close to putting forward the argument which was roundly rejected  by
       the Supreme Court in TN, MA and  AA  (Afghanistan)  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department  [2015]UKSC  40  where  Lord  Toulson,
       delivering the judgment of the majority said this:-
           "53. On this approach, it is not for the tribunal or the  court,
           in considering a claim for asylum,  to  try  to  compensate  the
           claimant for some past breach of duty which does not affect  the
           question whether he is presently exposed to a risk entitling him
           to the protection of the Refugee Convention (or to  humanitarian
           protection). The  consequences  of  a  breach  of  duty  by  the
           respondent may be a relevant factor in the assessment of present
           risk, because of the possible effect on the nature  and  quality
           of the available evidence. But that is different from exercising
           some form of remedial jurisdiction  entitling  the  tribunal  or
           court to order that the claimant should have indefinite leave to
           remain, on account of the respondent's breach of duty, in a case
           where the evidence does not establish the present existence of a
           right to refugee status or humanitarian protection."


   10. Mr Sobowale was not able to point me to any authority in support  of
       his submission other than  to  what  the  Judge  himself  said.   He
       submitted that "all aspects" meant that the  Judge  should  consider
       the risk on the basis of the Appellant being a minor  because  there
       is no "bright line" between minority and adulthood.  I accept  that,
       insofar as the Appellant's claim relied on his position as a  minor,
       the Judge was bound to  have  regard  to  the  plausibility  of  his
       account on that basis (as he did at [68] of the Decision).   I  also
       accept that the Judge was bound to consider the Appellant's evidence
       on the basis that the claim was made when he was still a minor.   It
       is likely that this is what the Judge meant by "all aspects  of  the
       appeal" as he was there dealing with how he intended to approach the
       evidence.


   11. All that does not though mean that he could  disregard  whether  the
       change in the Appellant's circumstances would mean he is  no  longer
       at risk.  The Appellant complains in particular about what  is  said
       at [75] of the Decision as being in conflict with the  approach  set
       out at [66].  That paragraph reads as follows:-
            "[75]      The only significant evidence in this  appeal  about
           the Appellant's home area is the news article to  which  I  have
           already referred.  This suggests that steps have been  taken  to
           eradicate the Taliban from the Appellant's home  area.   Looking
           at the evidence in the  round,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
           Taliban  have  an  adverse  interest  in  the  Appellant  either
           generally, because he is no longer a child who they  would  wish
           to recruit, or as an individual, because I have  not  found  his
           account to be credible.  The Appellant has  not  discharged  the
           burden of showing that he is at risk of persecution in his  home
           area."


   12. Even if there is an error  by  the  Judge  in  failing  to  consider
       whether the Taliban might still perceive the Appellant  as  still  a
       child, that error could not possibly be material  in  light  of  the
       finding about the Taliban's lack of presence in Baghlan Province  to
       which I have referred and which I consider below.


   13. The Appellant has failed to show that  there  is  any  inconsistency
       between what is said  at  [66]  of  the  Decision  and  the  Judge's
       consideration of the  claim  and  the  evidence.   When  making  the
       statement that he would consider "all aspects of the appeal" on  the
       basis that the Appellant is a minor, the  Judge  was  not  directing
       himself to depart from the established legal principle that risk  is
       to be determined on the basis of the circumstances  as  at  date  of
       hearing.  Indeed, were he to have meant  that,  he  would  not  have
       directed himself as he  did  at  [64]  that  he  must  consider  the
       circumstances as at that date.


   14. The second ground concerns the Judge's  finding  that  there  is  no
       longer a risk in the Appellant's home area because  the  Taliban  no
       longer have a significant presence there.


   15. At [69] of the Decision, the Judge said this:-
            "[69]      I note too, the news  article  at  page  11  of  the
           Appellant's bundle, which refers to his  home  area  in  Baghlan
           province.  Although this article relates to  a  time  after  the
           Appellant left Afghanistan, it suggests that before the date  of
           the article in 2016, the Taliban did have a presence there,  and
           one sufficiently strong  to  cause  the  Afghan  authorities  to
           conduct an operation there to  oust  them.   This  supports  the
           Appellant's evidence in his home area at the time of the  events
           he relates.  I find, however, that the article does not  provide
           significant evidence that the Taliban are still  there,  because
           it indicates a determination on the part of the  authorities  to
           succeed in their objective.  I find this article to be of little
           assistance in assessing  the  current  situation,  and  risk  on
           return now."


   16. The news article to which the Judge there refers is  dealt  with  by
       him at [36] of the Decision in the following terms:-
            "[36]      One news article, dated  14  April  2016,  refers  in
           particular to the  situation  in  Baghlan  province,  where  the
           Appellant lived in Afghanistan. It records that Dand-e-Ghori has
           been the scene of fighting between the  Afghan  security  forces
           and the  Taliban,  after  a  concerted  military  operation  was
           launched in Dand-e-Shahabuddin, and states  that  the  operation
           will continue until the full elimination of Taliban hideouts  in
           Baghlan province.  The article concludes by reporting that Dand-
           e-Ghori was cleared of insurgents after forty days fighting."


   17.  I have already drawn attention to [75] of the Decision which begins
       with the Judge's finding that steps have been taken to eradicate the
       presence of the Taliban in the Appellant's home area.  At [5] of the
       Appellant's grounds, my attention is drawn to what was said  in  the
       skeleton argument for the Appellant as follows:-
           "It merits note that his home area is  suffering  a  significant
           amount of violence and whilst the number of civilian  casualties
           has  fallen  in  2017  it  remains  high  with  violent  clashes
           continuing along with targeted killings.  There continues to  be
           high levels of civilian casualties caused by ground  engagements
           with suicide and  complex  attacks  continuing  along  with  the
           targeting and deliberate killing of civilians."


   18.  I have read and had regard to the news article to which  the  Judge
       makes reference and the background material to which the Appellant's
       grounds refer.  I begin by observing that the Judge's summary of the
       news article at [36] and [69] is a fair one.   Whilst  that  article
       speaks of the Taliban seeking to gain control of  certain  parts  of
       Baghlan province, it also cites official sources as being determined
       to drive them out of the area and reference to them having  recently
       done so in one part of the province.


   19. The difficulty with the other evidence to which the Appellant refers
       is that the reports are for the most part about the  general  levels
       of violence  within  Afghanistan  rather  than  an  account  of  the
       situation in Baghlan province specifically.  Although the statistics
       which do refer specifically to Baghlan province do still  show  some
       civilian casualties, they also show a 36% decrease on  the  previous
       year.  In any event, those do not point  to  the  Taliban  having  a
       significant presence there; the numbers of civilian  casualties  are
       low when compared with many of the  other  provinces.   There  is  a
       reference to a former Afghan National  Police  officer  having  been
       abducted by the Taliban in Baghlan  province  in  2017  but  such  a
       person is likely to be of particular interest  to  the  Taliban  and
       that says nothing about the general presence of the Taliban in  that
       area.


   20. The Judge dealt with the general levels of violence when considering
       the claim for humanitarian protection at [77] of the Decision.


   21. The Appellant has failed to show that there was evidence before  the
       Judge which did not permit the finding he has made about the Taliban
       no  longer  having  any  or  any  significant  presence  in  Baghlan
       province.  The finding he made that the  Appellant  could  therefore
       return to his home area was  one  which  was  open  to  him  on  the
       evidence.


   22. For the above reasons, I am satisfied that  the  Decision  does  not
       contain a material error of law.  I therefore uphold the Decision.


    DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision does not contain a material  error  of
    law. I  uphold  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chapman
    promulgated  on  16  October  2017  with  the  consequence   that   the
    Appellant's appeal stands dismissed
       Signed          [pic]            Dated: 14 February 2018
       Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
