
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Numbers:
PA/06787/2016

                                                 PA/06602/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                   |        Determination & Reasons       |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 4th August 2017                    |        On 18th September 2017        |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS

                                   Between

                                  (1) A B S
                                  (2) S B S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTIONS MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellants:    Ms E Rutherford (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Frankish promulgated on 6th January 2017 following a  hearing  at
    Bennett  House,  Stoke-on-Trent  on   3rd   January   2017.    In   the
    determination, the judge  dismissed  the  appeals  of  the  Appellants,
    whereupon the Appellants subsequently applied  for  and  were  granted,
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the  matter  comes
    before me.





The Appellants

 2. The Appellants are citizens  of  Iraq,  are  brothers,  and  were  born
    respectively on  4th April  1992  and  1st  January  1995.   They  are
    presently aged 25 and 23 currently.  They arrived in  the  UK  on  22nd
    January 2016 and claimed asylum on the same day.

The Appellants' Claim

 3. The Appellants' claim is  that,  as  far  as  the  first  Appellant  is
    concerned that he is a Kurd from Kirkuk and fears ISIL  because  he  is
    afraid that they would conscript him to fight for them.  He also  fears
    the KDP because his father was in the Ba'ath Party during the  time  of
    Saddam Hussein.  The second Appellant's claim is that he is the younger
    brother to the first Appellant  and  that  because  his  father  was  a
    captain in the Ba'ath Party, after  the  collapse  of  the  regime  his
    father started a car business in Kirkuk and Arab thugs visited his shop
    and demanded money.  When his father refused this led to death threats.



The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge highlighted the essence of the Appellants' claim before  him.
    He noted that the account described by the Appellants was  of  targeted
    violence with the hand of the same group of Jihadists being responsible
    for threats to the father for money or manpower  in  the  form  of  his
    sons, the destruction of the father's workshop, and the  shooting  dead
    of the elder brother, A (see paragraph 18).  The judge did  not  accept
    however that there was the same guiding hand behind all the misfortunes
    that befell this  family  during  their  life  in  Kirkuk  because  the
    evidence was too vague to link that to the murder, attempted murder and
    attempted kidnapping of three of the brothers of this family. The judge
    considered  that  there  was  an  element  of  "overegging  the   case"
    (paragraph 20).

 5. More significantly, the judge took the view that it was  not  plausible
    that the Appellants had lost all contact with their family  in  Kirkuk.
    Indeed, the judge  went  on  to  say  that,  "the  first  Appellant  in
    particular, has a lifetime of contacts in his  home  city.   I  do  not
    accept he is unable to make  contact  with  the  family  through  them"
    (paragraph 21).

 6. The determination ended with  the  observation  that,  as  he  had  not
    accepted that there was a loss of contact  with  the  family  by  these
    Appellants' brothers, he could not be satisfied that an approach to the
    Iraqi Embassy would fail to produce duplicate documents  leading  to  a
    CSID, because following the guidance given in the case of  AA  (Article
    15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544, it was not the  case  that  this  was
    "unachievable or disproportionate" (paragraph 26).

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

 8. On 11th  May  2017,  the  Upper  Tribunal  granted  permission  to  the
    Appellants on the basis that it was arguable that  the  judge  did  not
    consider whether relocation to the IKR was reasonable taking account of
    the Appellants' personal circumstances.

 9. On 6th June 2017, a Rule 24 response was entered to the effect that the
    judge had dealt with the issue of internal relocation to the  IKR  with
    sufficient scrutiny of all aspects  of  what  the  internal  relocation
    entailed.  The determination dealt with  internal  relocation  at  some
    length culminating in an assessment of  the  feasibility  of  unskilled
    returnees at paragraph 23.  Moreover the judge's findings at  paragraph
    26 make it clear that the Appellants were found to have  the  means  to
    contact family members on return to Iraq.

Submissions

10. In her submissions before me, Ms Rutherford, appearing on behalf of the
    Appellants stated that the claims of both Appellants are based  on  the
    same events in Iraq.  Judge Frankish rejected their claims, but  failed
    to consider whether internal relocation to the IKR,  with  transit  via
    Baghdad, was now available  to  the  Appellants  given  their  personal
    circumstances.  Judge Frankish  did  consider  whether  the  Appellants
    would be at risk in the IKR due to the activities of their father.   He
    concluded that they would not be at risk.   He  was  entitled  to  that
    conclusion.  However, he did not consider the other arguments that were
    put forward on behalf of the Appellants, in particular  those  relating
    to internal relocation.

11. The issue of internal relocation was highly significant in the light of
    the expert report of Dr Rebwar Fatah who had  identified  a  number  of
    difficulties in the path of the Appellants were they to  seek  internal
    relocation in Iraq.   These  were  as  follows.   First,  there  was  a
    changing demography in the disputed territories and  if  the  returnees
    were allowed to settle in the IKR then the number of  the  Kurds  would
    reduce.  Second, the requirement of a Sponsor to visit the IKR had been
    removed but non-professional Kurds such as labourers from the  disputed
    territories, risked being barred from the IKR.   The  barring  of  such
    people was arbitrary and there was no pattern to it.  Third, Kurds from
    the disputed areas were allowed to visit  but  they  could  not  obtain
    identity cards relating to the IKR.  Fourth,  the  public  distribution
    system PDS for food rations could not be transferred to  the  IKR  from
    outside the region.  Fifth, there was confusion regarding the  transfer
    of civil records and the civil records did  not  move  from  the  Iraqi
    governorates to the IKR.  Finally, if the Appellants were returned they
    would be removed from their kinship networks and in a country like Iraq
    most people rely on social connections  or  blood  ties  for  accessing
    employment, housing, and social assistance, which would  be  denied  to
    these Appellants.

12. All these issues are very important because the Country Information and
    Guidance Report on Iraq for August 2016 of the UK  Government  revealed
    that job opportunities in the IKR are very limited and the humanitarian
    situation in the IKR for IDPs was grim.  Accordingly,  the  failure  of
    the judge to  give  specific  regard  to  these  issues,  in  the  form
    enumerated by Dr Rebwar Fatah, was an error of law.

13. Second, since the determination being handed down  by  Judge  Frankish,
    the Court of Appeal had given fresh guidance in the case of  AA  (Iraq)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  The position now is that former residents of  the
    Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be to the  IKR  and  all  other  Iraqis
    would be returned to Baghdad.  As far  as  the  Iraqi  Authorities  are
    concerned, they would allow an Iraqi national in the United Kingdom  to
    enter only if such a person was in possession of a current  or  expired
    Iraqi passport relating to themselves or a  lassiez-passer.   No  Iraqi
    national would be returned to Baghdad if they were not in possession of
    one of these documents.  The Court of Appeal has made it clear  that  a
    returnee's ability to obtain a CSID "is likely to be severely hampered"
    if they are unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  office  in  the
    relevant governorate if there is a risk there of serious harm occurring
    contrary to Article 15(c).

14. On this basis, Ms Rutherford submitted that the Appellants cannot  move
    about in Iraq, or gain access to the IKR, or  obtain  access  to  basic
    services because neither has a passport, and  although  Judge  Frankish
    held that duplicate documents would be provided by the  Iraqi  Embassy,
    the ability of the Appellants to obtain a CSID will be  dependent  upon
    whether they know the page and volume number of the book holding  their
    information and their ability to persuade officials that they  are  the
    two people named there.  The Appellants in  these  circumstances  would
    need the assistance of their family members.  The judge held  that,  "I
    do not accept the loss of contact as described by the  Appellants"  and
    that "I do not accept he is unable to make  contact  with  the  family"
    through other contacts in their home  city  (see  paragraph  21).   The
    judge repeated this at the end of the  determination  stating  that  he
    would not accept that there was a  loss  of  contact  with  the  family
    (paragraph 26).

15. Nevertheless, the problem remained that the Appellants were  without  a
    passport.  There was no evidence that they would  be  able  to  have  a
    CSID.  They have to go to Kirkuk to get a CSID.   They  would  need  to
    know the page and volume number of the book and they would need  to  be
    able to persuade the officials that they were the people  they  claimed
    to be.

16. For her part, Ms Aboni  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response  and  she
    submitted that the judge had directed  himself  appropriately  in  this
    case.  He had given  adequate  reasons.   He  had  concluded  that  the
    Appellants were not targeted specifically.  The judge had explained  at
    paragraphs 24 to 26 that the Appellants would  be  able  to  travel  to
    Baghdad, and they would still be able to make contact with their family
    (see paragraph 21), who would assist the Appellants to relocate to  the
    IKR.  The judge did address all the issues and there was  no  error  of
    law.

Error of Law

17. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First and  most  importantly,  notwithstanding  the  detailed
    manner in which the judge has compiled the determination, the  fact  is
    that there is now a new Court of Appeal judgment in  AA  (Iraq)  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944 that sets down stringent requirements with respect to  the
    feasibility of return of Iraqi nationals.  Whereas the judge  has  been
    able to address many of the concerns that are  raised  in  this  latest
    judgment, what is set out at section C of the  annex  to  the  judgment
    bears further scrutiny.  Here it  is  stated  (at  paragraph  9),  that



         "It will be necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or  would  be
         able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID
         is generally required in order for an  Iraqi  to  access  financial
         assistance from the Authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;
         and medical treatment.  If P shows there are  no  family  or  other
         members likely to be able to provide means  of  support,  P  is  in
         general likely to face a real risk  of  destitution,  amounting  to
         serious harm ..." (paragraph 9).

18. Similarly, although section C of this annex goes on to say that even if
    P does not have a CSID, as a general matter it should  be  possible  to
    obtain one from the Civil Status Affairs office in the returnee's  home
    governorate, using an Iraqi passport, nevertheless,

         "if P does not have such a passport, P's ability to obtain  a  CSID
         may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of  the
         book holding P's information (and that of P's family).  P's ability
         to persuade the officials  that  P  is  the  person  named  on  the
         relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has  family  members
         or other individuals who are prepared to vouch  for  P"  (paragraph
         10).

19. Of course it is the  case  here  that  the  judge  took  the  view  (at
    paragraph 21) that it was more than likely that the Appellant would  be
    able to contact, through his community ties, his mother in the IKR.

20. Nevertheless, the annex in the Court of Appeal's judgment  goes  on  to
    say that, "P's ability to obtain  a  CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
    hampered if P is unable to go to the Civil Status Affairs office of P's
    governorate because it is in an area where Article 15(c)  serious  harm
    is occurring ..." (paragraph 11).

21. Ms Rutherford's submissions before me have been that  the  difficulties
    in this regard are  compounded  for  the  Appellants  because  the  CSA
    officers for Kirkuk have not been established in Baghdad and this would
    mean that the Appellants would have to travel  to  Kirkuk,  a  disputed
    area, in order to get their documentation.

22. If this is the case then  plainly  a  more  detailed  consideration  is
    required of the situation that faces these two Appellants.  That is the
    position now in the light of the latest judgment of the Court of Appeal
    in AA (Iraq).

23. Second, and following on from this, the  expert  report  of  Dr  Rebwar
    Fatah plainly assumes a more heightened importance in  the  context  of
    what I have just stated  above,  and  would  need  to  be  specifically
    considered in relation to each of the five points that I have  set  out
    above, which the expert had highlighted, before  it  can  be  concluded
    that the Appellants' return would indeed be such that would not violate
    the Rules on internal relocation as set down by international law.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the decision of
    the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is
    allowed to the extent that  it  is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be determined by a judge other than  Judge  Frankish  under
    practice statement 7.2(b).

25. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Dated


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 15th September 2017
