
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06188/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On October 2, 2018                           |On October 19, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  HERSH [K]
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Counsel, instructed by CAB
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.  He left Iraq on October  27,  2015
    and entered the United Kingdom clandestinely on October  30,  2015  and
    claimed asylum the same day.  The  respondent  refused  his  protection
    claim on May 18, 2016 under paragraph 336 HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on June 15, 2016  under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier   Tribunal   Boylan-Kemp   MBE
    (hereinafter called "the Judge") on May 10,  2017  and  in  a  decision
    promulgated on June 19, 2017  the  Judge  refused  the  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission to appeal  on  November
    1, 2017 finding it arguable  the  Judge  had  arguably  ignored  expert
    evidence, provided  by  Dr  Fatah,  that  relocation  would  be  either
    impossible or unreasonable.

 5. When this matter came before me on June 26, 2018 Mr Tan  accepted  that
    in considering internal relocation the Judge had  failed  to  have  any
    regard to the expert report of Dr Fatah and as this case was all  about
    internal relocation he accepted there had been an error in law.

 6. Both Mr Tan and Ms Wilkins also agreed the Judge erred  by  failing  to
    address the issue of whether the appellant  could  be  a  member  of  a
    particular social group and both accepted the Judge was wrong  to  find
    that  being  part  of  a  blood  feud  could  not  engage  the  Refugee
    Convention.

 7. I adjourned the case for up to date country evidence and directed  that
    evidence be submitted prior to the next hearing. The  decision  of  AAH
    (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC) has
    provided up to date guidance on how Iraqi Kurd cases  should  be  dealt
    with.

 8. At the resumed hearing I heard submissions from both representatives.

    SUBMISSIONS

 9. Mr Tan accepted that people who are part of a blood feud can be members
    of a particular social group but he submitted that if the appellant was
    able to internally relocate  to  the  IKR  then  there  was  no  direct
    evidence  that  members  of  the  appellant's  ethnicity  (Kakai)  were
    targeted by the Bayati. Dr Fatah had considered in  his  report,  dated
    January 31, 2017, the issue of blood feuds noting that blood feuds were
    a regular occurrence within Kurdish society but commented at  paragraph
    46 of his report that where members  of  the  other  tribe/family  (the
    Bayati tribe) were unable to reach their target then  it  was  possible
    that they would kill another member of that person's family  but  there
    was no evidence that this has happened  despite  the  appellant  having
    left Iraq at the end of October 2015. There was no evidence  that  they
    had attempted to trace the appellant and Mr Tan submitted that Dr Fatah
    findings at paragraphs 49 and 50 were unsubstantiated especially as the
    CPIN (Iraq: Blood Feuds) August 2017 report made no  reference  to  the
    Bayati being present or having any influence in the IKR. Dr Fatah  also
    did not specifically consider whether the Tribal Council would be  able
    to resolve any ongoing tribal dispute especially as the  CPIN  confirms
    that tribal chiefs will take effective measures to  settle  a  conflict
    before it assumes serious proportions. Mr Tan submitted  that  internal
    relocation was a viable option in this appeal and the appellant was not
    entitled to a refugee status.

10. Mr Tan thereafter addressed the issue of the appellant's lack of a CSID
    and noted that in his interview the appellant accepted that  he  had  a
    brother in law and that this brother in law had sent him documents  and
    it was therefore perfectly reasonable either for him  or  other  family
    members in Iraq to forward to  him  sufficient  information  that  will
    enable him to obtain his CSID documentation in Baghdad or to appoint  a
    power of attorney.

11. Finally, with regard to article 8 Mr Tan adopted  what  the  Judge  had
    stated in the First-tier Tribunal and although there was  now  a  third
    child the situation was unchanged.

12. Ms Wilkins adopted the content of her skeleton argument  and  submitted
    that returning the appellant would either entitle him to protection  on
    refugee or humanitarian protection grounds or in the alternative  under
    section 6 of the Human Rights Act 1998.  The  respondent  had  accepted
    that the appellant was Kurdish and of the Kakai ethnicity and  that  it
    would be unsafe for him to return to  his  home  area.  This  had  been
    accepted by the Judge in the First-tier Tribunal and the Judge had also
    accepted that the appellant had been threatened by the family of a  man
    who had died after visiting the appellant shop. She submitted that this
    was capable of being a blood feud and therefore  engaging  the  Refugee
    Convention. She submitted that  internal  relocation  to  the  IKR  was
    neither practically possible without a CSID nor would it be safe  based
    on the findings of Dr Fatah.

13. With regard to  whether  the  appellant's  claim  engaged  the  Refugee
    Convention because of the blood feud Ms Wilkins submitted that  as  the
    appellant could not safely or reasonably relocate to the IKR his appeal
    should be allowed on refugee grounds. She submitted that the  appellant
    would be unable to receive protection in the IKR and as  the  appellant
    did not have a CSID or passport he would be unable to travel to the IKR
    and in such circumstances internal relocation would  not  be  possible.
    She pointed to the fact that he would be unable to replace his CSID  in
    the United Kingdom because he did not have the  relevant  documentation
    to obtain it and he would be unable to complete the necessary paperwork
    especially as the Consulate in London are "very  unhelpful".  He  would
    also be unable to obtain the documentation in Baghdad because he had no
    contact with any family and there would be no  male  family  member  or
    documentation which would enable him to obtain a replacement CSID.

14. When considering reasonableness Ms Wilkins submitted that the  Tribunal
    had to have regard to the fact the appellant and  his  wife  had  three
    young children and given the timeframe to obtain documents  in  Baghdad
    he would have insufficient resources to support his family  was  trying
    to obtain the documents and/or persuade officials to overlook some  the
    requirements all trawl through  volume  after  volume  for  his  family
    records.

15. Once in the IKR he would find work difficult as he had no experience in
    the "legal" job market having previously run a shop selling alcohol and
    completing  only  three  years  of  primary  school.  With  no   family
    connections in the region the likelihood  of  him  obtaining  work  was
    further reduced especially as prospective  employers  may  be  deterred
    from taking on someone from a contested area. The appellant would  also
    have no accommodation for himself and his family and no means to rent a
    property.

16. With regard to article 8 ECHR the appellant  has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom for three years and has two children aged 12 and seven  and  an
    eight-month old child. It would be disproportionate to require them  to
    return to Iraq.

17. Having heard submissions, I indicated would give a written decision.

    FINDINGS

18. The appellant ran a  shop  selling  in  alcohol  and  after  purchasing
    alcohol from the appellant's shop AH was shot and killed by an  unknown
    person upon leaving the shop. AH's family blamed the appellant for  his
    death and AH's family attended at  the  appellant's  home  address  and
    attacked the appellant and his family. The appellant's home  was  later
    burnt down.

19. The appellant and his family (wife and  two  children)  fled  Iraq  and
    claimed asylum in the United Kingdom.

20. After hearing the evidence, the Judge concluded the appellant had given
    a credible account both of what happened  at  his  shop  and  what  had
    subsequently happened. The Judge further accepted that it was plausible
    that AH's family could choose to direct their anger and frustration  on
    the appellant and his family.

21. Mr Tan, contrary to the position of his  colleague  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, accepts that a person involved in a blood feud can engage the
    Refugee  Convention  but  whether  this  appellant  would  engage   the
    Convention is a factual assessment.

22. The Tribunal in EH (blood feuds) Albania CG  [2012]  UKUT  00348  (IAC)
    gave guidance on the correct approach to considering whether  a  person
    involved in a blood feud is  at  risk  of  persecution.  The  following
    factors should be considered:

      a) The history of the alleged feud, including  the  notoriety  of  the
         original killings, the numbers killed, and the degree of commitment
         by the aggressor clan toward the prosecution of the feud.

      b) The length of time since the last death and the relationship of the
         last person killed to the appellant.

      c) The ability  of  members  of  the  aggressor  clan  to  locate  the
         appellant if returned to another part of Iraq.

      d) The past and  likely  future  attitude  of  the  police  and  other
         authorities towards the feud and the protection of  the  family  of
         the person claiming to be at risk, including any past  attempts  to
         seek prosecution of members of  the  aggressor  clan,  or  to  seek
         protection from the Iraqi authorities.

      e) In order to establish that there is an active blood feud  affecting
         the appellant must establish: (a) his profile as a potential target
         of the feud identified and which family carried out the most recent
         killing; and (b) whether the appellant has been, or  other  members
         of his family have been,  or  are  currently,  in  self-confinement
         within Iraq.

23. In this particular case the respondent has accepted  that  the  alleged
    incident took place but Mr Tan has submitted there was no evidence that
    the appellant's family  members  had  suffered  as  a  result  of  what
    happened and Mr Tan submitted the appellant would be able to return  to
    Iraq (the IKR in particular) which was  an  area  where  there  was  no
    evidence that members of the other family or their tribe held any power
    or influence.

24. In dealing with the appeal the Judge accepted it was plausible that the
    family of the deceased male  could  choose  to  vent  their  anger  and
    frustration on the appellant's family. Dr Fatah was asked  to  consider
    the issue of a blood feud but his report makes no reference to problems
    involving the appellant's extended  family.  At  paragraph  44  of  the
    report Dr Fatah referred to attempts that  could  be  made  to  kill  a
    prominent male member of the family but  there  was  no  evidence  that
    anybody else, apart from the appellant, had been targeted.

25. Applying the guidance suggested  by  the  Tribunal  in  EV  I  find  as
    follows:

      a) The history of the feud is limited.

      b) There is a lack of evidence that there has been any other  attempts
         to target any of the appellant's family.

      c) This incident occurred in October 2015.

      d) Dr Fatah suggests that the appellant could be traced to the IKR but
         the Country Information Report  July  2017  does  not  suggest  the
         Bayati tribe are based in the IKR. Dr Fatah's report is speculative
         about the risk that could be occasioned to the appellant in the IKR
         from this family.

      e) Dr Fatah refers to the Tribal Council and the  fact  that  they  do
         wield  influence  within  society.   The   aforementioned   Country
         Information Report confirms that Tribal Courts settle  disputes  in
         accordance with tribal customary law including  the  settlement  of
         feuds. This issue was not properly considered by Dr Fatah.

26. Accordingly, whilst I accept the appellant is capable of being a member
    of a particular social  group  I  am  not  satisfied  on  the  evidence
    submitted that the facts of this case support the  submission  advanced
    by Ms Wilkins. I do not therefore accept the appellant  has  a  Refugee
    Convention claim.

27. I turn now to the other issue which I feel has more merit namely claims
    under article 15(b) and  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive.  The
    appellant and his family came from a contested area and  I  accept,  as
    did Mr Tan, that return to that area is currently impossible.

28. The Tribunal in AAH issued the following guidance:

          1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances.


             Factors to be considered include:


               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held, or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all.


             Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
             decision in AA (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is replaced
             with the following guidance:


          2. There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom  are
             to Baghdad.


          3. For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical and can be made without a real risk of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


          4. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


          5. P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport.   If
             P has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It is not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.


          6. Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.   There   is   no   sponsorship
             requirement for Kurds.


          7. Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
             (i) coming from a family with a known association  with  ISIL,
             (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii)  being
             a single male of fighting age. P  is  likely  to  be  able  to
             evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK,  which  would
             dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from  ISIL
             territory.


          8. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers
             to determine  the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
             provided by P's family on a case by case basis.


          9. For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:


               i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;


              ii) If P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building.  It would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic necessities such as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;


              iv) In considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P  access  to
                  �1500. Consideration should also be given to whether P can
                  obtain financial support from other sources  such  as  (a)
                  employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the
                  availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to  access
                  PDS rations.


         10. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


               i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
                  legitimate employment;


              ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR  is
                  70%;


             iii) P cannot work without a CSID;


              iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
                  securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
                  the region will have a significant advantage  in  that  he
                  would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts  to
                  make introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                  for him;


               v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
                  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;


              vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers.


29. This appellant no longer has his CSID and whilst he clearly had one  in
    the past it is  clear  from  the  decision  in  AAH  that  obtaining  a
    replacement is not straightforward. The Tribunal  accepted  that  civil
    registries in the contested areas have been left  in  utter  chaos  and
    there is  evidence  that  many  documents  have  been  either  lost  or
    destroyed.

30. Both Mr Tan and Ms Wilkins agreed that unless the appellant had a  CSID
    he would be in difficulties. The options available  to  this  appellant
    are to (a) try and obtain a CSID in London or  (b)  obtain  a  CSID  in
    Baghdad.

31. The Tribunal recorded the issues facing applicants seeking CSID in both
    London and Baghdad:

         "26. If applying through a consulate abroad  the  requirements  are
         different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and checked on
         the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr  Fatah  states  that
         the  authorities  will  require  the  applicant  to  first  make  a
         statement explaining why he needs a CSID and  attach  this  to  his
         application form, which must  countersigned  by  the  head  of  the
         applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or embassy; he must
         then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country
         where he is applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq,
         an additional form completed by the head of the applicant's  family
         verifying that the contents of his application form were true, four
         colour copies of his INC, and 10 colour  photographs.     Crucially
         the applicant must be able to produce something which can establish
         the location of his family's details in the  civil  register.  This
         should be a CSID, an INC or birth certificate. If none of these are
         available to the applicant he must supply the identity documents of
         his parents. This evidence again  accords  with  that  of  Landinfo
         (December 2017) who conclude that it can  be  difficult  to  obtain
         replacement ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual
         who is unable to verify his or her identity.


         27.  If you are in Iraq, and have all of the required documents, in
         normal circumstances the process is straightforward and  quick  and
         should take no more than three days. Dr Fatah's  own  daughter  was
         born in the United Kingdom and he managed to obtain her a  CSID  in
         one day from the office in Sulaymaniyah, upon payment  of  a  small
         fee.    Dr Fatah was less optimistic about the  efficiency  of  the
         process if in the United Kingdom. He has regular dealings with  the
         consulate in London and he is not impressed.  He  said  that  staff
         there are generally very unhelpful.


         28.  If some of the documents were missing it might generally  take
         you up to a month to collate and replace them  all.   In  his  live
         evidence, when pressed by Mr Singh, Dr Fatah acknowledged  that  it
         may be possible, when dealing with some officials, to obtain a CSID
         even if one does not have all of the  documents  listed  above.  He
         conceded that an official might  be  'persuaded'  to  overlook  the
         official requirements,  and  that  there  may  be  some  degree  of
         flexibility about the process in  some  governates.  He  maintained
         however that it would normally be the  case  that  these  documents
         would be required. The key piece of information that the individual
         would however have to have would be his family's  volume  and  page
         reference  number  in  the  civil  register.  Without   that,   the
         individual "is in trouble".   He could only obtain a  new  CSID  if
         the Registrar was prepared to trawl  through  volume  after  volume
         looking for the family record. In his evidence before the  Tribunal
         in AA (Iraq) Dr Fatah wondered if such an official would be willing
         to undertake such a task, or could be "made willing". The  Tribunal
         concluded that this was not likely. The only  way  that  a  totally
         undocumented Iraqi could realistically hope to obtain  a  new  CSID
         would be the attendance at the civil  registry  of  a  male  family
         member prepared to vouch for him or her. The production of  a  CSID
         from, for instance, an uncle, would enable the Registrar  to  trace
         back through the record to find the  individual's  father,  and  in
         turn him.


         29.  As to whether one would need to attend the office of the civil
         registrar in person, Dr Fatah reiterated the evidence he gave in AA
         (Iraq). One could delegate  the  task  to  a  relative  or  trusted
         friend, assuming of  course  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the
         relevant documents and/or information.    Alternatively,  Dr  Fatah
         agreed that it was theoretically possible that one could  engage  a
         lawyer and grant him or her power of  attorney.    He  had  however
         never known  of  anyone  who  had  actually  done  that,  but  like
         everything else in Iraq, it depended on whether  you  had  contacts
         whom you could trust. Dr Fatah was asked about the  possibility  of
         attending alternative offices,  such  as  the  Central  Archive  in
         Baghdad, discussed at paragraphs 180 to  187  of  AA  (Iraq).    He
         maintained the evidence that he gave in that  case:  he  has  never
         heard of anyone obtaining a CSID from the Central Archive.  In  his
         main report Dr Fatah cites the research of  NGO  'Ceasefire  Centre
         for Civilian Rights' to the effect that IDPs attempting to  recover
         lost  documents  are  being  met  with  indifference,   corruption,
         incompetence and even sarcasm by the authorities.


         30.  Dr Fatah explained that this complex bureaucracy  has  existed
         in Iraq for many years. The family registration  books,  and  their
         contents reflected on the CSID, are the foundation of  the  state's
         control.   Iraq  is  presently  facing  significant  challenges  in
         maintaining the system in the north of the country, however.  Under
         ISIL control all recording of official events was banned, and  some
         civil register offices, such as that  in  Mosul,  were  damaged  or
         destroyed. The effect is that there is now a huge backlog  for  the
         bureaucrats to catch up on. Between 2014  and  2017  no  marriages,
         births or deaths were recorded. Catching up will be a mammoth task.
          In Mosul alone there are 1.5 million Iraqis who  will  need  their
         records updated. In addition to recording the names  of  those  who
         have died in the conflict  there  will  be  tens  of  thousands  of
         children whose births have not been registered,  or  who  were  not
         entered into the record before ISIL took power. Their families  are
         now desperate to have their  existence  recorded,  because  without
         that, they  cannot  obtain  CSID  cards;  without  CSID  cards  the
         children are not entitled to PDS  cards;  without  PDS  cards  they
         cannot receive food rations.   In addition many people  lost  their
         documents during the conflict when homes  were  destroyed  or  when
         fighting broke out, causing people to flee at short notice  without
         them.   In light of this, the problems of one  individual  returnee
         are likely to be  given  short  shrift.  No  procedures  have  been
         implemented to assist the re-documentation of returnees and in  the
         view of Dr Fatah this is because their issues are considered to  be
         trivial compared to the position of IDPs  already  on  the  ground.
         These returnees are  a  "totally  insignificant  problem"  for  the
         authorities, whose efforts are further hampered by  the  fact  that
         many of the more experienced civil servants, whose skills could  be
         helpful at this point,  were  sacked  in  the  "de-Ba'athification"
         programme.   The likelihood of  persuading  an  official  to  spend
         precious time trying to  find  an  individual's  records  are  even
         further diminished."


32. Taking into account the above information I am satisfied that obtaining
    a CSID in the United Kingdom will be extremely difficult given the fact
    the appellant has no documentation whatsoever. Dr Fatah  gave  evidence
    to the Upper Tribunal in AAH that suggested some officials may  turn  a
    blind eye but the Tribunal concluded that without  certain  information
    it would be nigh impossible for the appellant to obtain the document in
    London.

33. The second option is  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  a  CSID  from  a
    designated Registry in Baghdad. The evidence about obtaining  documents
    in Baghdad also raised concerns. The chances  of  the  appellant  being
    able to obtain the information from the former  Registry  is  slim.  He
    would have to be able to produce evidence from a family member, at  the
    very least, to obtain his  CSID  and  whilst  in  theory  this  may  be
    possible it seems  highly  unlikely  that  such  a  document  would  be
    obtained within a reasonable period of time especially as the appellant
    would be returned with a wife and three young children.

34. The appellant has no family in Baghdad and bearing  in  mind  where  he
    lived before he came to the United Kingdom it seems highly  speculative
    to suggest that he would have access to any family in Baghdad.  Without
    a CSID he would be unable to leave Baghdad and he would  be  unable  to
    obtain any employment.

35. Whilst the appellant is a Kurd he is not someone  who  originates  from
    the IKR. He would be unable to fly to  the  IKR  because  the  Tribunal
    accepted that without a CSID a flight would not be possible.  There  is
    the alternative of travelling to the IKR overland but  there  would  be
    problems for this appellant because he would have to travel  through  a
    number  of  checkpoints  and  without  a  CSID  he  would  again   face
    significant problems as detailed in AAH.

36. The respondent cannot guarantee  safe  passage  to  the  IKR  for  this
    appellant and his family and even if he was able to travel to  the  IKR
    and avoid the problems considered by the Upper Tribunal the chances  of
    him obtaining employment within a reasonable period of time are slim as
    his only work experience was selling alcohol in a shop. There are  high
    levels of unemployment in the IKR and whilst he  may  not  be  forcibly
    removed due to his ethnicity I accept that he would experience problems
    in the IKR.

37. I make it clear that if he had been able to  overcome  all  the  issues
    relating to his CSID then it may well  be  neither  article  15(b)  nor
    15(c) would be engaged but based on the problems highlighted in  AAH  I
    am satisfied that this appellant will not be able to travel to the  IKR
    because he will not be able to secure a CSID within a reasonable period
    of time. The only alternative would be for him to remain in Baghdad but
    due to the problems highlighted by Ms Wilkins in her submissions I find
    he would be at risk of serious harm if he remained in Baghdad.

38. I accordingly find that returning this appellant,  and  is  family,  to
    Iraq  would  engage  articles  15(b)  and  (c)  of  the   Qualification
    Directive. It also follows that  it  would  be  both  unreasonable  and
    unduly harsh to require the appellant and his family to return to  Iraq
    and thus article 8 ECHR would be engaged. My  reasons  for  finding  it
    both unreasonable and unduly harsh  are  based  on  the  findings  made
    above. In reaching this decision on article 8 ECHR I  have  taken  into
    account the statutory factors set out in section 117B of the 2002Act.

    DECISION

39. I have previously set aside the Judge's  decision  and  I  remake  this
    decision and grant the appellant humanitarian  protection  as  set  out
    above.

40. I also allow the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Signed                              Date     08/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as no fee was payable.


Signed                              Date     08/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
