
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06383/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th March 2018                            |On 17th April 2018            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                  Mr R. M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Chelvan, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Bangladesh  born  on  [  ]  1993.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Afghanistan some  five  months  prior  to
    arriving in the UK and to have arrived in the UK in  December  2008  by
    lorry.  The Appellant was thereafter found to be working  illegally  on
    23rd June 2011 and  he  claimed  asylum  on  2nd  February  2017.   The
    Appellant's claim for asylum was based upon a fear that if returned  to
    Afghanistan he would face mistreatment due to the non-Convention reason
    that he fears the Taliban due to his father's previous  work  with  the
    government.  The Appellant's  application  was  refused  by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 21st June 2017.  The Appellant appealed  and  the  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Geraint Jones  QC  sitting
    at Hatton Cross  on  2nd  August  2017.   In  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 8th  August  2017  the  Appellant's  appeal  based  upon
    asylum, the  Qualification  Directive  and  human  rights  grounds  was
    dismissed.

 2. Grounds of appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds
    contended:-

      i) That the  Tribunal  had  materially  erred  in  law  in  re-opening
         subjective credibility of the Appellant where  the  only  basis  of
         rejection of acceptance of the past narrative and future fear was a
         lack of external corroboration.

     ii)  That  the  Tribunal  treatment  of  Dr  Giustozzi's  evidence  was
         procedurally unfair and/or irrational.

    iii) That  the  Tribunal  had  acted  in  a  manner  that  was  arguably
         procedurally biased by forming a view at the hearing in relation to
         Counsel's conduct in not applying for the hearing  to  be  aborted.
         The Appellant's Counsel was already preparing the groundwork for an
         appeal,  notwithstanding  the  assumption  that  the  Tribunal  was
         independent and notwithstanding the rejection  at  the  hearing  on
         preliminary matters could still decide an appeal either way.

 3. On  31st  October  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Shimmin noted the Grounds for  Appeal  and
    succinctly re-stated them stating that they argued that the judge erred
    in re-opening subjective credibility of the Appellant  where  the  only
    basis of rejection of the past narrative and future fear was a lack  of
    external  corroboration  and  that  the  Tribunal's  treatment  of   Dr
    Giustozzi's evidence was procedurally unfair and/or irrational in  that
    it was arguable that the expert report  was  not  considered  correctly
    especially in the light of the concessions by the Respondent as to  the
    Appellant's credibility contained in the refusal letter.  Finally Judge
    Shimmin notes that the grounds argued that the Tribunal had acted in  a
    manner that was procedurally  biased  and  that  paragraph  79  of  the
    decision indicated such a position by the judge.

 4. On 10th January 2018  the  specialist  appeal  team  gave  a  directive
    response on behalf of the Secretary of State.  This is not  a  Rule  24
    response and it is of little relevance for reasons set out below.

    The response states:-

         "I am unable to  provide  a  response  to  the  claimant's  grounds
         challenging the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision  because  the
         determination is not attached and I am unable to locate it."

 5. It is on the above basis that the appeal comes before me  to  determine
    initially where there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  is  represented  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr  Chelvan.   Mr  Chelvan  is  familiar  with  this
    matter.  He appeared before the First-tier Tribunal, he is  the  author
    of two skeleton arguments, one before the  First-tier  and  one  before
    myself.  He is also the author of the Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary
    of State appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Duffy.

 6. As a preliminary point bearing in mind the facts and the  vulnerability
    of the Appellant Mr Chelvan applies for an anonymity direction  on  his
    behalf.  That is not opposed by Mr Duffy and it is granted.

Preliminary Points

 7. The challenge herein as a starting point  is  one  of  bias.   That  is
    constituted by Ground 3 of the Grounds of Appeal  particularly  in  the
    finding by the First-tier Tribunal Judge due to the perception  gleaned
    from paragraph 79 of the determination  in  recording  the  Appellant's
    Counsel in not applying for the  hearing  to  be  aborted  and  another
    Tribunal convened, was "seeking to lay the ground for a hearing  before
    a different Tribunal on a different  occasion."   Mr  Duffy  makes  two
    concessions.  Firstly, he concedes that this ground  is  made  out  and
    that there is consequently a material error of law in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal  Judge.   He  also  acknowledges  that  in  the
    situation where there  is  an  allegation  made  of  bias  that  it  is
    incumbent upon the Secretary of State to respond to that allegation and
    that the letter of 10th January fails to address that issue albeit that
    that is not a criticism of the author of that letter.  There had been a
    change of instructed solicitor.

 8. So far as other issues are concerned Mr Chelvan firstly points  out  to
    me that the Appellant came  to  the  hearing  with  the  report  of  Dr
    Giustozzi.  He submits and points out that Dr Giustozzi  is  well-known
    and well regarded in the Upper Tribunal and the higher courts and  that
    his second report dated July 2017 includes  the  most  recent  evidence
    available on country conditions before the  Tribunal.   He  points  out
    that there was no evidence filed to rebut Dr  Giustozzi's  findings  on
    risk of return but that at paragraph 62 the Tribunal had  rejected  any
    weight to be attached to Dr Giustozzi's second report as the judge  has
    proceeded on the basis that the Appellant's account  is  accepted.   He
    submits that the Tribunal had materially erred in rejecting the  weight
    that should have been given  to  the  expert's  evidence.   He  further
    reminds me that plausibility is a matter for reliable  expert  evidence
    and country background evidence and that in  these  proceedings  noting
    the hurdles that had to be overcome credibility had  been  rejected  at
    the first hurdle solely based on a lack of external corroboration.   He
    pointed out that both reports from Dr Giustozzi filled the  lacuna  and
    therefore this placed the Appellant within the  risk  category  in  his
    home area relying on Dr Giustozzi's expertise on country conditions  in
    Afghanistan  and  further  investigations  by  one  of  Dr  Giustozzi's
    researchers who had visited  the  home  area  of  the  Appellant.   His
    submission consequently is that bearing in mind the  positive  findings
    and concessions of the Secretary of State the  only  outstanding  issue
    relates to external corroboration it being accepted by the Secretary of
    State that no documentary evidence was available.  He went on to submit
    that since the Appellant had been in the UK since 2008 and  that  there
    had been nothing produced to undermine Dr Giustozzi's report  therefore
    there had been no basis to  challenge  the  findings.   His  contention
    consequently was that despite the concession made by the  Secretary  of
    State it was inappropriate for the Tribunal to remit the matter back to
    the First-tier as that would be a completely wasted exercise  and  that
    the correct approach was to remake the decision.

 9. In response Mr Duffy accepting the bias point had not been  dealt  with
    and that therefore there were material errors of law in the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal, took a slightly different view on credibility.
     The Secretary of State contends that  the  Appellant's  claim  is  not
    accepted and that he has not made out  his  claim  and  that  the  mere
    production of an expert's report does  not  specifically  overcome  the
    credibility issue.  Whilst asking me to find that there is  a  material
    error of law he is not in a position to concede the  matter  should  be
    remade and that it is a matter for me as to whether I decide to  do  so
    or remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.

The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Finding on Error of Law

12. It is clear that there is a material error of law in  the  decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and  that  this  is  conceded  by  the
    Secretary of State.  Unfortunately, due to the choice of words used  by
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge there is a potential for a perception  of
    bias to be considered with regard to the wording used by the  judge  in
    paragraph 79 in that  the  judge  may  inadvertently  have  gained  the
    impression that Mr Chelvan was setting him  up  for  an  appeal.   That
    consequently constitutes a material error of  law.   Having  made  that
    decision I go on to consider  the  issue  relating  to  Dr  Giustozzi's
    report and I am satisfied that the manner in  which  the  Tribunal  has
    given due consideration to the  evidence  of  Dr  Giustozzi  is  itself
    procedurally unfair so far as its approach to expert evidence.





The Remaking of the Decision

13. The issue consequently that I now have to decide upon is whether I  can
    proceed on the submissions made by Mr Duffy and Mr  Chelvan  to  remake
    the decision or whether it is necessary to remit the  matter  back  for
    rehearing to the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Chelvan has urged  me  merely
    to remake the decision on the basis  that  all  key  other  issues  are
    accepted so  far  as  the  asylum  claim  is  concerned  save  for  the
    requirement of some form of external corroboration  and  that  this  is
    firstly provided by Dr Giustozzi's report and secondly in any event  it
    is unnecessary to provide external corroboration  in  a  case  of  this
    nature.

14. In the event that there is  a  challenge  to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant that would require an  assessment  of  the  evidence  of  the
    general  claim  and  relevant  factors  would  include   the   internal
    consistency of the claim, the inherent plausibility of  the  claim  and
    the consistency of the claim with external factors of the sort said  to
    be found in country  guidance.   I  accept  that  it  is  theoretically
    correct that the claimant need do no more than state his  claim  but  I
    further  consider  that  a  claim  still  needs  to  be  examined   for
    consistency and inherent plausibility and in nearly every case external
    information  against  which  the  claim  could  be  checked  would   be
    available.

15. I accept and agree with the submission made by Mr Chelvan that with the
    other  key  evidence  being  admitted  external  corroboration  is  not
    necessary and that the only gap would be to  be  found  within  country
    background evidence.  However, that is actually covered by Dr Giustozzi
    whose reports fill the lacuna  of  external  corroboration.   There  is
    internal consistency.  The test of credibility  is  met  and  there  is
    corroborative evidence which is not going to be challenged  by  way  of
    having the matter reheard.  In such circumstances I am  satisfied  that
    the Appellant meets the criteria of being a  refugee  and  the  correct
    approach is not to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for
    rehearing but for me to deal with this matter here and now in a  manner
    in which it is appropriate and proper for a Judge of the Upper Tribunal
    to do.  That I do and for all the above reasons I remake  the  decision
    allowing the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The decision is remade allowing the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 9th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 9th April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

