
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06698/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th October 2018                         |On 6th November 2018          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                ED (ALBANIA)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafar, Counsel instructed on a Direct Access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who remained in the UK without leave from 8 August  2016
    (having had only temporary  admission  as  an  air  passenger  who  was
    supposedly in transit to the USA) and who subsequently  claimed  asylum
    on 13 January 2017 - a claim which she subsequently abandoned - appeals
    from the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  her  appeal
    against the decision of the respondent to refuse to grant her leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life  established  in  the  UK  with  the
    partner whom she came to join and their two children. The  Judge  found
    that there were not insurmountable obstacles to family life between the
    appellant, her partner and the children being carried  on  in  Albania.
    Alternatively, he found that the appellant had the reasonable option of
    returning with the children to Albania for a relatively short period of
    time in order to make an application  for  entry  clearance  under  the
    Rules.

The Reasons for the Initial Refusal of Permission

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup on
    7 December 2017 for the following reasons:

         "The grounds assert the Judge erred in failing to accept  that  the
         appellant's case engaged the Chikwamba principle and failed to give
         due weight to the best interests of the children.

         However, it is clear from the reading  of  the  decision  that  the
         Judge  addressed  the  relevant  considerations.   Neither  of  the
         children is a qualifying child for  the  purpose  of  Appendix  FM,
         paragraph 276ADE,  or  s117B(6).   The  Judge  addressed  the  best
         interests of the children, finding that these  were  to  live  with
         their mother, but noted that the appellant's representative did not
         argue that there were insurmountable obstacles to continuing family
         life in Albania.  The Judge gave anxious consideration  as  to  the
         private life claims  of  each  child.   This  is  not  a  Chikwamba
         situation, as it is far from  clear  whether  she  would  meet  the
         requirements for  entry  clearance,  as  she  requires  an  English
         language qualification and in  which  application  her  immigration
         history may be relevant."

The Reasons for the Eventual Grant of Permission to Appeal

 3. On 15 May 2018 Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Plimmer  granted  permission  to
    appeal because arguably, "the First-tier Tribunal's reasons for finding
    at [58] that the case has not engaged the  Chikwamba  -v-  SSHD  [2008]
    UKHL 40 principle, given the findings at [53-55], are inadequate."

Relevant Background Facts

 4. The appellant is a national of Albania,  whose  date  of  birth  is  13
    February 1980.  She has two children, "A" born on  24  September  2008,
    and "B" born on 14 July 2011.  Both her children were born  in  Albania
    and they are Albanian nationals. Her partner, and the father of the two
    children, is "HL", a Serbian  national  who  has  indefinite  leave  to
    remain.

 5. The appellant served in the Albanian army from  2004  until  16  August
    2016.  On 29 June 2006 the appellant entered into an arranged  marriage
    with Arjan.  In her asylum claim, she said that on the first  night  of
    their marriage he raped her, and  thereafter  she  suffered  financial,
    physical  and  emotional  abuse  from  him  on  almost  a  daily  basis
    throughout the duration of their marriage.

 6. She first met  HL  on  a  visit  to  the  UK  in  August  2006.   Their
    relationship began at that point.  She returned to the  UK  in  October
    2007 to stay with him for 10 days while she was stationed  in  Germany.
    She subsequently came to the UK again from Germany in October 2010, and
    stayed with HL for 2 weeks.

 7. Arjan suspected that he was not the father of the children to whom  the
    appellant had given birth, but he did not  take  a  paternity  test  to
    verify his suspicions.

 8. The appellant separated from Arjan in August 2011,  and  their  divorce
    was finalised on 31 January 2012.  The appellant's parents  were  aware
    that HL was the biological father of  the  children,  but  HL  was  not
    mentioned in the  divorce  proceedings.   Nor  was  he  listed  as  the
    children's father on their birth certificates.

 9. After the divorce, the appellant said she  received  threats  by  phone
    from her ex-husband and that he also came  round  to  their  house  and
    visited the children's nurseries.  HL would also visit her  in  Albania
    from time to time, and on 14 July 2016 he proposed marriage to her.

10. She said that she had decided to leave Albania  for  good  in  February
    2016.  She obtained a visit visa for the USA for herself  and  her  two
    children, which was valid from June 2016.  She left her employment with
    the Army at the beginning of August 2016, and on 6 August 2016 she  and
    her children purportedly embarked on a journey to the  USA,  which  was
    going to involve transiting at Gatwick  Airport  for  24  hours.   Upon
    their arrival in the UK, she left the airport with her children to join
    HL.

11. On 4 July 2017  the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's protection and human rights claims.  It  was  not  accepted
    that she had suffered ill-treatment from her ex-husband.  The reasoning
    of the respondent included the fact that she had been  able  to  reside
    and work in Albania until her departure in August 2016;  she  had  been
    able to live on her own for the last six years  and  had  travelled  to
    Germany and to the UK on several occasions since 2006; and until August
    2016 she had remained in the same locality where  her  ex-husband  knew
    her location and also knew that she was in a relationship with HL.

12. On the issue of future risk, she had been  educated  up  to  university
    level; she had a good relationship with her parents;  she  could  speak
    Albanian, English and German; and she had relevant transferable  skills
    to support herself on return to Albania.  It was not considered  unduly
    harsh to expect her to relocate within  Albania  away  from  her  local
    area.  She failed to demonstrate that the authorities in Albania  would
    have been unable or unwilling to offer her protection if she had sought
    it.  She said that her ex-husband had connections with  the  police  in
    Albania, but she had not provided any details or evidence of this.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

13. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Harris, sitting in the  First-
    tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross on 11 August  2017.   Both  parties  were
    legally represented.  At the outset of the hearing, Mr Alim of  Counsel
    clarified that the appellant was  only  pursuing  an  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds under Article 8 ECHR.

14. The Judge received oral evidence from the appellant  and  HL.   In  her
    evidence, the appellant said that Arjan was always suspicious that  the
    children were not his.  After leaving him in 2011, she and the children
    lived in Tirana in a flat owned by her parents.  Arjan, who was renting
    accommodation in Tirana at the same  time,  used  to  make  threatening
    phone calls to her and also come to her home and intimidate her and the
    children.  He would also appear outside the children's schools.

15. The children had, in consequence,  had  difficult  childhoods.   A  had
    witnessed  Arjan  abusing  the  appellant,  and  Arjan  had  also  been
    physically and emotionally abusive towards A.  The appellant  described
    A as being traumatised and extremely afraid of Arjan.  For  many  years
    he would always  sleep  in  the  same  bed  as  her,  and  he  had  had
    behavioural problems at school in Albania.

16. The fact that HL had fathered the two children  was  confirmed  by  DNA
    test evidence.  HL had obtained indefinite leave to remain in the UK in
    2014 under the Legacy Scheme.  He had visited the appellant in  Albania
    in September 2015; December 2015; and July  2016.   Their  relationship
    between 2006 and 2014 had been on and off, but it  had  grown  stronger
    from 2015 onwards.  They had  become  engaged  on  14  July  2016.   At
    present, no date had been set for the marriage.

17. The children had begun  to  settle  well  into  the  country,  learning
    English, attending school and  making  friends.   The  children  became
    anxious when the appellant and HL talked about Albania.   She  believed
    that removing her two sons to Albania would  affect  them  emotionally,
    socially and behaviourally.

18. In his subsequent decision, Judge Harris noted that Mr Alim had made it
    clear in his submissions that he was not arguing that the circumstances
    of either of the children or HL engaged paragraph EX.1 of Appendix  FM.
    Neither child was a qualifying child, and there were not insurmountable
    obstacles to either the appellant or HL integrating into Albania.

19. On the issue of proportionality, he acknowledged at paragraph [41] that
    he had to treat as  a  primary  consideration  what  was  in  the  best
    interests of each of the  appellant's  sons.   At  paragraph  [52],  he
    referred to the guidance given by Clarke LJ at  paragraph  [35]  of  EV
    (Philippines) [2014] EWCA Civ 874.

20. At paragraph [43], he held that it was clearly in the best interests of
    both children to reside with their mother  and  father.   However,  the
    appellant had not argued that there were insurmountable  obstacles  for
    either herself or HL  in  relocating  to  Albania.   This  allowed  the
    children to have family life with their parents in Albania.  It was not
    the case that family life could only be pursued in the UK.

21. At paragraph [44], the Judge observed that the appellant relied more on
    the effect in private life terms that leaving the UK for Albania  would
    have on the children.  A was now 9 years old, and E  was  now  6  years
    old.  It was accepted that each of them had begun  to  develop  private
    lives separately from the family life they had with their parents.   It
    was also accepted that neither child should be blamed for a decision of
    their parents which resulted in them being overstayers.  However,  each
    child had only been in the country since August 2016.  The family would
    not face destitution in Albania.  The children were of  primary  school
    age, and already had experience of the Albanian education  system.   It
    was not asserted that the children would be at  real  risk  of  serious
    harm in Albania from Arjan or anyone else.  It was  accepted  that  the
    level  of  past  harassment  and  threatening  behaviour  from   Arjan,
    described by the appellant, would  be  distressing  for  the  children.
    But, even taking her account  at  its  highest,  neither  she  nor  the
    children had suffered actual physical  harm  at  his  hands  since  the
    appellant had left him in 2011.

22. The appellant claimed that there would be a  psychological  effect  for
    each child in returning to Albania.  But she was not a medical  expert.
    There was no medical evidence before him in  respect  of  either  child
    being  diagnosed  with  suffering  any  mental  health  or  behavioural
    problems, and there was no prognosis of mental  health  or  behavioural
    problems arising on relocation to Albania.

23. Accordingly, he concluded at paragraph [51] that the ex-husband was not
    such a threat to the wellbeing of the children to make it against their
    best interests to relocate to Albania with their parents.

24. He could accept that there  would  be  some  disruption,  socially  and
    emotionally, for each child leaving the UK for Albania, but it was  not
    established that the consequence of relocation would be so  severe  for
    either child that  return  to  Albania  would  be  against  their  best
    interests.

25. In any event, the respondent submitted - correctly in his view  -  that
    there was an alternative to permanent relocation to Albania  which  was
    open to the appellant and the children.  This was to return to  Albania
    for a relatively short period  of  time  in  order  to  make  an  entry
    clearance application under the Rules to join HL in this country.

26. Mr Alim's objection that the applications might be refused  on  account
    of the appellant having a poor immigration history was not a basis  for
    finding compelling circumstances in the current  appeal.  It  was  well
    established that there was a significant public interest in encouraging
    people who are illegally present in the UK  to  return  to  their  home
    countries in order to make appropriate applications under the Rules.

27. HL was employed in the building industry and his oral evidence was that
    he earned around �669 net per week.  This was indicative that he  would
    be able to sponsor his family's applications at the required  level  of
    income under the Rules  with  the  required  specified  evidence.   The
    appellant was a trained linguist  who  would  be  asked  to  provide  a
    relatively basic qualification  in  English  to  satisfy  the  language
    requirements of the Rules.  It would be open to  HL  to  accompany  the
    family to Albania for the period it took to make the applications.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

28. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Jafar developed the appellant's case on similar lines  to  that
    sketched out by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer when granting  permission.
    Mr Jafar submitted that the analysis of best  interests  had  not  been
    properly conducted.  The Judge had not considered best interests first.
     Instead, he had determined that it was in the best  interest  for  the
    children to be removed because there were no insurmountable  obstacles,
    and then he had gone on to consider whether their best  interests  were
    affected by matters that should have informed him where the  children's
    best interests lay in the first place.  The  Judge  had  put  the  cart
    before the horse.

29. The Judge's approach to  the  Chikwamba  line  of  authority  was  also
    flawed.  In Chikwamba -v- SSHD [2008] UKHL 40, Baroness Hale  had  held
    that, even if it would not be disproportionate to require  the  husband
    to endure some months of separation, it was unreasonable to expect  the
    child to do so.  The jurisprudence  of  the  European  Court  of  Human
    Rights made it clear that the separation of young children  from  their
    parents caused serious and irreversible harm.

30. In reply, Mr Tarlow adhered to  the  Rule  24  response  settled  by  a
    colleague.  There was no error of law in the Judge's line of  reasoning
    in paragraph [53]-[58] of his decision.  In Chen -v-  SSHD  IJR  [2015]
    UKUT 189, the Upper Tribunal held as follows: "There may  be  cases  in
    which there are  no  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  being
    enjoyed outside the UK but where a temporary separation  to  enable  an
    individual  to  make  an  application  for  entry  clearance   may   be
    disproportionate.  In all cases, it will be for the individual to place
    before the Secretary of State evidence that such  temporary  separation
    will interfere disproportionately with protected rights.  It  will  not
    be enough to rely solely upon the case  law  concerning  Chikwamba  -v-
    SSHD [2008] UKHL 40."

31. The Upper Tribunal also held in the same case that Lord Brown  was  not
    laying down a legal test in Chikwamba when he opined that  requiring  a
    claimant to make an application for entry clearance from  abroad  would
    only "comparatively  rarely"  be  proportionate  in  a  case  involving
    children.

Discussion

32. I will address the two grounds of appeal in the  order  in  which  they
    appear in the application for permission to the Upper Tribunal.

33. Ground 1 is that the Judge erred in  law  in  not  accepting  that  the
    appellant's case engaged "the principle" of Chikwamba.  What  is  meant
    by this is apparent from the passage in Hayat v SSHD [2011] UKUT  00444
    which is then cited, and which was also cited by the Judge at paragraph
    [57]:

         "The significance of Chikwamba is to make  it  plain  that,  in  an
         appeal where the only matter weighing on the respondent's  side  of
         an Article 8  proportionality  balance  is  the  public  policy  of
         requiring an application to be made  under  the  immigration  rules
         from abroad, that legitimate objective will usually  be  outweighed
         by factors resting on the appellant's side of the balance."

34. I consider that it was open to the Judge to  find  that  the  Chikwamba
    principle was not engaged as defined in Ground 1.  This is not  a  case
    where the only matter weighing on the respondent's side of an Article 8
    proportionality  balance  was  the  public  policy  of   requiring   an
    application to be made under the Immigration Rules from abroad.  On the
    contrary, there were clearly other factors in play which rested on  the
    respondent's  side  of  the  proportionality  balance.   Firstly,   the
    appellant had not shown that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to
    family  life  being  carried  on  in  Albania,  or  even  that  it  was
    unreasonable to expect  family  life  to  be  carried  on  in  Albania.
    Secondly, the appellant had not shown that she qualified for  leave  to
    remain on the alternative basis of the minimum income requirement being
    satisfied. Thirdly, the appellant had used deception to gain  entry  to
    the UK.

35. As Mr Jafar tacitly recognises by dealing with Ground 2  first  in  his
    skeleton argument, in order  to  establish  an  error  of  law  in  the
    application of Chikwamba, it is first necessary for  the  appellant  to
    establish that the Judge erred in law in finding that it was reasonable
    and proportionate for the entire family to relocate to Albania.

36. This is illuminated by a passage from the judgment of Elias LJ in Hayat
    [2012] EWCA Civ 1054 at paragraph [18], cited by Mr Jafar at  paragraph
    7 of his skeleton argument:

         "It may at first blush seem  odd  that  Article  8  rights  may  be
         infringed by an unjustified insistence that  the  applicant  should
         return home to make the application,  even  though  its  subsequent
         decision to refuse the application on the  merits  will  not.   The
         reason is that once there is interference with  family  or  private
         life, the decision maker must  justify  that  interference.   Where
         what is relied upon is  an  insistence  on  complying  with  formal
         procedures that may be insufficient to  justify  even  a  temporary
         disruption to family life.  By contrast, a  full  consideration  of
         the merits may readily identify features which justify a refusal to
         grant leave to remain." (my emphasis)

37. The Judge undertook a full consideration of the merits, and, subject to
    Ground 2 (see below),  he  adequately  identified  the  features  which
    justified the refusal to grant leave to remain.

38. Neither the Judge nor the respondent was insisting that  the  appellant
    should go back to Albania to apply  for  entry  clearance.   The  Judge
    merely found that, aside from  the  reasonable  option  of  the  entire
    family relocating to Albania, there was also the reasonable  option  of
    the appellant going back with  the  children  and  applying  for  entry
    clearance.

39. Moreover, this was not a case where the only public interest  that  was
    engaged was the narrow one of compliance with formal procedures.

40. Although the Judge characterised the appellant  as  an  overstayer,  he
    recorded at paragraph [19] an admission that the appellant had obtained
    USA visit visas and had bought flights to  the  USA  to  use  them  "as
    cover" for entering this country. It was not part  of  the  appellant's
    case that she genuinely intended to visit the USA  with  her  children,
    but changed her mind while being in transit  at  Gatwick  airport.  Her
    leaving the airport to join her  partner  was  part  of  a  pre-planned
    stratagem to  circumvent  the  rules.  It  was  precisely  because  the
    appellant was not a mere  overstayer  but  potentially  came  into  the
    category of an applicant who "has previously contrived in a significant
    way to frustrate the intentions of the Rules" - see Rule 320(11) - that
    Mr Alim expressed concern that an Entry Clearance Officer might  refuse
    an application for entry clearance from abroad on account of  her  poor
    immigration history.

41. In addition, although there was a reasonable prospect of HL being  able
    to produce the specified evidence  to  show  that  the  minimum  income
    requirement  was  met  through  his  self-employment  in  the  building
    industry, there was no evidence that he would be  able  to  demonstrate
    compliance with the financial  requirements  in  the  near  future,  as
    opposed to six or twelve months down the line.

42. For the above reasons, it was clearly open to the Judge  to  find  that
    the appellant's case did not  engage  the  principle  of  Chikwamba  as
    defined in the passage from Hayat cited in the permission  application.
    As the Judge said at paragraph [58], it  was  not  just  public  policy
    requiring an application to be made under the rules  from  abroad  that
    was an obstacle to the decision of the respondent  being  found  to  be
    disproportionate: "As I have indicated above, there are  other  factors
    that do not weigh in the appellant's favour."

43. Turning to Ground 2, I do not consider that there was an error  of  law
    in the Judge's approach.  As I explored with Mr Jafar in oral argument,
    I consider that his approach was entirely consonant with  the  guidance
    given by  the  Upper  Tribunal  in  Azimi-Moayed  &  Others  (decisions
    affecting children; onward appeals) [2013] UKUT 197 (IAC): as  well  as
    with the guidance given by the Court of Appeal in EV (Philippines).  In
    the former, the UT said:

         30.  It is not the case that the best interests principle means  it
             is automatically in the interests of any child to be permitted
             to remain in the United Kingdom, irrespective of  age,  length
             of stay, family background or other circumstances.   The  case
             law  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  identified  the  following
             principles to assist in the  determination  of  appeals  where
             children are affected by the decisions:

             (i)  As a starting point in the best interests of children  to
                  be with both their parents and if both parents  are  being
                  removed from the United Kingdom then  the  starting  point
                  suggests that so should dependent children who  form  part
                  of  their  household  unless  there  are  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.

             (ii) It is generally in the interests of children to have both
                  stability  and  continuity  of  social   and   educational
                  provision and the benefit of growing up  in  the  cultural
                  norms of the society to which they belong.

             (iii)    Lengthy residence in a country other than  the  state
                  of origin can lead to development of social, cultural  and
                  educational  ties  that  it  would  be  inappropriate   to
                  disrupt, in the  absence  of  compelling  reasons  to  the
                  contrary.  What amounts to lengthy residence is not  clear
                  cut but past and present policies  have  identified  seven
                  years as a relevant period.

             (iv) Apart from the terms of published policies and Rules, the
                  Tribunal notes that seven years from age 4 is likely to be
                  more significant to a child than the first seven years  of
                  life.  Very young children are focused  on  their  parents
                  rather than peers and are adaptable.

             (v)  Short periods of  residence,  particularly  ones  without
                  leave or the reasonable expectation of leave to  enter  or
                  remain, while claims are promptly considered, are unlikely
                  to give rise to private life deserving of respect  in  the
                  absence of exceptional factors.  In any event,  protection
                  of the  economic  wellbeing  of  society  amply  justifies
                  removal in such cases.

44. It is  apparent  from  the  above  guidance  that  the  Judge  did  not
    impermissibly put the cart before the  horse,  as  Mr  Jafar  puts  it.
    Consistent with the first principle in Azimi-Moayed, the Judge directed
    himself that it was clearly in the best  interests  of  both  dependent
    children to reside with their parents.  Although only  one  parent  was
    facing  removal,  a  crucial  consideration  was  whether  there   were
    insurmountable obstacles, as defined in EX.2, to the family unit  being
    reconstituted in Albania, to which the answer was no.

45. The Judge went on to consider all the remaining relevant best  interest
    considerations before  arriving  at  the  sustainable  conclusion  that
    returning  to  Albania  would  not  be  against  the  children's   best
    interests.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 18 October 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

