
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/06854/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2018                           |On 8 February 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     JFK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Lay, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:    Mr. I. Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Frazer, promulgated  on  7  March  2017,  in  which  she
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse a grant of asylum.


  2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


    "It is arguable that the Judge  did  not  have  proper  regard  to  the
    evidence of Ms Flint's report,  including  the  failure  to  apply  the
    trafficking definition where the reality of the  Appellant's  "consent"
    was challenged.  She also arguably erred in characterising  Ms  Flint's
    view that the Appellant was intended for  exploitation  in  the  UK  as
    "speculative".  Ms  Flint  arguably  gave  reasons  as  to  his  likely
    exploitation."


 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


 5. Mr. Lay relied on the grounds of appeal.  He submitted that  the  Judge
    had not applied the law on the definition of trafficking  correctly  to
    the facts in the  Appellant's  appeal.   She  had  not  considered  the
    sufficiently nuanced definition of trafficking when  an  individual  is
    smuggled.  The definition of "trafficking"  in  the  decision  was  too
    narrow.  There were differences in the approach taken by the expert and
    the Judge due to  the  definition  applied.   The  Judge  accepted  the
    Appellant's account of his  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom.   Having
    accepted that, she should have made a finding that  the  Appellant  had
    been trafficked.  Following her finding that the Appellant had not been
    trafficked, the Judge erred in finding that he was not at risk  of  re-
    trafficking on return to China.


 6. I was referred to Ms Flint's report, [130] onwards.  The law is not  in
    dispute - the Respondent shares the  same  definition  of  trafficking.
    There was no engagement by the Judge with this undisputed definition of
    trafficking.   She  had  not  engaged  with  the  main  thrust  of  the
    Appellant's case which was that he had been trafficked  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  Her finding  that  he  was  not  at  risk  of  re-trafficking
    depended on her finding that he had not been trafficked to  the  United
    Kingdom, and was therefore wrong.


 7. The Judicial Review  of  the  Reasonable  Grounds  decision  was  still
    stayed.  However the Judge was entitled to come to a different decision
    to that of the  competent  authority.   The  Judge's  treatment  of  Ms
    Flint's report was inadequate.  She considered the case of a  voluntary
    economic migrant for whom something went wrong thereafter.   The  Judge
    had accepted the account  of  the  journey,  which  included  the  harm
    suffered by the Appellant.  He had  been  pushed  over  the  line  from
    someone who had been smuggled to a  victim  of  trafficking  along  the
    journey.  He was still in debt bondage now.  There was a risk of  being
    re-trafficked on return to China either from the same  people  who  had
    trafficked him here, or because he was vulnerable.  The  expert  report
    had considered this.  The caselaw and principles of asylum law  pointed
    to previous trafficking leading to an increased risk on return.


  8. In response Mr. Richards submitted that the Judge  had  regard  to  the
     report of Ms Flint.  I was referred to [50].  It was a matter  for  the
     Judge how much weight to attach to the  report.   She  found  that  the
     Appellant was an economic migrant.  He had come for employment and  was
     able to return to China at any time.  He had not been trafficked.  Even
     if it was possible to fit the facts to the definition  of  trafficking,
     there was no material error of law as the Judge had considered at  [53]
     the risk of the Appellant being  re-trafficked.   She  found  that  the
     Appellant had not been pursued by the snakeheads in the United Kingdom.
      The terms of payment could be renegotiated as they  had  been  before.
     The Appellant's sister had come to no harm as a  result  of  the  debt.
     There was no evidence of threats to the Appellant's family.  Whether or
     not the Judge had found that he  had  been  trafficked  to  the  United
     Kingdom, the crucial issue was whether he would be at risk on return.


  9. The Judge had conducted a thorough analysis and had come to a  properly
     reasoned conclusion that the Appellant would not be at risk on  return.
     He had no well-founded fear of persecution.  The findings were open  to
     the Judge and the decision  was  adequately  reasoned.   There  was  no
     material error of law.


 10. In response, Mr. Lay referred me to  [50]  of  the  decision  which  he
     submitted formed the basis of the error of law.  The work undertaken in
     Weymouth was not the point in  relation  to  being  trafficked  to  the
     United Kingdom.  I was referred to [175] of  the  expert  report.   The
     expert had addressed the issue  of  the  snakeheads  not  pursuing  the
     Appellant in the United Kingdom and  had  noted  that  the  Appellant's
     sister was now living in Canada.  The Judge had found there was no risk
     to the Appellant because he had not been trafficked in the first place.
      He referred me footnote  3  of  the  grounds  for  the  definition  of
     trafficking.


Error of law


11. The Judge found that the Appellant  had  not  been  trafficked  to  the
    United Kingdom.  Ground 1 asserts that she erred in law in so  finding,
    and gives reasons with reference  to  the  definition  of  trafficking.
    Ground 2 alleges that there was a failure to give reasons for rejecting
    the expert views of Ms Flint.  These two grounds are bound up together,
    and Ground 3 follows on from them, given that it relates to the  future
    risk to the Appellant both on account of the  fact  that  he  has  been
    previously trafficked, and also due to the failure to take into account
    the expert's opinion on  this.   I  will  consider  all  three  grounds
    together, given how closely they are linked.


12. The Judge accepts the Appellant's account of his journey to the  United
    Kingdom.  At [42] she states:


    "I find that his account of his journey is credible.  It is a  detailed
    account which is internally consistent."


13. In her report, from [130] to [188], Ms  Flint  considers  "whether  J's
    experiences  would   fall   within   the   Convention   definition   of
    trafficking".  At [132] she states:
    "In sum, based on my knowledge and experience together with my analysis
    of J's case, I am drawn to the conclusion that it is more  likely  than
    not J was a victim of trafficking from China to the UK for the purposes
    of financial exploitation".


14. From [134] to [139] she considers his journey to  the  United  Kingdom.
    She gives detailed reasons setting out the "acts, means and purpose  of
    trafficking to the UK".  She goes through his journey  in  detail  with
    reference to his statement.  This account was accepted  by  the  Judge.
    At [165] to [167] she specifically addresses whether the fact  that  he
    chose to travel excluded him from  falling  within  the  definition  of
    trafficking.  She refers to Article 4(b) of the trafficking Convention.
     She concludes that his consent to travel was "irrelevant".


15. The expertise and experience of Ms  Flint  is  not  questioned  by  the
    Judge, and she does not give limited weight to the report  because  she
    finds that Ms Flint does not have  the  expertise  to  produce  such  a
    report.  Her reasons for attaching little  weight  to  the  report  are
    first by reference to [105] of the report, which covers the Appellant's
    work in Weymouth.  However,  even  had  he  been  working  of  his  own
    volition in Weymouth, this does not have any bearing on his journey  to
    the United Kingdom.


16. Secondly she states that she found "a number of the  expert's  opinions
    to be speculative in nature".  She gives examples of [141]  and  [146].
    I have carefully considered these paragraphs.  Ms Flint's opinion  that
    he was intended for exploitation at [141] is  with  reference  to  "his
    history  of  deception,  coercion,   threats,   force   and   financial
    exploitation en route  to  the  UK"  which  she  has  detailed  in  the
    preceding paragraphs, with reference to his statement which forms  part
    of the evidence accepted by the Judge.  It  cannot  be  said  that  her
    opinion is speculative given her  detailed  analysis  and  the  reasons
    which precede it.  The same is true  in  relation  to  her  opinion  in
    [146].  She has given reasons for this in [145].


17. I find that the Judge has  given  insufficient  reasons  for  attaching
    limited weight to the report of Ms Flint, and her classification of her
    opinions as speculative is wrong.   She  has  not  doubted  Ms  Flint's
    ability and expertise to produce such a  report.   Her  statement  that
    some of Ms Flint's opinions are speculative in  nature  indicates  that
    she has not properly considered the report, or the reasons given by the
    expert for her opinions.  Further, she has not given any full or proper
    consideration to the expert's reasons for concluding that the Appellant
    was trafficked to the United Kingdom as set  out  at  [134]  to  [139],
    despite stating that she has had regard to the report "insofar  as  she
    deals with the issue  of  trafficking".   She  has  not  dealt  in  her
    decision with that part of the report which deals with  trafficking  to
    the United Kingdom.


18. The only other reference to Ms Flint's report is at [53] when again she
    states that her "contention that he may be perceived as having betrayed
    his traffickers is highly speculative".  This is addressed by Ms  Flint
    at [224], and again she gives reasons for why she considers this to  be
    the case.


19. I find that the Judge has erred in her failure to have proper regard to
    the report of Ms Flint, having erred in her assessment  of  Ms  Flint's
    opinions as "speculative", and having failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for attaching limited weight to the report.  There is  nothing  in  the
    decision to suggest  that  she  has  given  any  consideration  to  the
    expert's analysis and assessment of  the  Appellant's  journey  to  the
    United Kingdom.


20. This links in with both Grounds  1  and  3,  insofar  as  the  expert's
    opinion  is  important  to  both  whether  or  not  the  Appellant  was
    trafficked, and whether he will be at risk on return.


21. At [48] the Judge considers the fact that the  Appellant  consented  to
    enter into the debt of 230,000 prior to taking the trip to  the  United
    Kingdom.   Reference  is  made  to   the   Convention   definition   of
    trafficking.  Apparent consent is irrelevant where means  of  deception
    or fraud are used.  The grounds set out how the Appellant was  deceived
    as to the route of travel, the amount of money he would have to  repay,
    the time he would have to repay it, and the conditions and remuneration
    he could expect from employment in the United  Kingdom.   This  is  all
    addressed in Ms Flint's report [134] to [139].  Not only does the Judge
    make no reference to Ms Flint's report, but she also makes no reference
    to the definition which means that his  consent  would  be  irrelevant,
    given that she has accepted the Appellant's account of his journey.


22. At paragraph 9(ii) of the grounds it is submitted that the Judge failed
    also to engage with the  evidence  of  the  other  means  used  by  the
    traffickers relating to  the  Appellant's  position  of  vulnerability,
    abduction, threats of  serious  harm  and  coercion.   These  are  also
    addressed by Ms Flint, [134] to [139].   The Judge has not referred  to
    these aspects of the Appellant's situation.


23. The final limb of Ground 1 relates to the finding that  the  definition
    of "exploitation" does not include debt bondage.  Reference is made  to
    Article 4(a) of the Convention, and how working under a debt bond is  a
    "slavery-like practice".  There is  no  reference  to  the  Appellant's
    being under debt bondage being part of the definition of  exploitation.




24. I find that the Judge has erred in failing  properly  to  consider  the
    definition  of  trafficking   and   apply   it   to   the   Appellant's
    circumstances, namely his journey to the United Kingdom.  I find  that,
    had she given  proper  regard  to  the  expert  report,  she  may  have
    considered more fully whether or not the Appellant met this definition.


25. In relation to Ground 3, the finding that the Appellant would not be at
    risk on return is directly affected by the  finding  that  he  was  not
    trafficked to the United Kingdom in the first place.  The Judge  failed
    to engage with the expert report which addressed  this.   Further,  she
    accepted that he would be in debt to the loan sharks on his  return  to
    China.  However, she did not consider how this might affect his risk on
    return  of  being  re-trafficked.   Neither  has  she  considered   his
    vulnerability,  a  factor  which  she  also  did  not   consider   when
    considering whether he was trafficked initially.


26. I find that the decision involves the making of material errors of  law
    in the failure properly to consider the expert report, and the  failure
    properly to apply the  undisputed  definition  of  trafficking  to  the
    accepted facts in the Appellant's case.  I set the decision aside.





Remaking

27. The account of the  Appellant's  journey  to  the  United  Kingdom  was
    accepted by the First-tier Tribunal [40] to [42] of  the  decision.   I
    adopt those findings here.


28. I have taken into account the report of Ms Flint.  As stated above,  no
    objection was taken in the First-tier Tribunal  to  her  expertise  and
    experience, or to her  ability  to  produce  such  a  report.   I  have
    considered her experience and expertise as set out at pages 36 to 38 of
    the Appellant's bundle.  I find that I can rely on  her  expertise.   I
    find that the report itself is  detailed  and  thorough.   The  factual
    basis on which the report was written is the same as  was  accepted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal, and I have adopted  those  findings  here.   I
    find that I can rely on Ms Flint's report.


29. I have carefully considered the definition of trafficking as set out in
    the Convention and as accepted by the Respondent.  I have set out above
    in the decision relating to the error of law how the Judge in the First-
    tier Tribunal was wrong  not  to  take  into  account  aspects  of  the
    Appellant's situation which are relevant  to  a  finding  that  he  was
    trafficked.  I do not intend to repeat those here, but in remaking  the
    decision I have taken account of my findings above in the error of  law
    decision.


30. I have considered specifically whether  the  Appellant  was  trafficked
    from China to the United  Kingdom.   I  have  carefully  considered  Ms
    Flint's report, in particular from [134] to [139], but also the section
    where she deals with the "General NRM  indicators  of  modern  slavery"
    [24] to [125].


31. The definition of trafficking from  Article  4(a)  of  the  Council  of
    Europe Convention on Action against Trafficking in Human Beings  is  as
    follows:


    "Trafficking   in   human   beings"   shall   mean   the   recruitment,
    transportation, transfer, harbouring or receipt of persons, by means of
    the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, of abduction, of
    fraud, of deception, of  the  abuse  of  power  or  of  a  position  of
    vulnerability or of the giving or receiving of payments or benefits  to
    achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for
    the purpose of exploitation. Exploitation shall include, at a  minimum,
    the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual
    exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or  practices  similar
    to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs."


32. This is the definition used in the decision of the Competent Authority,
    and also in Ms Flint's report.  I have also taken into account  Article
    4(b) in relation to the issue of the Appellant's consent to come to the
    United Kingdom.


    "The consent of a victim  of  "trafficking  in  human  beings"  to  the
    intended exploitation set forth in subparagraph  (a)  of  this  article
    shall be irrelevant where any of the means set  forth  in  subparagraph
    (a) have been used."


33. I find, in reliance on the report of Ms Flint, taking into account  the
    Appellant's journey to the United Kingdom, and his  vulnerabilities  as
    set out in her report, that the Appellant was trafficked to the  United
    Kingdom.  In particular, considering the definition, I find that he was
    transported, transferred, and harboured by means of the threat  or  use
    of force, fraud, deception and the abuse of power, that  he  was  in  a
    position of vulnerability, and that  as  a  result  he  was  under  the
    control of another for the purpose of exploitation.  I  find  the  fact
    that he consented to come to the United Kingdom is not relevant.


34. I have considered the Appellant's risk on return to China.  In doing so
    I have considered the expert report of Ms Flint, in particular [222] to
    [236].  I have found  above  that  he  was  trafficked  to  the  United
    Kingdom.  I have taken into account the case of HD  (Trafficked  women)
    Nigeria (CG) [2016] UKUT 454, in relation to the risk to the  Appellant
    arising from the fact that he has already been trafficked.


35. Answering the question "Is there a risk J may come under the control of
    traffickers again if returned to China" Ms Flint states at [223]:


    "In sum, yes, I think it more likely that not that J would  come  under
    the control of his traffickers again if returned to  China  because  of
    his history of being trafficked especially by  what  appears  to  be  a
    large, sophisticated, organized  crime  network/s  of  snakeheads  with
    connections to triads and the authorities  in  a  number  of  different
    countries so their reach, capacity and resources could be considerable.
     I think it is more likely than not that he would be  targeted  by  his
    previous traffickers because he is now marked as vulnerable by dint  of
    being a prior victim of trafficking with debts.  He could  be  seen  as
    someone who is easy to exploit as has been  proven  by  the  snakeheads
    tracing him in China Town for extortion."


36. At [228] addressing "whether J would be at risk  of  re-trafficking  on
    return to China" she states:


    "[....] it is my professional opinion that it is more likely  than  not
    that J would come under the control of traffickers again if returned to
    China and if so he is at risk of re-trafficking."


37. At [229] she states:


    "Even if J did not come under the control of his  previous  traffickers
    and/or their associates he would also be vulnerable to being trafficked
    by others because his history of trafficking makes  him  vulnerable  to
    further exploitation and because he has  a  number  of  push  and  pull
    factors  that  make  him  susceptible  to  suggestion  and/  or  easily
    influenced  by  others.   For  example,  if  J  were  offered   another
    opportunity on return to China to improve the quality of his life or to
    pay off his debts to the loan sharks I think it highly likely  that  he
    may accept such an offer despite his history of  being  deceived.   His
    push factors include: a history  of  distrust  of  the  authorities;  a
    history of harm and ill-treatment at the hands of the authorities and a
    lack of protection from the authorities; a history of trauma, debt  and
    fear for his own life at the  hands  of  his  previous  traffickers;  a
    history of exploitation."


38. Ms Flint at [230] to  [235]  quotes  from  the  Global  Slavery  Index,
    Country Study - China, and the 2016 US State Department  TIP  Report  -
    China.  The USSD Report is provided in the supplementary bundle  (pages
    110- 121).  She states at [236]:


    "Given the above shortfalls in protection and the 2016 TIP Report  tier
    rating given to China this year, this points to some  serious  failings
    on the part of the Chinese government in terms of protecting victims of
    trafficking.   These  failings  place  J  at  heightened  risk  of  re-
    trafficking in my opinion because he cannot rely on the authorities  to
    protect him."


39. I have  also  considered  the  country  guidance  case  of  HC  and  RC
    (Trafficked women) China CG [2009] UKAIT 00027.   This  states  in  the
    headnote:


    "(1) Although the Chinese authorities  are  intent  upon  rescuing  and
    rehabilitating  women  and  girls  trafficked  for  the   purposes   of
    prostitution, there are deficiencies in the measures they have taken to
    combat the problem of trafficking. The principal deficiencies  are  the
    lack of a determined effort to deal with the complicity of corrupt  law
    enforcement officers and state officials and the failure to penalise as
    trafficking acts of forced labour, debt bondage, coercion,  involuntary
    servitude or offences committed against male victims."


40. I find that there would not be a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    Appellant given the deficiencies on the  part  of  the  authorities  in
    dealing with the problem of trafficking.  I find, given the risk of re-
    trafficking, that  the  Appellant  would  not  be  able  to  internally
    relocate.  He is vulnerable to re-trafficking and exploitation for  the
    reasons set out above including, significantly,  that  he  is  in  debt
    bondage.  For all the reasons set out above, and placing weight on  the
    detailed and thorough report of Ms Flint, I find that the Appellant  is
    at risk on return to China of being re-trafficked, either by those  who
    have already trafficked him, or from others.


41. Considering all the above, I find that the Appellant  has  demonstrated
    that there is a real risk that he will suffer persecution on return  to
    China, and so his claim succeeds on asylum grounds.  As I have  allowed
    his claim on asylum grounds, I do not need to  consider  his  claim  to
    humanitarian protection.  Following  my  finding  in  relation  to  his
    asylum claim, I find that  he  would  also  be  at  risk  of  treatment
    contrary to Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR such  as  to  put  the  United
    Kingdom in breach of its obligations.  The  appeal  is  therefore  also
    allowed on human rights grounds.

Decision


 42. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law, and I set the decision aside.


 43. I remake the decision allowing the Appellant's appeal on asylum grounds
     and human rights grounds, Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 5 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
