
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06433/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12th January 2018                          |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [s k]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Charlton (LR)
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC, promulgated on 21st August 2017, following a  hearing
    at Hatton Cross on 3rd August 2017.  In the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a female, born on [ ] 1985, and claims to be a citizen
    of Afghanistan.  She appealed against the decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 21st June 2017, refusing her  application  for
    asylum and the grant of humanitarian protection under paragraph 339C of
    HC 395.

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim is that she is an  Afghan  Sikh  who
    fears mistreatment in Afghanistan on account of her religion.  Some six
    years ago, her father was shot and killed while he  was  working  at  a
    shop in Kabul.  The Appellant after the  murder,  reported  it  to  the
    police but no action was taken, and  she  then  went  and  lived  in  a
    gurdwara (a Sikh temple), and she was not allowed as  single  woman  to
    live in the city of Kabul.  The gurdwara committee  members  eventually
    arranged for her to leave Afghanistan.  An attempt was  first  made  to
    have her leave through India, as an  Indian  national  with  an  Indian
    passport, when that failed, she returned back to Afghanistan, and  then
    made her way out again to the west,  arriving  in  the  UK,  where  she
    married another Afghan national, a Sikh by the name of  [NS],  who  has
    indefinite leave to remain, and they have two children,  both  of  whom
    are British citizens.  Their current ages of the eldest is going to  be
    3 years of age in April 2018, and the youngest, a son, will be  1  year
    of age in April 2018.  The Appellant fears that if she were  to  return
    to Afghanistan she will be harmed on account  of  her  religion,  as  a
    Sikh.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge began the determination by observing that, "the Appellant was
    gloriously vague and claimed not to know much, if anything, about those
    travels" (paragraph 3) when asked how she travelled with an agent, some
    three and a half years ago, through an unknown country,  before  coming
    to  the  UK,  given  that  the  travel  took  some  four  months.   The
    Appellant's account,  during  these  travels  was  that  she  sometimes
    travelled  in  a  lorry,  sometimes  by  foot,  and  sometimes  by  air
    (paragraph 11).  The judge was not  impressed  by  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant claimed not to know anything about the country to  which  she
    went for four months before returning to Kabul.  The judge stated that,
    "I find as a fact that  she  was  in  India,  where,  being  a  Punjabi
    speaker, she would have been able  to  communicate  easily  with  those
    around her ..." (paragraph 21(iv).  The judge was  also  secondly,  not
    impressed by the fact that the Appellant had an  Indian  passport  when
    she made her visa application in 2012, after her fingerprints had  been
    taken, because this appeared to suggest that she was an Indian citizen,
    and not a citizen of Afghanistan, as she had maintained all along.   In
    conclusion, the judge held that the Appellant could  return  to  India,
    with her children, and with her husband.  In  ending,  the  judge  held
    that, "so far as the children are concerned,  they  will  enjoy  Indian
    citizenship and will be free to  reside  in  that  country  with  their
    mother" (paragraph 26).

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge failed to give  reasons
    for why he disbelieved the Appellant's narrative.   The  reasons  given
    for rejecting the  narrative  were  not  properly  explained.   He  had
    accepted the evidence of  the  Respondent  without  hesitation  despite
    evidence to the contrary from the Appellant.   The  conclusion  by  the
    judge that the Appellant "is somebody of guile" was unsustainable, when
    that expression was used to criticise the Appellant for  her  statement
    that she had an Indian passport which was given to her  by  her  agent.
    The grounds state that the judge failed to  engage  with  the  cultural
    aspect of the appeal, with respect to a  lone  Afghan  woman,  who  had
    always lived in a Sikh  gurdwara  in  Kabul,  and  was  dependent  upon
    others.

 6. On 13th November 2017, permission to appeal was given by the First-tier
    Tribunal on the basis only that the judge failed to make findings as to
    what was in the best interests of  the  children  and  failed  also  to
    properly deal with the Article 8 ECHR aspect of  the  case,  which  had
    been specifically argued in the grounds of application.

 7. A Rule 24 response dated 8th December 2017 is to the  effect  that  the
    judge had directed himself appropriately  and  good  reasons  had  been
    given.  The judge had noted  that  no  case  was  put  forward  by  the
    Appellant under Article 8 before the Tribunal.  The  Appellant  was  at
    liberty to present their case differently to that put  forward  in  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The determination shows  that  Article  8  was  not
    pursued before the judge (see the determination at paragraphs 24 to 28)
    and an error cannot therefore be established on the part of the  judge.
    Secondly, even if there was an error to deal with the issue of  Section
    55 and/or Article 8 outside of the Rules, it was submitted  that  given
    that there was no evidence before  the  judge  to  suggest  a  remotely
    arguable case under Article 8, there was no materiality to the error.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 12th January 2018, Mrs Charlton,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant relied upon her grounds of application.

 9. First, she submitted that the Appellant had never denied that  she  had
    been given a fraudulent Indian passport by her agent so that she  could
    leave Afghanistan and go to India and from there come to  the  UK.   It
    was wrong to describe this as the actions of "somebody of guile".   The
    fact, however, was that the Appellant was stopped then  by  the  Indian
    authorities from leaving the country on the basis of a UK endorsed visa
    in her passport, because  the  passport  was  deemed  to  have  been  a
    forgery.  The EURODAC fingerprints were not produced.   The  judge  was
    wrong, on the basis of this narrative,  to  simply  conclude  that  the
    Appellant was an Indian, when all along she had maintained that she was
    not an Indian, and it had been recorded at the outset (at paragraph  1)
    by the judge, that the Appellant  spoke  Punjabi,  Dari  and  Kabli,  a
    distinct dialect spoken in Kabul itself only by  Sikh  Kabul  dwellers.
    Mrs Charlton submitted that Sikhs in India will not be  speaking  Kabli
    or Dari.

10. Second, the Appellant's husband gave evidence at the  hearing,  and  he
    made it quite clear that he himself was also an Afghan Sikh, and  would
    not ever consider marrying a woman who was not  also  an  Afghan  Sikh,
    because of the cultural differences  that  exist  between  people  from
    different countries.  They had, after all, married  quickly  after  the
    Appellant's arrival to the United Kingdom,  because  of  their  similar
    background.  None of this features in the determination at all.

11. Third, Article 8 was set out in the original grounds.   The  judge  was
    wrong now to say that, "I record that no argument was  advanced  before
    me based upon Article 8 ECHR ..." (paragraph 28).

12.  Fourth,  the  approach  of  the  judge  was  further  tainted  by  the
    observation, in relation to children who held  a  British  citizenship,
    that, "they will enjoy Indian citizenship and will be free to reside in
    that country with their mother" (paragraph 26).  There is absolutely no
    analysis here, submitted Mrs Charlton, of the "best interests"  of  the
    children, but for  the  glib  assertion  that  they  can  enjoy  Indian
    citizenship, when  all  along,  it  is  plain  that  they  are  British
    citizens.

13. For his part, Mr Bramble submitted that he will simply  rely  upon  the
    Rule 24 response.

14. In reply, Mrs Charlton submitted that the  appeal  should  be  remitted
    back de novo to the First-tier Tribunal, to be determined  by  a  judge
    other than Judge Jones QC because there was no proper analysis  of  the
    best interests of  the  children  and  the  Article  8  issue  was  not
    considered, when  it  plainly  ought  to  have  been,  given  that  the
    Appellant was married to a person who had indefinite leave to remain in
    the United Kingdom, and was settled in this country.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that  I  should  set  aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision.  My reasons are as follows.

16. First, there is the question of the Appellant's citizenship.   She  had
    consistently maintained  that  she  was  an  Afghan  national  who  had
    procured a false Indian passport through her agent.  The Appellant,  in
    confirming possession of her Indian passport, was not responding to the
    EURODAC print match, which had only been produced on  the  day  of  the
    hearing,  but  had  already  declared   the   position   before   them.
    Furthermore, in relation  to  her  citizenship,  the  evidence  of  her
    husband, at the hearing that he was an Afghan national who  would  only
    have married an Afghan Sikh woman, was not  even  referred  to  by  the
    judge.

17. Second, the judge does not address the  position  of  the  two  British
    citizen children on the basis of their "best interests"  under  Section
    55 of the BCIA 2009.  Nor is this clearer in the statement  that  "they
    will enjoy Indian citizenship and  will  be  free  to  reside  in  that
    country with their  mother"  (paragraph  26),  which  is  difficult  to
    understand if they already hold British citizenship.

18. Third, Article 8 ECHR was asserted in the Grounds  of  Appeal.   It  is
    stated there that the Appellant's removal will be contrary to Article 8
    ECHR because

         "The Appellant is in a relationship and has undergone  a  religious
         wedding with an individual person and settled in the UK.   Further,
         the couple have two children together, both British citizens, whose
         best interests will be served by remaining in the UK  as  a  family
         unit" (paragraph 7 of the grounds).

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside  the  decision  of  the
original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This appeal  is  allowed
to the extent that it is remitted back to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
determined by a judge other than  Judge  Geraint  Jones  QC  under  Practice
Statement 7.2(a).  This appeal is allowed to that extent.

This appeal is allowed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 26th February 2018
