
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/06197/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Manchester                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 7th June 2017                          | On 28th June 2017               |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     HMO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Wilkins, Greater Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born in 1994. He has permission[1]
    to appeal against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge James)
    to dismiss his appeal on  human  rights  and  protection  grounds.  The
    determination was promulgated on the 8th December 2016.




    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection.  Having had regard to Rule
    14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  and  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders  I  therefore
    consider it appropriate to make an order in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him nor  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    The Facts


 3. In her letter dated the 2nd June 2016 the Respondent accepted that  the
    Appellant is a national of Iraq, that he is of  Kurdish  ethnicity  and
    that he is from a village near Mosul. Having heard the oral evidence of
    the Appellant the First-tier Tribunal made positive  findings  of  fact
    about the following matters:


               . The Appellant fled Mosul with a friend in order to avoid  a
                 forced conscription drive by Daesh


               . They made their way on foot through  the  countryside,  and
                 assisted by a family friend named Majid,  took  a  taxi  to
                 Erbil

               . As they attempted to enter the IKR the men were stopped  at
                 a checkpoint.  The Appellant and his friend  were  arrested
                 upon suspicion of being Daesh infiltrators

               . They were released after four days

               . The Appellant subsequently found  that  Majid  had  paid  a
                 large bribe to secure his release, and had  agreed  to  the
                 condition that the Appellant would leave the country

               . Majid subsequently arranged their passage to Turkey




 4. Having made these findings the First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that  the
    Appellant was at risk in his home area of Mosul.   It did  not  however
    find there to be any subsisting risk to him in the  IKR.  Referring  to
    the extant country guidance of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT
    544 (IAC) the Tribunal found as follows:


         "I have considered whether he has a genuine fear of return  to  the
         IKR. The Appellant submits that he would be killed or mistreated by
         the authorities in the IKR  if  he  was  returning  there  but  his
         submission is based purely upon his detention while  escaping  from
         Daesh. I have explained why I find that his detention would  be  an
         entirely  reasonable  response  to   being   apprehended   by   IKR
         authorities. However I am not satisfied that his previous detention
         would give rise to an expectation of further detention should he be
         returned to the IKR. I have noted that the Appellant has  submitted
         that there is objective evidence of numerous people  fleeing  Mosul
         and entering the IKR. Accordingly the  IKR  authorities  will  have
         encountered many people with similar  narratives  to  that  of  the
         Appellant. I have considered this matter further in  light  of  the
         guidance in AA.


         I have noted section E of the head note to AA. The Appellant  is  a
         Kurd. He speaks the language and has been  a  farm  worker  in  the
         Kurdish region of  Iraq.  I  accept  the  submission  that  he  has
         transferrable skills that would enable him to obtain employment  in
         the IKR. He has held an ID card or taskara which remains  with  his
         father. I accept that the Appellant has had not recent contact with
         his family. I have noted the Country Information and Guidance dated
         December 2014 which has been set out in some detail in Annex A  and
         conclude that having held a taskara he would be able  to  obtain  a
         new or re-issued one on return to Iraq or through  the  embassy  in
         London.


         For the above reasons I conclude that the appellant would not be  a
         person of interest to the IKR authorities on  return....  it  would
         not be unduly harsh or unreasonable to expect him  to  relocate  in
         the IKR"


    The appeal was thereby dismissed.




    The Appeal


 5. Ms Wilkins submits that the First-tier Tribunal erred in  its  approach
    to whether it would be safe or reasonable for the Appellant  to  return
    to the IKR.  She makes four points:


              i) The Judge made no  findings  as  to  whether  it  would  be
                 possible for the Appellant to get from  Baghdad  (where  he
                 would be returned) to Erbil. The evidence had been that the
                 Appellant would have no funds to get from A to B.


             ii) In its assessment of internal flight the Tribunal failed to
                 have regard to one  of  the  three  factors  identified  as
                 relevant in AA, namely the availability of assistance  from
                 family and friends in the IKR. The evidence had  been  that
                 the Appellant knew no-one in the region.

            iii) In finding that he would be able to obtain  a  new  taskara
                 the Tribunal failed to take into account  its  own  finding
                 that his home area was  under  Daesh  control.  In  AA  the
                 Tribunal had held that an individual's ability to obtain  a
                 new identity document would be "severely hampered" if  they
                 were from a contested area.

             iv) The Tribunal does  not  appear  to  have  factored  in  the
                 accepted evidence that the Appellant had been released upon
                 condition that he leave the country and does not return  to
                 the IKR.




    The Response


 6. For the Secretary of State for the Home Department Mr  Harrison  agreed
    that in reaching its  findings  on  internal  flight  to  the  IKR  the
    Tribunal had not expressly referred to the evidence that the  Appellant
    had been  released  upon  condition  that  he  should  not  return.  He
    submitted however that it was implicit from the facts as found that the
    Judge had had regard to that matter. If I found there to be an error of
    law as alleged by the Appellant the Respondent invited  me  to  re-make
    the decision having regard to the country guidance and  to  the  up  to
    date country background material.




    Discussion and Findings


 7. I am not satisfied that there is any merit in ground (i). The Appellant
    would upon removal be eligible for an IOM resettlement grant that would
    enable him to pay for passage, by way of internal flight, from  Baghdad
    to Erbil. There was no evidence  before  me  that  he  would  face  any
    administrative difficulties getting on such a flight.  Although  he  is
    not in possession of a CSID he would have an emergency travel document.
    In the absence of any evidence to the  contrary  I  find  that  such  a
    document would serve as identity papers sufficient to board an internal
    flight.  Although the First-tier Tribunal did not make express findings
    on this issue I do not find that to be a material omission.


 8. I find  that  grounds  (ii)-(iv)  are  made  out.    Having  found  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness, and his account  to  be  true,  the
    Tribunal does appear to have omitted to factor into its risk assessment
    the fact that he had been detained by Kurdish  security  personnel  and
    only released upon condition that he does not return to the IKR.   That
    was plainly a pertinent factor, and one difficult to  square  with  the
    finding at paragraph 40: I conclude that the Appellant would not  be  a
    person of interest to the IKR authorities on  return".   I  am  further
    satisfied that  the  Tribunal  has  omitted  to  consider  whether  the
    Appellant has family or  other  potential  sponsors  in  the  IKR.  The
    presence of such connections was identified in AA as being an important
    consideration in the assessment of internal flight,  and  as  such  the
    omission must be a material one.

 9. In respect of the CSID the First-tier  Tribunal  placed  reliance  upon
    information found in Annex A of the  Respondent's  Country  Information
    and Guidance Note dated  December  2014,  to  the  effect  that  a  new
    identity document could be obtained from the Iraqi embassy  in  London.
    This CIG was not available to me, nor to  the  First-tier  Tribunal;  I
    take it that it based its finding on the selected extracts set  out  in
    the Respondent's  refusal  letter  (at  page  10  of  14).   The  error
    identified by Ms Wilkins is that the Tribunal does not appear  to  have
    read the entire paragraph. Had it  done  so  it  would  have  seen  the
    following: "usually existing documents  or  copies  would  need  to  be
    submitted to receive consular assistance. In the case of replacing lost
    documents, those of a relative  could  be  submitted  to  identify  the
    person applying. Sources consistently indicated that if  an  individual
    was unable to prove their identity and demonstrate that  they  were  an
    Iraqi national, reacquiring documents  via  an  embassy  would  not  be
    possible". The accepted evidence in this case was  that  the  Appellant
    was from a contested area, that he had no original  or  copy  documents
    with him and that he had lost contact with his family.  I  accept  that
    the Tribunal materially erred in law in its findings on the CSID, since
    it is difficult in light of the accepted facts and the guidance in  AA,
    to see how he would go about obtaining a new identity document.

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  to  the
    limited extent identified above. The Respondent has made  no  challenge
    to the remaining findings of fact made.

11. The parties invited me to remake the decision  in  the  appeal  on  the
    facts as found by the First-tier Tribunal.

12. The Appellant is from a contested area of Iraq and as such would face a
    real risk of serious harm in his home area.  There is no  challenge  to
    that finding. His accepted evidence was that he fled his  home  village
    in Mosul district after Daesh took over and  started  committing  gross
    human  rights  violations.  The  Appellant  personally  witnessed  such
    atrocities, including the beheading of three young police officers.  He
    fled because Daesh told the Mukhtar in his  village  that  adult  males
    were to report for training.

13. He has attempted to avail himself of the  internal  flight  alternative
    once before.  Upon his arrival at the Kurdish border he was, by his own
    admission, dirty and dishevelled. He and his friend were  both  wearing
    black and having come from a Daesh controlled area, had long  hair  and
    beards. The Kurdish security personnel understandably viewed them  with
    some suspicion. They were handcuffed and taken by  car  to  a  building
    called the 'Asaysh' or security headquarters. The  Appellant  does  not
    claim to have been physically assaulted during his four day  detention,
    but he was held in violation of basic human rights inasmuch as  he  was
    given no food or water. He was interrogated by officers  who  told  him
    that being Kurdish did not count for much since they had  reports  that
    some Kurds had joined Daesh.   They wanted to know why he had  come  to
    Hawler (Erbil).  The Appellant only managed to get out when his  family
    friend Majid paid for his release.  He had negotiated with  someone  he
    knew who was "quite high up" in the Asaysh. The officer who  authorised
    his release did so upon specific undertaking that the  Appellant  would
    not come back to the IKR.  Majid did not immediately manage  to  secure
    the release of the friend that the Appellant had been with but told him
    that he would do his best.

14. The question is whether the Appellant would have better luck next time.
    He would not this time be entering the  IKR  direct  from  a  contested
    governate. He would not, one assumes, be  dirty,  dishevelled,  bearded
    and dressed in black. The chances of him being apprehended as  a  Daesh
    fighter, flying  straight  from  Baghdad  or  even  the  UK,  would  be
    substantially lessened.   I have no doubt at all that he would  however
    be questioned. He would be holding no Iraqi identity document and would
    be readily identifiable - by accent if nothing else  -  as  being  from
    Mosul.  I am satisfied that it is reasonably likely that  he  would  be
    screened by the Asaysh security  forces,  and  that  it  is  reasonably
    likely that they would discover that the Appellant  was  previously  in
    detention, and the conditions attached to his release.


15. In her submissions Ms Wilkins relied on country background  information
    postdating the decision in AA. A Human Rights Watch report  dated  29th
    January 2017 details how they are aware of at least 183 boys being held
    by Kurdish  security  personnel  on  suspicion  of  being  with  Daesh.
    Detainees  as  young  as  11  reported  being  tortured  in  detention,
    including being beaten with pipes, burned with cigarettes  and  shocked
    with electricity.   Others reported being  threatened  with  rape.  HRW
    researchers were able to see physical  marks  on  the  detainees  which
    supported the accounts being given.  The  US  State  Department  report
    dated 3rd March 2017 documents numerous violations of human  rights  in
    the IKR, including extrajudicial execution,  abusive  interrogation  in
    detention and prolonged detention without trial in  Asayish  prisons  -
    sometimes for more than 6 months.  The  November  2016  UNHCR  Position
    Paper on Returns to Iraq confirms there to be credible reports of  ill-
    treatment of IDPs from Daesh controlled  areas.   The  displacement  of
    such large numbers of people  have  caused  tensions  to  rise  in  the
    region,  with  some  politicians  and  security  officials   repeatedly
    asserting that ISIS fighters were among the IDPs and/or that there  was
    a correlation between the influx of IDPs and the increase  in  security
    incidents, thereby contributing to the  strengthening  of  pre-existing
    negative perceptions of IDPs. UNHCR confirm that some  IDPs  have  been
    released from detention only to be forcibly  evicted  from  the  region
    back into contested areas.


16. Having considered all of that information I cannot  be  satisfied  that
    there is a safe, viable internal flight alternative in this  case.  The
    Appellant is not an Arab - the characteristic most likely to  place  an
    IDP at risk in the IKR, but he is someone whom the Asaysh have  already
    regarded with suspicion, and he is a Sunni from Mosul.  He  is  someone
    who has specifically been instructed not to return to the area.   I  am
    satisfied that at the very least the Appellant would face a  real  risk
    of not being admitted to the IKR. In light of  the  country  background
    material I must be satisfied that there is a real  risk  that  his  on-
    arrival screening would include ill treatment.

17. The Respondent  did  not  submit  that  there  were  any  other  viable
    alternatives for relocation outside of the IKR. For  the  avoidance  of
    doubt I find that there is not a reasonable alternative: the  Appellant
    is Kurdish, has no relatives or contacts in  the  Baghdad  and  has  no
    CSID. Applying the reasoning  in  AA  he  is  one  of  those  for  whom
    relocation to the city would be unduly harsh.


    Decisions

18. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error  of  law
    and it is set aside to the limited extent identified above.


19. I remake the decision in the appeal as follows:

    "The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.


    The Appellant is not entitled to humanitarian protection because he  is
    a refugee.


    The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds".

20. There is an order for anonymity.



                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce

                                26th June 2017




                           -----------------------
[1] Permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Bennett on the 17th
January 2017


