
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06287/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 November 2018                  |On 3 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                     R M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Latimer of Counsel instructed by Fountain
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Coaster promulgated on  9  July  2018  dismissing  the  appeal  of  the
    Appellant against a  decision  of  the  Respondent  dated  3  May  2018
    refusing a protection claim.

2.   The Appellant is a citizen of Iran born on 8  December  1957.  He  left
    Iran, or about 19 January 2017 travelling by air to Paris  on  his  own
    passport. He then travelled to  Italy  (he  says  via  Sweden),  before
    flying to the United Kingdom. He disposed of his passport en route.  He
    arrived in the UK on 31 January 2017 and claimed asylum.

3.   A screening interview was conducted on 31  January  2017  (Respondent's
    bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  at  Annex  A).  When  asked  to
    explain briefly all reasons why he could not return  to  Iran  (section
    4.1 of the screening interview), the Appellant didn't claim any  reason
    beyond being "very unhappy in Iran":

         "There isn't any reason except I was very unhappy in Iran. My  life
         is not in danger, but I have never been happy. I could not tolerate
         living in Iran. There is no security.  Two  weeks  ago  a  building
         caught fire people have no security in  Iran.  I  want  to  have  a
         decent life. I want to bring my wife and  live  in  this  country."
         (A5)

    Further, in the 'Criminality and Security' section the Appellant denied
    ever having been committed or been accused of committing any  offences,
    denied ever having been detained, and denied ever having been  involved
    with any political organisation (A6-A7).

4.    Following  the  screening  interview,  by   way   of   a   letter   of
    representations from his solicitors dated 16 May  2017,  the  Appellant
    sought to amend what was said  to  be  errors  in  the  record  of  the
    screening interview  (B11-B12).  In  respect  of  section  4.1  it  was
    asserted:

         "[The Appellant's] account  has  been  recorded  inaccurately.  Our
         client was asked whether or not at the time that he left  Iran,  he
         had a fear for his life. At the time that our client departed Iran,
         he had no intentions of claiming asylum. Our client instructs  that
         although he has had problems with the authorities and spent time in
         prison previously, he was intending to return  and  was  travelling
         for business. Whilst on business, he received a call from his  wife
         to confirm one of his friends had been arrested and that he was  in
         danger. Our client instructs that when he sought to explain, he was
         informed that he would have a further interview to explain." (B12)

    I pause to note that it is unclear from the above, notwithstanding  the
    opening assertion, whether it was being claimed that  the  interviewing
    officer  misrecorded  what  was  said,   or   whether   the   Appellant
    misunderstood the question and otherwise was not given  an  opportunity
    to state in full his reasons for claiming asylum.

5.   In  the  letter  of  representations  it  was  not  asserted  that  the
    Appellant  had  denied  any  history  of  detention  at  the  screening
    interview, but nonetheless it was stated that he had been imprisoned on
    3 occasions. Such periods of imprisonment as claimed were  significant:
    a sentence of 10 years in 1976 of which he served 2 years; a period  of
    detention  between  approximately  1981  and  1984;  and  8  months  in
    detention without being formally charged in 2002. The  letter  did  not
    seek to correct the denial of any involvement a political organisation.

6.   Notwithstanding that concerns  as  to  the  conduct  of  the  screening
    interview were raised, and  corrections  made  to  the  record  of  the
    screening interview, the letter of 16 May 2017 fails to articulate  the
    basis of the Appellant's claim for protection. Although  it  is  stated
    that he only decided to claim asylum after it  being  reported  by  his
    wife that a friend had been arrested and that "he [the  Appellant]  was
    in danger", no further context is offered

7.   It is also to be noted that the Appellant reported a number  of  health
    conditions at the screening interview - diabetes, kidney problems,  and
    a damaged left leg pursuant  to  a  car  accident.  In  the  letter  of
    representations  seeking  to  clarify/correct  the  contents   of   the
    screening interview it was additionally claimed that the Appellant also
    suffered from asthma. No mention was made of any condition  that  might
    impair his memory.  However,  notwithstanding  the  correction  to  the
    screening interview, at the substantive asylum interview conducted on 5
    October 2017 (Annex C) the Appellant additionally claimed that  he  was
    suffering  from  Alzheimer's  and  forgetfulness  (question  1,   C17).
    Although the Appellant produced extensive medical records in his appeal
    bundle before the First-tier Tribunal (pages 89-137) there  is  nothing
    identifiable therein to support a claimed diagnosis of Alzheimer's.

8.   It was  not  until  the  substantive  asylum  interview  that  anything
    particular or specific by way of reasons for claiming  asylum  emerged.
    The Appellant acknowledged that  notwithstanding  earlier  difficulties
    with the authorities, he had had no such difficulties since his release
    in 2002, and he was issued with a  passport  in  2012  and  allowed  to
    travel freely. His claimed current difficulties arose by reason of  his
    involvement with an organisation  called  NehZat  Azadi  which  offered
    assistance and support to the families of prisoners,  and/or  otherwise
    by reason of his own activities in helping prisoners and their families
    outside the context of is involvement with the  organisation  e.g.  see
    clarification to question 28 offered in letter dated  11  October  2017
    (D38).

9.   The core substance of the Appellant's claim  is  helpfully  articulated
    at paragraphs 19 and 20 of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal:

         "19. The Appellant claimed that an arrest warrant had  been  issued
         for him and his friend [F] who had been already detained.  This  is
         because  he  and  F  were  helping  prisoners  and  their  families
         financially. He had done this because he had been in prison himself
         and knew what it  was  like.  The  Appellant  and  his  friend  had
         supported about 50 families. The  Appellant  and  his  friend  were
         members of an illegal political organisation  called  NehZat  Azadi
         although  the  Appellant  did  not  know  how  many   members   the
         organisation had. He and F personally provided financial support to
         the families of prisoners and assisted in prisoners obtaining legal
         representation because they had sufficient means  that  they  could
         afford to do so. They paid  cash  to  lawyers  for  their  services
         making bank transfers.

         20.  The Appellant believed that the authorities had  been  unaware
         of his activities. The families they had helped had been unaware of
         their respective identities even if their names  were  known.  When
         asked how the authorities have now become aware of  the  Appellant,
         he replied that whilst he was away, F had become known and had been
         arrested."

10.  The Appellant's application for asylum was refused on 3  May  2018  for
    reasons set out in a 'reasons for  refusal'  letter  ('RFRL')  of  that
    date.

11.  The Appellant appealed to the IAC.

12.  The appeal was dismissed for the reasons set out in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons of Judge Coaster promulgated on 9 July 2018.

13.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal,
    which was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Blundell  on  8  August
    2018. In material part the grant of permission to appeal  is  in  these
    terms:

         "2.  I consider the second ground arguable. When  set  against  the
         totality  of  the  account  given  by  the  appellant   about   his
         involvement with Nehzat Azadi, the single sentence in [33]  of  the
         Judge's decision is arguably inadequately reasoned.

         3.   Had it not been for that second ground, I would not have  been
         inclined to grant permission. The first ground complains that there
         is no clear finding about the appellant's  historical  imprisonment
         but the obvious corollary of the finding that the appellant was not
         currently sought  by  the  Iranian  authorities  was  that  he  was
         permitted to leave Iran notwithstanding that claimed  history,  and
         would be of no interest at the 'pinch point 'of return described in
         AB (Iran) [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC).  Nevertheless,  having  regard  to
         Ferrer [2012] UKUT 304 (IAC), I do not restrict the scope  of  this
         grant of permission."

14.  In context, the second ground of appeal raises criticism in respect  of
    the following passage at paragraph  33  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision:

         "His account  of  being  a  member  of  NehZat  Azadi  but  helping
         prisoners out of his own funds and not  through  that  organisation
         does not ring true; it lacked detail and therefore credibility.  He
         was not an active member of NehZat Azadi."

15.  In my judgement, even if  it  might  arguably  be  contended  that  the
    reasoning in the sentence highlighted in the second  ground  of  appeal
    (and  upon  which  permission  to  appeal  was  based)  is  in   itself
    inadequate, this can make no material difference once  the  basis  upon
    which the Judge in substance rejected the  Appellant's  credibility  in
    all material respects is understood.

16.  The First-tier Tribunal Judge noted in the premises that it was  common
    ground between the parties that "if his account is accepted, it was not
    disputed that he would be at risk on return" (paragraph 3).

17.  The Judge  set  out  the  development  of  the  Appellant's  claim  and
    narrative account from the screening interview onwards with careful and
    detailed consideration. The Judge identified "an enormous inconsistency
    between the Appellant's evidence at the screening interview and at  the
    substantive asylum interview" (paragraph 21). Both  the  identification
    of this inconsistency, and its  characterisation  as  'enormous',  were
    entirely sustainable and open to the Judge.

18.  In my judgement it is manifestly the case that the Judge  gave  careful
    consideration to the Appellant's attempts to explain this discrepancy -
    including his suggestion that the use of an interpreter via a telephone
    had  occasioned  difficulties.  The  Judge,  for  sustainable  reasons,
    rejected the suggestion that  the  extraneous  noise  resulted  in  the
    Appellant being unable to understand what he was being asked (paragraph
    27). The Judge did not accept that the Appellant  had  been  denied  an
    opportunity of stating the basis of his claim in simple  terms  at  the
    screening interview, notwithstanding that it was acknowledged that  the
    screening interview could be a stressful  process  and  that  using  an
    interpreter  by  telephone  was  not  ideal.   Over   and   above   the
    discrepancies arising from the contents of the screening interview, the
    Judge additionally noted that at a medical assessment on 1  March  2017
    the Appellant denied any form of assault or harm, and in  stating  that
    he had been detained only referred to a period of 24 hours detention by
    police (paragraph 30). The Judge considered that if there was any truth
    to the Appellant's claim that he had very recently heard from his  wife
    (whilst he was travelling in Europe) that an arrest  warrant  had  been
    issued and the authorities had visited his home in Iran looking for him
    - matters which had supposedly prompted his claim  for  asylum  -  "the
    most obvious and pressing response [at the screening  interview]  would
    have been to say exactly  that  -  'my  wife  just  told  me  that  the
    authorities  have  an  arrest  warrant  and  are  searching  for   me'"
    (paragraph 25).

19.  It is plain the Judge found that the manner of  the  emergence  of  the
    Appellant's claim subsequent to  the  screening  interview  "cannot  be
    avoided" (paragraph 28). Indeed the 'enormous' - and  it  seems  to  me
    uncontroversially fundamental - inconsistency, which the Judge  plainly
    concluded the Appellant was unable adequately to explain such  that  it
    could be disregarded or marginalised, informed  the  rejection  of  the
    Appellant's narrative account in all material respects. See:

         "Taking the Appellant's evidence in the round, I find his case  for
         asylum fatally flawed by the stark difference between  his  initial
         case for asylum and the case that he makes following legal  advice"
         (paragraph 33).

20.  Once the Judge's comment in respect of Appellant's  claimed  activities
    outside his claimed involvement with NehZat  Azadi  criticised  in  the
    second ground of appeal is seen in this context, there  is  nothing  in
    the Judge's comment that materially undermines the otherwise clear  and
    sustainable adverse  finding  in  respect  of  overall  credibility  in
    recounting the core elements of his claim.

21.  Nor do I consider the Judge's reference that "The  Appellant  may  well
    have experienced prison in the past" (paragraph 33) avails him  in  any
    material respect. It is not in terms a finding that the  Appellant  did
    experience prison; nor is it a finding that he experienced  prison  for
    any of the reasons claimed. In any  event,  as  the  Judge  noted,  the
    Appellant  had  seemingly  been  untroubled  by  the  authorities   for
    approximately 15 years since his last release from detention.  Even  if
    it might be said that an acceptance of the history of  past  detentions
    reinforces the notion that the Appellant was in some way  inhibited  in
    giving a full account of himself at the  screening  interview  (because
    such a history of detentions was omitted), it seems  to  me  that  this
    falls well short of adequately explaining the failure to state even  in
    the simplest or briefest of terms the essential basis of the claim  for
    asylum.

22.  In all the circumstances I can find no basis upon  which  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal could properly be impugned.



Notice of Decision

23.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no material error  of
    law and stands.

28.  The Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  Date: 1 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
