
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/06798/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 20th February 2018               |On 9th March 2018                 |
|                                    |                                  |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                               MR SHERAZ KHAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Knox, Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Mill dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan but has lived for most of
      his life in Pakistan.  He claims that he and his family, although
      having no official status, were treated on a de facto basis as
      refugees in Pakistan.  He claims to fear the Khorti tribe in
      Afghanistan because of his father's involvement as a Jinga chief in
      arbitrating in a land dispute between the Khorti and the Mangal.  It
      was this dispute which led the appellant's family to leave Afghanistan
      when the appellant was aged one.  The appellant also claimed to fear
      the Taliban because he had been subject to western influences, as
      demonstrated, for example, by speaking English and obtaining a
      Master's degree in the UK.

   3. The judge comprehensively disbelieved the appellant's claim to fear
      the Khorti tribe.  In addition, the expert evidence did not support
      the claim that the appellant would be at risk from the Taliban because
      of matters such as his western education or his ability to speak
      English.  The appellant's mother, wife and two nephews had been
      residing in Khost in Afghanistan without difficulty.  The appellant
      could live in Khost or relocate to Kabul.

   4. In his evidence at the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the
      appellant gave evidence that it had been his intention after studying
      in the UK to return not to Afghanistan but to Pakistan.  The judge did
      not consider this intention to be credible.  At paragraph 23 the judge
      wrote:





           "The Appellant states that his family who had sought refuge in
           Pakistan, having fled from Afghanistan, were treated as de facto
           refugees but never had any lawful status nor any identification
           as refugees.  When he has returned to Pakistan since leaving to
           enter the United Kingdom in 2008, he has returned with the
           benefit of a visit visa.  His position is that it was never his
           intention to return to Afghanistan but instead to relocate back
           to Pakistan.  This does not seem plausible.  It is clear that he
           would have no automatic right to do so.  The default position
           would be that he would require to relocate back to his home
           country of Afghanistan.  His explanations in this respect do not
           make sense and undermines his credibility."





   5. According to the application for permission to appeal, the grounds of
      which appeared to be incomplete, the judge erred in making this
      finding.  The Secretary of State had not challenged the appellant's
      claim that his family were treated in Pakistan as de facto refugees.
      The Judge of the First-tier Tribunal did not make a finding on whether
      the family were treated as de facto refugees.  The judge erred by
      concluding that the appellant's intention to return to Pakistan rather
      than Afghanistan as not plausible.  As was pointed out in the grant of
      permission to appeal, a person may hold a subjective intention which
      is genuine even if it may not be possible to carry it out.


Submissions

   6. At the hearing before me Mr Knox, for the appellant, sought to lodge a
      written argument and a bundle of additional country information.  Mr
      Matthews objected to the admission of the additional country
      information on the basis that the procedure for admitting new evidence
      had not been followed.  I said I would defer making a decision on
      whether to admit the additional evidence until after I had made a
      decision on whether the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had made an
      error of law.


   7. Before me the focus was on paragraph 23 of the judge's decision.  Mr
      Knox acknowledged there had been no need for the judge to make a
      finding on whether the appellant and his family had been treated in
      Pakistan as de facto refugees.  It was not disputed that the appellant
      had lived in Pakistan since he was a child.

   8. It was pointed out that the main difficulty with paragraph 23 was the
      judge's finding that the appellant's evidence regarding his intention
      to return to Pakistan rather than to Afghanistan "undermines his
      credibility".  Mr Matthews submitted that if this finding was
      extracted from the decision it would make no difference to the outcome
      of the appeal.  All the judge was saying at paragraph 23 was that the
      appellant's expressed intention to return to Pakistan when his student
      visa expired was not reliable.


   9. Mr Knox submitted that the finding at paragraph 23 could not be
      separated from the rest of the judge's findings.  The finding raised a
      question as to whether the judge accepted that the appellant's family
      had been living in Pakistan.


Discussion

  10. On this latter point it is clear from the decision as a whole that the
      judge accepted that the appellant and his family had been living in
      Pakistan.  At paragraph 28 the judge found that the appellant had not
      lived in Afghanistan since he was a baby.  At paragraph 26 the judge
      recorded that the appellant's family had returned to Afghanistan in
      November 2016.  There is no question as to whether the judge accepted
      that the appellant's family were living in Pakistan for around twenty-
      five years.


  11. The judge having accepted this, I would agree with Mr Knox that there
      was no need for the judge to make any finding on whether while the
      family were in Pakistan they were treated as de facto refugees.  The
      appellant's evidence was that it had been his intention to return to
      Pakistan after completing his studies in the UK.  As Mr Matthews
      implied, if the judge had said no more than that this intention was
      not reliable, then it would seem unlikely that any arguable error of
      law would have arisen.  The judge, however, went further and stated
      that the appellant's credibility was undermined.

  12. It would not be appropriate for me to seek to rewrite part of the
      judge's decision.  On the other hand, it must be asked whether
      sustainable findings in the remainder of the decision should be set
      aside because of some infelicitous wording towards the end of
      paragraph 23.  It is permissible to seek to make sense of the judge's
      findings having regard to the decision as a whole, provided this does
      not result in unfairness.

  13. With this in mind I have taken into consideration the other findings
      made by the judge, including those relating to the appellant's
      credibility.  At paragraph 21 the judge questioned why the appellant's
      father would have been liable to repercussions for a decision taken by
      the tribal council in which he participated.  Such a decision would
      normally be treated with respect.  At paragraph 22 the judge pointed
      out that the appellant had not produced any documentary evidence in
      relation to his father's involvement in resolving the land dispute,
      despite the fact that the appellant maintained contact with others in
      Afghanistan.  At paragraph 24 the judge referred to the appellant
      having previously made a human rights claim based on private and
      family life without referring to his fear of returning to Afghanistan,
      even though the Pakistani authorities had stated in March 2016 that
      historical Afghan refugees would require to return.

  14. At paragraphs 25 and 26 the judge pointed out that although in his
      witness statement the appellant said he had police reports about his
      family in Khost having been attacked by members of the Khorti tribe,
      in his oral evidence he said that his family had had no difficulties
      with the Khorti tribe since returning to Afghanistan in November 2016.
       An untranslated police report was lodged but at the First-tier
      hearing the appellant's representative said this piece of evidence was
      no longer being relied upon.  The judge nevertheless allowed the
      appellant to be cross-examined upon it but was so dissatisfied with
      the appellant's attempted explanations the judge found the report was
      fraudulent.

  15. Finally the judge noted that although the expert report referred to a
      long-running land dispute between the Khorti and the Mangal there was
      no indication of any specific blood feud or of named individuals
      involved in such a feud.  The judge pointed out that the appellant had
      been away from Afghanistan since he was a baby and the judge observed
      that, even if the appellant's father had been involved in a dispute,
      there was no reason why the appellant would receive any adverse
      attention after so many years had elapsed.

  16. The judge gave more than adequate reasons for finding that the
      appellant's alleged fear of the Khorti tribe was not genuine.  The
      judge's reference at paragraph 23 to the implausibility of the
      appellant intending to return to Pakistan was, in effect, only a very
      minor aspect of the discrepancies on which the judge's findings were
      based.  As I observed above, if otherwise soundly based the decision
      should not be set aside because of some infelicitous phraseology on an
      issue which was in no sense crucial to or determinative of the outcome
      of the appeal.  Reading the decision as a whole I do not consider that
      there has been any unfairness in the judge's approach to the evidence.
       Overall the judge made findings which were based upon the evidence
      and supported by adequate reasons.  I am not satisfied there is any
      error of law in the judge's decision which should lead to it being set
      aside.


Conclusions

  17. The making of the decision of the First-tier tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error of law.


  18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the appeal shall
      stand.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make an anonymity direction.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
                8th March 2018
