
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06087/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 2nd October 2017                       |On 11th October 2017              |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mr W Q
                          (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms O Wybraniec instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Chamberlain dated 31st July 2017 who dismissed,  on  all  grounds,  the
    appellant's asylum, humanitarian protection and European  human  rights
    Articles 2, 3 and 8  appeal.   The  appellant  asserted  the  following
    grounds in the application for permission to appeal.

Ground (i)

 2. The Immigration Judge misdirected herself when considering the  medical
    evidence and when finding there was no  reference  to  the  reason  for
    assault.  The judge erred in considering that the author of the  report
    was required to comment on the reason for the assault as that would  be
    beyond his expertise.  Had the author of the medical records  commented
    on the reason that would have been a reason for  challenge.   Similarly
    the Rule 35 report and Dr Jegede's medicolegal report  could  not  have
    been expected to comment on the fact that the appellant  was  assaulted
    because he was a supporter of the Jamaat-e-Islami  Party  and  was  not
    instructed to do so.

Ground (ii)

 3. The Immigration Judge misdirected herself when considering the  medical
    evidence in relation to the  definition  of  torture.   EO  and  Others
    [2013] EWHC 1236 Admin set out  the definition of torture as

         "Any act by which severe pain or  suffering,  whether  physical  or
         material, is intentionally inflicted on a person for such  purposes
         as  obtaining  from  him  or  a  third  person  information  or   a
         confession, punishing him for an act he  or  a  third  person,  has
         committed, or intimidating or coercing him or a third  person,  for
         any reasons based on discrimination of any kind".

 4. The judge erred in paragraph 43 in diluting the findings of  Dr  Jegede
    and the author of the Rule 35 report that the appellant was tortured by
    making a finding that he was attacked  once.   The  appellant  was  not
    required to state that he was tortured.  All he was required to do  was
    to give an account of the act by which severe  pain  or  suffering  was
    inflicted upon him.

 5. The judge erred in finding at paragraph 44 that

       "there was a reasonable likelihood that the appellant  was  assaulted
       in some way ... however, there is no evidence to link this  with  the
       appellant's claimed support of any political party".

Ground (iii)

 6. The Immigration Judge erred in finding  that  it  was  significant  and
    damaging that the appellant  provided  more  evidence  in  his  witness
    statement than at interview.  The appellant  was  entitled  to  provide
    more detail about his knowledge and understanding of the  policies  and
    values of the Jamaat-e-Islami Party in his witness  statement  than  he
    did at interview.  The judge would appear to be raising the standard of
    burden of proof by finding  that  giving  much  more  detail  after  an
    interview significantly damages a claim.

Background

 7. The appellant is a Pakistan citizen, born in 1991 and asserts he was  a
    supporter of the political party Jamaat-e-Islami.  He  states  that  on
    14th April 2010 he was attacked  by  members  of  the  Pakistan  Muslim
    League and hospitalised.  His attackers then filed a First  Information
    Report charging him with assault.  After his release from  hospital  he
    went to stay with his uncle.  He then left Pakistan and entered the  UK
    on a student visa on 17th February 2011.  His Tier 4 leave was extended
    until 19th June 2013 but a further application  was  rejected  on  17th
    February 2014 and his appeal dismissed on 17th October 2014.  He became
    appeal rights exhausted on 9th January 2015.

 8. On 5th August 2015 he was fingerprinted in  Ireland  where  he  claimed
    asylum.  He was served with an enforcement notice but failed to report.
     On 16th April 2017 he was encountered after being arrested for a  road
    traffic offence and detained and he claimed asylum on 24th April  2017.
    His claim was rejected.

 9. At the hearing Ms Wybraniec before me provided a very helpful  skeleton
    argument for the hearing which outlined the issues I have stated  above
    and she submitted that paragraph 339K should have been engaged and  the
    appellant was entitled to the presumption of the serious indication  of
    a well-founded fear of persecution.  On the  medical  evidence  it  was
    open to the judge to find that the appellant was a victim of torture.

10. The first ground was such that neither of the  definitions  of  torture
    required consideration of the reason for the infliction of pain and  in
    introducing this consideration in relation to the medical evidence  the
    judge misdirected herself as to the relevant legal test.  There was  no
    reason for the writer of  the  medical  notes  to  have  addressed  the
    question of whether the assault constituted torture, let alone for  the
    reason for the assault having taken place.  It was unreasonable for the
    judge to have relied on the absence of such reference  in  her  reasons
    for conclusions.  Such  a  misdirection  was  crucial  to  the  judge's
    subsequent determination at paragraph 44  which  found  only  that  the
    appellant was assaulted in some way.  It was correct that the  evidence
    did not link the appellant to the political party but that was not  the
    purpose of the medical evidence.  There were two  instances  of  expert
    medical documentary evidence and it was open to her to have found  that
    the appellant was a victim of torture.

11. Mr Tufan relied on JL (medical reports credibility) China  [2013].   He
    referred to the circumstances as they were noted in  the  determination
    as a whole.  The appellant had been appeal rights exhausted and claimed
    asylum after being encountered following a traffic incident.  The  Rule
    35 report went a little way towards  assisting  him  and  certainly  BA
    (Eritrea)  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  458  at  paragraph  75   confirmed   that
    restatement in a Rule 35 report did not constitute independent evidence
    of torture.  He also pointed out that  the  medicolegal  expert  report
    failed to comply with the guidance given in JL China and there was  one
    word in relation to the Istanbul Protocol.

12. I address ground (ii)  first  because  it  sets  the  context  for  the
    findings made by the judge in  respect  of  the  medical  evidence.   I
    stress, this appeal was not a challenge on the basis of Mibanga  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 367  and indeed the judge assessed the medical evidence in the
    context of the account of the appellant as a whole.

13. The judge found at paragraph  26  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was
    inconsistent and  he  was  evasive  in  cross-examination.   He  failed
    further to furnish information in his witness statement regarding  bail
    in an effort to embellish his claim, see paragraph 27.  It was open  to
    the judge to find that to leave Pakistan on bail was an issue which was
    significant and it was no answer from the  appellant  merely  to  state
    that he had not been asked this question.

14. The judge assessed the evidence of Mr Z and found it to contradict  the
    appellant's claim in respect of his membership of the  Jamaat-e-Islami.
    The judge further found at paragraph 35 that the fact that the evidence
    of the appellant's father and uncle did  not  refer  to  the  appellant
    being a supporter of Jamaat-e-Islami.

15. Further, the particular criticism  by  the  judge  of  the  appellant's
    evidence in this is that he sets out more information about  the  party
    and his knowledge of the Jamaat-e-Islami and sets out information which
    is of a general nature and is in the public domain, however when he was
    asked spontaneous questions at interview he did not know other  current
    senior members apart from one.  He  was  unable  to  name  any  current
    economic policies.  The fact that in his witness statement he has given
    much more detail was found to damage, rather  than  assist  his  claim.
    The conclusions were open to the judge to  make,  particularly  in  the
    light of his limited knowledge of the party  when  interviewed  despite
    the  fact  that  he  had  the  opportunity  to   make   representations
    immediately after the  interview  and  in  the  light  of  the  overall
    findings which ran from paragraphs 25 to 53.   Indeed  the  judge  also
    noted that 'the appellant had 'not said in his witness  statement  that
    any of the men who assaulted him said that they had done so because  of
    his support for Jammat-e-Islami'.

16. With reference to ground (i) the  medical  evidence  must  be  assessed
    holistically but in no particular order.  It is  clear  that  the  head
    note of  JL  (medical  reports  credibility)  China  [2013]  UKUT  145,
    stresses the importance of being vigilant that an objective analysis is
    required and Dr Jegede appears to have  concluded  that  the  appellant
    underwent torture - that is for the judge to decide.   As  set  out  at
    head note 2 and 3

    (2)    They should also bear in mind that when an  advocate  wishes  to
         rely on their medical report  to  support  the  credibility  of  an
         appellant's account, they will be expected to identify  what  about
         it affords support to what the appellant has said and which is  not
         dependent on what the appellant has said to the  doctor  (HE  (DRC,
         credibility and psychiatric reports) Democratic Republic  of  Congo
         [2004] UKAIT 000321). The more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming
         that the account given by the appellant was  to  be  believed,  the
         less likely it is that significant weight will be  attached  to  it
         (HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]).

    (3)    The authors of such medical reports also need to understand that
         what is expected of them is a critical and  objective  analysis  of
         the injuries and/or symptoms displayed. They need  to  be  vigilant
         that ultimately whether an appellant's account  of  the  underlying
         events is or is not credible and plausible is a question  of  legal
         appraisal and a matter for  the  tribunal  judge,  not  the  expert
         doctors (IY [47]; see also HH (Ethiopia) [2007] EWCA Civ 306  [17]-
         [18]).

17. I recite this evidence because it was against this background that  the
    appellant claimed that there had been an assault on him.  Once again he
    set out more detail about the assault in his statement and  indeed  the
    appellant's own evidence did not support his claim he was assaulted due
    to his support if any of the Jamaat-e-Islami and indeed the appellant's
    uncle made no reference to any physical attack on him and no  reference
    to him being a supporter of the party.  Having reviewed  this  evidence
    and against this background it was that the judge assessed the  medical
    evidence.  The judge did not doubt that there had  been  some  scarring
    but noted that the medical records did not assist the appellant to show
    that he was assaulted due to his support for a particular party and  it
    is this link and this issue which is important in assessing whether the
    appellant has indeed been the victim of persecution or serious harm  as
    a result of his links to a party or imputed political opinion.
18. It was open to the judge to dismiss the  Rule  35  report  as  she  did
    because the report merely states "on examination he has scars  possibly
    due  to  the  history  given".   As  BA  (Eritrea)  identifies  a  mere
    restatement of the appellant's account does not assist  and  the  judge
    was entitled to approach the report as  she  did  particularly  as  the
    report used the language 'possibly'.

19. The judge specifically addressed the medical  report  from  Dr  Jegede.
    Once again the judge appears to accept the injuries that the  appellant
    has sustained but the judge questions the reasons for the assault.  The
    judge states at 42

    42.    I have also considered the medical report from Dr.  Jegede  (A11
         of the Appellant's bundle).   Dr.  Jegede's  opinion  is  that  the
         Appellant falls into the category of being  a  victim  of  torture.
         However, this report does not assist the Appellant in showing  that
         the reason that he was assaulted was because he was a supporter  of
         the  Jamaat-e-Islami  party.   At  page  A14  it  states  that  the
         Appellant stated that he believed the reason he was beaten  up  was
         due to his support of the party, but it  is  only  the  Appellant's
         opinion,  and  no  other  evidence,  including  evidence  from  the
         Appellant's family in Pakistan, has  corroborated  the  Appellant's
         view that this is the reason that he was  assaulted.   Indeed,  the
         evidence from the Appellant's father and uncle refers at  the  most
         to a quarrel and threats, not to any physical assault.

    43.    Further, I find the Appellant himself has never claimed that  he
         was "tortured".  He has claimed that he was attacked once.  That is
         the extent of the Appellant's claim as to the physical mistreatment
         that he received.

    44.    I find that there is a reasonable likelihood that the  Appellant
         was assaulted in some way as  shown  by  the  medical  report  from
         Pakistan and the medical report from Dr. Jegede.  However, there is
         no evidence to link this with the Appellant's  claimed  support  of
         any political party.  I have found above that he has not shown that
         he was a supporter of Jamaat-e-Islami.  I find that his claim  that
         the assault was politically motivated is an  attempt  to  found  an
         asylum claim.

20. The judge clearly states that there was no other evidence but  this  is
    not a request necessarily for corroboration but for an understanding of
    why it was that the appellant's father and uncle referred "at most to a
    quarrel and threats, not to any physical assault".  The evidence of the
    appellant's family contradicted the appellant's latest claims regarding
    the attack.

21. There is one reference, when describing the injuries,  in  the  medical
    report at page 5, which complies with  the  Istanbul  Protocol  to  the
    effect that

         "Nasal septum deviation: there is a marked deviation of  the  nasal
         septum about 1.5 centimetre from the midline  to  the  left.   This
         injury is consistent with the application of force with  sufficient
         energy to push the bone and cartilage that makes  up  the  nose  to
         that degree".

22. There is further reference to the scar of  a  cut  1.5  centimetres  in
    length in the region of the "temporomandibular joint"  and  the  doctor
    opines that "it could possibly have been caused by a weapon such  as  a
    knuckleduster especially if the edges were relatively sharp as  is  the
    case of the designs of the said implement".

23. Finally the doctor states

         "The scars that I examined did not appear to be surgical in  origin
         although the appearance over time might have been modulated by  the
         surgical technique or other factors pre-  or  postoperatively  e.g.
         infection, failure to clean the room prior to surgery".

24. The most that can be said about this report is that  it  confirms  that
    the appellant at some point had experienced a physical  injury  to  the
    nose but even the doctor does not appear to be clear whether  that  was
    due to surgery or otherwise.

25. Nonetheless the judge finds that there  was  "a  reasonable  likelihood
    that the appellant was assaulted in some way as shown  by  the  medical
    report from Pakistan and the medical report from Dr  Jegede",  but  the
    judge did not accept that there was evidence  to  link  this  with  the
    appellant's claimed support of the political party and as the judge, on
    the overall evidence, did not accept that he had shown that  he  was  a
    supporter of the party,  she  did  not  accept  that  the  assault  had
    occasioned from his political activities;  that was open to the  judge.
    As set out in EO one occasion of assault could be classified as torture
    and the judge may have erred legally in her assessment at [43] but  for
    the sound reasons given in the  remaining  assessment  of  the  medical
    evidence this  is  not  material.  Essentially  much  of  the  evidence
    contradicted the account the appellant had given for  his  assault  and
    hence the concentration given by the judge to this factor.

26. The judge further proceeded to assess the appellant's account after  he
    had moved to Rawalpindi and found  once  again  that  his  account  was
    inconsistent and did not accept that the appellant's  father  would  be
    able to return to his village nor that the appellant's family would  be
    able to live in safety only 40 miles away.

27. It is a matter for the judge to conclude as to whether the  appellant's
    account is credible and I am not persuaded that  the  judge  approached
    the medical evidence erroneously, bearing in  mind  the  very  detailed
    findings on credibility that were made  throughout  the  determination,
    the tentative statement made in the Rule 35 report and  the  conclusion
    of Dr Jegede that the  appellant  was  "tortured".   That  suggests  an
    assessment of credibility which is not open to the doctor to make.

28. The doctor made a statement of truth but made no effective reference to
    the Istanbul Protocol within his report but merely extensively  records
    the appellant's account. As such the report, although it needed  to  be
    addressed as indeed it was by the judge, was barely compliant  with  JL
    (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145.

29. In the light of the findings overall in the decision there is no  error
    of law by the judge in her approach to the medical evidence or  in  her
    approach to the evidence as a whole.  That she made  the  comment  that
    there was no reference in the medical evidence  to  a  reason  for  the
    assault should be taken in the light of the findings as a whole.

30. That Rule 339K might have been engaged and as such the appellant  would
    be regarded as someone who had been subject to serious harm  such  that
    it might be a serious indication of real risk of harm does not  assist.
    Rule 339K for valid reasons was not engaged.

31. In respect of ground (iii)  the  judge  gave  a  host  of  reasons  for
    rejecting  the  account  given  by  the  appellant  and  explained  her
    rejection of his  more  detailed  written  statement  over  his  asylum
    interview when observing that his  spontaneous  responses  demonstrated
    that his grasp of the party's policies was tenuous.   It  was  entirely
    open to the judge to make that finding.

32. I find there is no material error of law and the decision shall stand.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington             Date Signed 10th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

