
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06026/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 11 April 2019                      |On 01 May 2019                        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     m p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bisson, Counsel instructed by ABN Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead members  of  the
    public identifying the  appellant.   A  failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.





Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who  was  born  on  12  October
    1986.  He is from Jaffna and is of Tamil ethnicity.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 21 September  2017.   On
    13 November 2017, he claimed asylum.  He claimed that in  2002  he  had
    started to help the LTTE in Sri Lanka.  He claimed  that  he  left  Sri
    Lanka in 2007 returning there in 2010.  He claimed that he was arrested
    and detained for one day on 16 March 2013 and during his  detention  he
    agreed to work with the Sri Lankan authorities to round up  members  of
    the LTTE, which he subsequently did.  He claimed  that  he  reneged  on
    that agreement but remained in Sri Lanka until March 2016 when he  left
    Sri Lanka, with the assistance of an agent, using a false identity.

 4. On 22 April 2018, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 19 June 2018 Judge Trevaskis dismissed the appellant's appeal on all
    grounds.  He made an adverse credibility finding.  The  judge  rejected
    the "core" of the appellant's claim.  At para 47 of  his  decision  the
    judge said this:

         "The country guidance decision and  the  background  evidence  make
         clear that the main focus of attention by  the  government  in  Sri
         Lanka is now upon the resurgence of the  LTTE  in  the  Sri  Lankan
         diaspora, and risk on  return  is  therefore  chiefly  directed  to
         anyone who has been seen to be active in that way.   Not  only  has
         the appellant been unable to  provide  convincing  account  of  his
         activity in Sri Lanka as a supporter of LTTE, and not a member,  he
         has spoken of attending only one  meeting  since  arriving  in  the
         United Kingdom, but has produced no other evidence to confirm  that
         attendance.  I find no reason to suspect that his presence at  that
         meeting, if it took place, was a  matter  which  has  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities in Sri Lanka, let alone  showing  that
         his level of involvement was such as to amount to 'significant'."

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  18
    January 2019 the Upper Tribunal (DUTJ  Jordan)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

 7. Thus, the appeal came before me on 11 April 2019.   The  appellant  was
    represented by Mr S Bisson and the respondent by Mrs H Aboni.

The Submissions

 8. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Bisson relied upon the grounds of appeal
    which he developed in his oral submissions.

 9. First, he submitted that the judge had  failed  to  consider  the  full
    extent of the appellant's claim relied upon before the judge.   Relying
    upon para 9 of the grounds, Mr  Bisson  submitted  that  the  appellant
    relied upon:

      a) the appellant's family's longstanding association with the LTTE;

      b) that the appellant was a confessed sympathiser to the LTTE's  cause
         even after the ceasefire in 2009;

      c)  that  the  appellant  had  refused  to  continue  to  assist   the
         Government; and

      d) that the authorities continued to look for the appellant.

10. Secondly, Mr Bisson submitted that the judge had  been  wrong  to  find
    that the appellant had, contrary to his own belief given  in  evidence,
    not been the subject of an arrest warrant.  Mr  Bisson  submitted  that
    the judge had made that assumption because the appellant had been  able
    to leave Sri  Lanka  without  difficulty.   That,  however,  Mr  Bisson
    submitted was contrary to the view taken by the Upper Tribunal  in  the
    country guidance decision of GJ and others (post-civil war:  returnees)
    Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) at [275] that: "it is possible  to
    leave through the airport even when a person is being actively sought."



11. Thirdly, Mr Bisson submitted that the  judge  had  made  two  factually
    inconsistent findings in para 47.  Having stated that: "No warrant  has
    been issued for his arrest", the judge went on  to  state  that  it  is
    "reasonable to infer that he will therefore not be included on a  watch
    list of persons liable to be detained on arrival at  Colombo  airport."
    But, Mr Bisson contended that the judge  in  the  immediate  succeeding
    sentence found that he was on a "watch list" when he said:

         "The lack of further contact with his father by the authorities  in
         my judgement supports the  claim  that  he  is  on  a  watch  list,
         because, having added his name to  such  a  list,  the  authorities
         would have no  reason  to  continue  looking  for  him  within  the
         country." (my emphasis)

12. Mr Bisson  also  relied  on  the  judge's  failure  to  deal  with  the
    appellant's evidence that his father had told him that he  had  seen  a
    document in Sinhalese which he believed was an arrest warrant.

13. Finally, Mr Bisson submitted that the judge's reasoning in para 47,  in
    relation to the appellant's claimed attendance at one  meeting  in  the
    UK, failed to deal with the evidence that the  Sri  Lankan  authorities
    monitored activity in the UK.

14. On behalf of the  respondent,  Mrs  Aboni  accepted  that  the  judge's
    reasoning was brief but the reasons were adequate to reject the  'core'
    of the appellant's claim.

15. First, the judge had taken  into  account  that  he  had  not  provided
    supporting evidence, for example from his brother.  Further, he had not
    provided any evidence of sur place activities that  would  put  him  at
    risk on return.  Mrs Aboni submitted that  the  judge's  findings  were
    consistent with an application of GJ and others such that the appellant
    had not established a profile which would put him at risk on return.

16. Secondly, as regard para 45 of the judge's decision, Mrs Aboni accepted
    that the judge appeared to make two inconsistent findings  in  relation
    to whether the appellant was on a "watch list" or  not.   Nevertheless,
    she submitted that was not material to the decision as, applying GJ and
    others at para (9) of the head note, he would only be at risk on return
    if, when monitored in Sri Lanka, he was not likely  to  be  seen  as  a
    person who was a Tamil activist working to destabilise the unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or revive the internal armed conflict.

17. In response, Mr Bisson submitted that the categories of risk in GJ  and
    others were not fixed and he referred  me  to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
    decision in MP and Anor (Sri Lanka) v SSHD  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  829  per
    Underhill LJ at [50].

Discussion

18. The judge's reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim are set out  at
    paras 39-48 (credibility) and paras  49-53  (risk  on  return)  of  his
    decision as follows:

         "Credibility of claims

         39.  I have considered the documents submitted or  relied  upon  by
             the Appellant and the Respondent.

         40.  I have considered the appellant's claims in the round, and  in
             light of the standard of proof required  to  substantiate  his
             claims.

         41.  In MA v UT 2014 CSIH 111 it was said that a proper approach to
             credibility required an assessment of the evidence and of  the
             general claim.  In asylum claims, relevant factors were, first
             the internal consistency of the claim; secondly  the  inherent
             plausibility of the claim; and thirdly the consistency of  the
             claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in
             country guidance.

         42.  The core of the claim is that he is at risk of persecution  by
             the authorities in Sri Lanka because he  assisted  members  of
             LTTE, and he claims  to  have  been  previously  arrested  and
             detained and tortured by the authorities; he was released, and
             was able to leave the country.  There is no physical  evidence
             of  torture,  such  as  scarring,  and  he  was   subject   to
             conditional release and no subsequent summons or  warrant  for
             arrest despite reneging.

         43.  Considering the evidence in the round, and  applying  the  low
             standard of proof  applicable  to  asylum  claims,  I  am  not
             satisfied that the appellant has presented a claim whose  core
             is consistent, credible and is not  undermined  by  background
             information.  He has given a vague account of his knowledge of
             and involvement with LTTE.  He was able to leave  the  country
             with a valid passport and visa, because he did so at the  time
             when there was no warrant or summons in force and therefore no
             reason for him to  be  detained  by  the  authorities  at  the
             airport.

         44.  No warrant has been issued for his arrest.  It  is  reasonable
             to infer that he will therefore not be  included  on  a  watch
             list of persons liable to be detained on  arrival  at  Colombo
             airport.  The lack of further contact with his father  by  the
             authorities in my judgement supports the claim that he is on a
             watch list, because, having added his name to such a list, the
             authorities would have no reason to continue looking  for  him
             within the country.

         45.  The appellant has not attempted to provide supporting evidence
             for his claims.  In particular, he  has  not  called  evidence
             from his brother, stating only that he has not asked him.

         46.  His presentation of false identity documents on arrival in the
             United Kingdom is a statutory factor damaging his credibility.
              His explanation for doing so is that it was necessary for him
             to use a false identity in order to leave  Sri  Lanka  safely.
             Based upon my above findings, settlement I do not accept  that
             such a measure would have been necessary, and therefore I find
             that I am entitled to attach significant weight to that factor
             in my overall assessment of the credibility of the appellant.

         47.  The country guidance decision and the background evidence make
             clear that the main focus of attention by  the  government  in
             Sri Lanka is now upon the resurgence of the LTTE  in  the  Sri
             Lankan diaspora, and  risk  on  return  is  therefore  chiefly
             directed to anyone who has been seen to be active in that way.
              Not only has the appellant been unable to provide  convincing
             account of his activity in Sri Lanka as a supporter  of  LTTE,
             and not a member, he has spoken of attending only one  meeting
             since arriving in the United  Kingdom,  but  has  produced  no
             other evidence to confirm that attendance.  I find  no  reason
             to suspect that his presence  at  that  meeting,  if  it  took
             place, was a matter which has come to  the  attention  of  the
             authorities in the Sri Lanka, let alone showing that his level
             of involvement was such as to amount to 'significant'.

         48.  For these reasons, I am not satisfied to the required standard
             that the appellant has shown that he has a  well-founded  fear
             of persecution for a Convention  reason,  namely  his  imputed
             political opinion.

         Risk on Return

         49.  I am not satisfied on the  basis  of  the  evidence  that  the
             appellant is perceived by the authorities in Sri Lanka to be a
             supporter of LTTE.

         50.  Applying the country guidance set out in GJ and others  (post-
             civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  319  (IAC),  I
             find as follows.

         51.  The appellant will not  appear  on  a  'stop  list'  and  will
             therefore not be detained at the airport by  virtue  of  being
             the subject of active enquiries.

         52.  The appellant does not fall within the current  categories  of
             persons at real risk of persecution or serious harm return  to
             Sri Lanka, whether in detention or otherwise.

         53.  I am therefore not satisfied to the required standard that the
             appellant will be at real risk of persecution or serious  harm
             on return to Sri Lanka, and accordingly I dismiss  the  appeal
             against the refusal of his asylum claim."

19. Whilst I do not accept all of Mr Bisson's submissions,  a  number  have
    merit and have led me to conclude that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law in rejecting the appellant's asylum claim.

20. First, it is unclear why the judge found that, as he said in  para  44,
    "[n]o  warrant  has  been  issued  for  his  arrest".   There  was  the
    appellant's evidence that he had been told by his father  that  he  had
    seen a document which he believed was an arrest warrant. The judge does
    not grapple with that before making the adverse finding.

21. Secondly, at para 43 the judge failed to take into account the relevant
    passage in GJ and others at [275] when inferring that the appellant was
    able to leave the country without difficulty because, "he did so  at  a
    time when there was no warrant or summons in  force  and  therefore  no
    reason for him to be detained by the authorities at the  airport".   GJ
    and others accepts  that  a  person,  even  if  they  are  wanted,  may
    nevertheless be able to leave Sri Lanka unhindered, for example through
    bribery.  The appellant's evidence was, of course, as set out  in  para
    46 of the judge's decision that he had left Sri  Lanka  using  a  false
    identity.

22.  Thirdly,  the  judge's  conclusions  in  para  44   contain   mutually
    inconsistent findings.  That inconsistent finding is, itself, an error.
     First, the judge finds that, in the absence of an arrest  warrant,  it
    is "reasonable to infer" that the appellant will "not be included on  a
    watch list" and so not  liable  to  be  detained  at  Colombo  airport.
    Secondly, however, the judge went on in  para  44  to  state  that  the
    appellant "is on a watch list" because that explains the absence of any
    further contact by the authorities with his father as they would  "have
    no reason to continue looking for him within the country".

23. The logic of the latter conclusion is not, itself,  immediately  clear.
    It pre-supposes that the authorities know that the individual concerned
    has left Sri Lanka and that, therefore, there is  no  point  in  making
    further enquiries in Sri Lanka and they can simply await his return and
    apprehend him at the airport.

24. It is also not entirely clear whether the judge meant  to  refer  to  a
    "watch" list in para 44 rather than a "stop" list.  The decision in  GJ
    and others contrasts a "watch" list with a  "stop"  list.   The  former
    does not, in general, make it reasonably likely that an individual will
    be detained by the security forces at the airport on return.  Rather it
    results in monitoring once the individual has returned (see para (9) of
    the head note).  By contrast, a person on a "stop" list is likely to be
    detained at the airport  (see  para  (6)  of  the  head  note).   That,
    perhaps, the judge meant to refer to a "stop" list, is  highlighted  by
    para 51 of his decision where he makes  a  specific  finding  that  the
    appellant will not appear on such a list and  therefore  would  not  be
    liable to be detained at the airport.  Certainly,  as  regards  whether
    the appellant would appear on a "stop" list may well turn upon  whether
    he is  subject  to  an  arrest  warrant  as  he  claimed.   The  error,
    therefore, in concluding  that  no  arrest  warrant  had  been  issued,
    necessarily, therefore, infects the judge's finding (at para  51)  that
    the appellant would not appear on a "stop" list.

25. To the extent the judge did intend in para 44 to  refer  to  a  "watch"
    list, even leaving aside the contradictory findings that the  appellant
    was both not on such a list and was on such a  list,  the  question  of
    whether by "monitoring" the appellant would come to  the  attention  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities on return (as set out in  para  (9)  of  the
    head note in GJ and others) is: "a  question  of  fact  in  each  case,
    dependent  on  any  diaspora  activities  carried  out   by   such   an
    individual." However, in reaching any finding on that issue, the  whole
    of the appellant's circumstances would need to be  taken  into  account
    including his claimed involvement in anti-Government  meetings  in  the
    UK.  That issue is not, in my judgement,  adequately  explored  in  the
    judge's relatively brief  reasoning,  and  in  particular  in  para  44
    (containing the inconsistent factual finding) and in para 47.

26. For these reasons, the judge materially erred in law  in  reaching  his
    adverse credibility and other findings when dismissing the  appellant's
    asylum claim.

Decision

27. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    That decision is set aside.

28. It was accepted by both representatives that if  the  judge's  findings
    could not stand, the proper disposal of the appeal was to remit  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.  In the light of the nature and extent of fact-
    finding  required,  and  having  regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, the proper disposal of this  appeal  is
    to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a
    judge other than Judge Trevaskis.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                              26, April 2019



