


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/06382/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |       Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2017                    |       On 16 November 2017           |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                 DR H H STOREY, JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                              MR FAISAL FARMAN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. The appellant, a national of Pakistan, appeals  with  permission  against
the decision of Judge Pears of the First  tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  3
August 2017 dismissing his appeal against a decision made by the  respondent
on 21 June 2017 refusing to grant international protection.

2. The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was at  risk  in  Pakistan
from individuals and groups  as  a  result  of  his  involvement  in  a  car
accident in June 2011 and also as a result of a blood  feud.  The  appellant
came to the UK as a student in August  2012.  The  day  before  his  student
leave expired on 30 November 2015 he applied on  the  basis  of  Article  8.
This application was refused and he did not appeal. In  April  2017  he  was
encountered  working  illegally  at  which  point  he  claimed  asylum.  The
respondent considered his claim  and  found  it  to  be  wholly  lacking  in
credibility.

3. Before this Tribunal there was no appearance  by  or  on  behalf  of  the
appellant. The file shows that he was notified at his given address  of  the
date of hearing. In the absence of any explanation  having  been  given  for
his absence, we decided to determine the appeal in the  absence  of  one  of
the parties. We heard very briefly from Mr Duffy.

4. The appellant's grounds of appeal  are  discursive  and  clearly  written
without the benefit of any legal help.  In essence the  judge  was  said  to
have erred in not giving significant weight to the  psychiatric  report;  in
failing to make any findings on or to  properly  weight  the  other  medical
evidence, the rule 35 report in particular;  in relying  on  inconsistencies
between the account  given by the appellant to the medical  expert  and  his
account given otherwise; in dealing with  the  medical  evidence  (including
the  medical  prescriptions  presented  at  the  hearing)  before   deciding
credibility; in counting against the appellant the fact that  his  different
statements had not always mentioned certain events claimed to have  happened
to the appellant in the past (such as the car  accident);  in  not  properly
considering the evidence of the witness Shahzad Ali; and  in  rejecting  the
FIR and newspaper evidence provided by the appellant after  his  substantive
interview.

5. The failure of the appellant to attend and give oral submissions  on  his
written grounds means that we must make what sense we can  of  his  grounds,
making due allowance for the fact  that  they  were  not  drafted  with  the
benefit of any legal help.

6. We have no hesitation in concluding that the  grounds  fail  to  identify
any error of law.

7. Before proceeding further, it  is  helpful  to  summarise  the  extensive
difficulties the judge identified  with  the  appellant's  account.   Having
identified the evidence submitted by both parties the judge heard  from  the
appellant  and  his  paternal  cousin,  Shahzad  Hussain.  He   then   heard
submissions from both parties (the appellant being  represented  before  the
FtT judge by Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel). In evaluating  the  evidence,  the
judge first dealt with the psychiatric report from  Dr  S  Z  Ali  and  gave
reasons for attaching little weight to it.   The  judge  then  proceeded  to
identify numerous inconsistencies and implausibilities  in  the  appellant's
account.

8. The judge also counted  against  the  appellant  his  delay  in  claiming
asylum. The judge found the FIRs and newspapers  articles  produced  by  the
appellant to be unreliable.  Finally, the judge addressed Article 8  issues.


9. We see no legal error in the judge's treatment of the  medical  evidence.
The judge properly  noted  a  number  of  shortcomings  in  the  psychiatric
report, including: the fact that it assumed the  truth  of  the  appellant's
account of medical problems he  had  had  in  Pakistan  (attempting  suicide
twice; attempting to choke himself to death; having seen a  psychiatrist  in
Lahore) without any medical notes to support these claims  (see  e.g.  paras
27-31, 62 and 91-92); the fact that it  simply  assumed  the  truth  of  the
appellant's general narrative; the fact that it identified the appellant  as
suffering from PTSD and depression  even though such  a  classification  did
not follow from the questions the psychiatrist asked of the  appellant;  and
the fact that it failed  to  properly  address  the  issue  of  malingering.
Having examined the psychiatric report for ourselves, we would also  observe
that it failed to identify any clear methodology or coherent assessment  and
wholly failed to engage with the difficulties identified by  the  respondent
with the appellant's account in her refusal  letter.  Its  findings  on  the
appellant's mental health problems are at odds  with  the  rule  35  medical
report which does not record any personal history  of  mental  disorders  or
suicide thoughts. The judge's decision took into account the  report's  view
that  the  appellant's  difficulties  in  giving  consistent  evidence   was
attributable to memory loss: see e.g. para 67.

10. Although it is true that the judge makes  no  express  findings  on  the
weight to be attached to the prison records  and  the  rule  35  report,  he
clearly took them fully into account and was clearly aware that  the  doctor
concerned  found  the  appellant's  account  plausible  and   the   scarring
consistent with how he claims he was attacked: see e.g. paras 62, 87. It  is
sufficiently clear that the judge attached limited  weight  to  it  and  had
valid reasons for doing so. The judge pointed out in paras 62-  63  that  it
was based on a different understanding of the  appellant's  medical  history
and made reference to incidents that the appellant had not  referred  to  in
his asylum interview. It must also be said  that  the  doctor  who  prepared
this report had only a limited amount  of  relevant  background  information
and was clearly unware of the numerous  difficulties  with  the  appellant's
account that had bene identified by the respondent in the refusal letter.

11. Given the last-minute production of further  medical  evidence  said  to
relate to the car accident in 2011 and its  aftermath  and  the  appellant's
failure to give a  satisfactory  explanation  for  why  it  was  only  being
produced 6 years later, we see nothing untoward in the judge's  decision  to
attach little or no weight to it: see paras 36; 73.

12. In making his adverse credibility findings the  judge  did  not  err  in
numbering among  the  appellant's  inconsistencies  significant  differences
between the accounts he had given in various  places  including  as  between
his asylum interview and the rule 35 report (see para  63)  and  as  between
his asylum interview and the psychiatric report (para 41).

13. We consider wholly  unfounded  the  appellant's  claim  that  the  judge
compartmentalised the evidence and decided on  the  appellant's  credibility
before taking account of the medical evidence. Not only did the  judge  note
the need to consider the evidence as a whole but that is clearly the way  he
proceeded: see e.g. para 103 and the treatment of the  medical  evidence  as
analysed by us above.

14. We are not entitled to interfere in a judge's findings  of  fact  unless
they are beyond the range of  reasonable  responses  to  the  evidence.  The
judge's  assessment  that  the   appellant's   different   accounts   lacked
credibility by virtue of a number of inconsistencies  (including  a  failure
within the appellant's own evidence to describe the claimed blood  feuds  in
consistent terms (see para 55) and as  regards  what  had  happened  to  the
appellant in Pakistan; and the failure of his witness  to  mention  anything
about a blood feud).

15. The appellant's  grounds  relating  to  the  judge's  treatment  of  the
evidence of  the  witness  are  wholly  unarguable  and  amount  to  a  mere
disagreement with the judge's assessment of  its  quality  and  effect  (the
judge anyway primarily relied on it in respect of its effect  and  the  fact
that it was at odds with the appellant's own evidence: see  e.g.  paras  72,
95).

16. The judge's approach to the other documentary  evidence,  the  FIRs  and
newspaper reports in particular, were based squarely on a fair  analysis  of
their contents. The  reasons  given  for  rejecting  them  are  not  legally
erroneous and the judge's conclusions regarding them at  paras  98-102  have
to be considered in the context of his assessment of their contents at  para
69, 77.

17. We see  force  in  the  judge's  decision  to  treat  adversely  to  the
appellant his attempted explanation for why, if he had been  at  risk  since
2011, he would have  travelled  back  to  Pakistan  for  around  two  months
residing in two different cities. The judge was fully justified, at para  67
for example, in finding the appellant's various explanations  of  this  trip
wholly                                                       unsatisfactory.







18. The appellant's grounds raise no challenge  to  the  judge's  Article  8
    findings.

19. For the above reasons we conclude that the FtT judge did not  materially
err in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal
must stand.


Signed
         [pic]


 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                   Date: 15 November 2017

