
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/06056/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                |         Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 May 2017                       |         On 25 May 2017                 |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER

                                   Between

                                     r t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit, Counsel, Kanaga Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal by the appellant against a  decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal  (Judge  Swaniker)  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 31  May  2016  refusing  his  application  for
    asylum and humanitarian protection.

Background

2.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri  Lanka  born  on  9  June  1987.   He
    claimed that he was forced to help the LTTE in 2008 and  2009  and  was
    detained by the authorities on 29 January  2011  until  29  March  2012
    after being sent to a rehabilitation camp.  He was released without any
    conditions but the CID came to his village and asked him to report  and
    questioned him.  He said that he decided to leave the country  and  did
    so on his own passport in November 2012, his agent having arranged  for
    him to go to Canada.  He flew from Colombo Airport  via  two  countries
    and then went by bus to Senegal.  From there he flew to  France  on  an
    Indonesian passport with his photograph  on  it  and  he  flushed  this
    passport on advice from the agent.  He was detained for fifteen days in
    a camp in France and then  released.   He  then  travelled  to  another
    African country but he did not know which one and was then returned  to
    Sri Lanka.

3.   He claimed that he started helping the LTTE again in May 2013  and  was
    detained by the army on 20 February 2014 for ten days.  He was kept  in
    a cell, beaten and questioned.  A bag doused in petrol was placed  over
    his head and he sustained scars whilst detained.  He  was  released  on
    payment of a bribe by his father.  He remained in  Sri  Lanka  for  ten
    days and then left with the help of an  agent,  travelling  by  air  to
    Qatar with a false Indian passport where he remained for two and a half
    months before flying on to Belgium where he stayed for two days  before
    making an unlawful entry into the UK in a van.

4.   The appellant was arrested on 3 February  2015  during  an  enforcement
    operation.  He said he had entered illegally  on  that  date.   He  was
    served with papers as an illegal entrant and then claimed asylum.

5.   The respondent accepted that the appellant's identity  and  nationality
    were as claimed but rejected  his  claim  about  the  problems  he  had
    suffered in Sri Lanka and whether he would be at risk on  return.   The
    respondent's reasons for refusing the application are set out  in  full
    in Annex A of the decision letter dated 31 May 2016.

The Hearing before the First-tier Tribunal

 6.  At the hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal  the  judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant and a witness and had documentary  evidence
    supplied on behalf of the appellant in a bundle indexed  and  paginated
    1A - 90 and a supplementary bundle indexed and paginated 1 -  20.   The
    judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness  setting  out
    her findings in [15]-[34].  Her findings on credibility are  summarised
    at [31] where she said:

         "I find for all these reasons that the appellant's account  of  the
         reasons he claims to have left Sri Lanka  in  2014  is  not  to  be
         believed.   I  find  him  to  be  a  witness  lacking  in   overall
         credibility.  I do not accept that he was a person of any  interest
         to the Sri Lankan authorities when he claims to have last left  the
         country and I find no reason from  the  totality  of  the  evidence
         before me to conclude that he would be a person of adverse interest
         upon return."

7.   The judge accepted as reasonably likely that  the  appellant  had  been
    arrested and detained in 2011, that he was required  to  undertake  the
    rehabilitation programme, that in common with many others he  had  some
    low level connection with the LTTE during the war years and  that  this
    low level led to  him  being  detained  by  the  authorities  once  his
    involvement came to light in 2011 [23].  She also accepted  that  there
    was  a  reasonable  likelihood  that  he  was  mistreated  during  this
    detention but he was eventually released because he was found to be  of
    no further interest.  The judge was not satisfied  that  the  appellant
    would be of any continuing interest to the Sri  Lankan  authorities  or
    that he was of any such interest in 2012 when he  left.   She  did  not
    accept his evidence about his arrest and detention in  2014  and  found
    that there was no credible evidence pointing  to  any  records  of  him
    being retained in the  database  of  wanted  persons  or  as  a  person
    otherwise  of  interest  to  the  authorities  in   Sri   Lanka   [25].
    Accordingly, his appeal was dismissed.

The Grounds and Submissions

8.   In the grounds of appeal it is argued that the  judge's  assessment  of
    credibility and in particular the rejection of his account of detention
    and torture in 2014 was flawed firstly,  in  ground  1(i)  because  the
    Tribunal did not appear  to  reject  but  accepted  the  fact  that  he
    suffered from mental health difficulties and  had  therefore  erred  by
    failing to treat him as a vulnerable witness  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance given in the Practice Direction relating to child,  vulnerable
    adult and sensitive witnesses.  It is argued  that  the  judge  thereby
    failed to give proper consideration to whether his condition  was  such
    that there were explanations for the inconsistencies in  his  evidence.
    It is then argued in ground 1(ii) that the  evidence  produced  from  a
    lawyer in Sri Lanka should  not  have  been  rejected  but  treated  as
    potentially  verifiable  in  accordance  with  the  judgment  of  PJ  v
    Secretary of State [2014] EWCA Civ  1011.   It  is  further  argued  in
    ground 1(iii) that no reasons were given for the  judge's  comments  in
    [24] discounting evidence as unreliable from the appellant's family  on
    the basis that it was self-serving.  Ground 2 argues  succinctly  that,
    not least given the flawed assessment of credibility  for  the  reasons
    set out in ground  1,  the  judge's  assessment  of  risk  was  legally
    untenable premised as it was upon a disbelief of the case.

9.   Permission to appeal was granted by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the
    basis that for the reasons given in ground 1(i) it  was  arguable  that
    the  Tribunal  had  failed  to  factor  into  the  assessment  of   the
    appellant's overall credibility the accepted fact that he was suffering
    from a moderate depressive episode and post-traumatic stress  disorder.
    Permission was granted on this ground only.

10.  Mr Muquit submitted that the judge had failed to  take  proper  account
    of the opinion set out in the psychiatric report dated 4 November  2016
    from Dr Dhumad  that  the  appellant  was  suffering  from  a  moderate
    depressive episode and post-traumatic  disorder  symptoms.   He  argued
    that when considering her credibility findings, the judge had failed to
    factor in the appellant's vulnerability and medical  condition  in  her
    assessment of  the  weight  to  be  placed  on  his  evidence  and,  in
    particular,  how  any  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  should   be
    treated.  He submitted that the judge had made her credibility findings
    before [26] where she considered the psychiatric  report.   Even  then,
    she had discounted the report as having any relevance to the assessment
    of credibility on the basis of findings of fact she had already made.

11.  Mr Muquit sought to re-open the grounds where permission to appeal  had
    been refused and in  particular  ground  2  arguing  that  the  judge's
    assessment of the appellant's involvement in diaspora activities in the
    UK had not been adequately assessed in the light  of  the  respondent's
    failure to produce at the hearing the Policy Guidance  and  Country  of
    Origin Information published on the Home Office website  on  28  August
    2014.  He relied on the judgment of the Court  of  Appeal  in  UB  (Sri
    Lanka) v Secretary of State [2017] EWCA Civ 85 submitting that, if this
    material had been produced at the hearing, the judge  might  well  have
    taken a different view on whether the appellant would  be  at  risk  on
    return in the light of his involvement with the  TGTE  referred  to  in
    [27] of the decision.

12.  Ms Ahmad submitted that there was no reason to believe that  the  judge
    had  reached  credibility  findings  without   consideration   of   the
    psychiatric report.  At [15] the judge had prefaced her  assessment  of
    credibility by saying that she was taking into account the  appellant's
    oral evidence and all of the evidence before her including  the  expert
    reports.  The judge had  explained  in  [26]  her  concerns  about  the
    psychiatric report and that paragraph formed part of her assessment  as
    a whole.  The appellant had not been granted permission  to  argue  any
    ground other than ground 1(i), no notice had been given of an intention
    to re-open the other grounds or to rely on the judgment of the Court of
    Appeal in UB (Sri Lanka).

Assessment of Whether the First-Tier Tribunal Erred in Law

13.  I am not satisfied that the appellant should be permitted to pursue  an
    argument based on grounds 1(ii), (iii) or  ground  2.   Permission  was
    refused for the following reasons:

         "It is not arguable,


         (a)  that the Tribunal was bound to accept the contents of a letter
             purporting to be from  a  Sri  Lankan  legal  attorney  simply
             because the respondent had not sought an opportunity to verify
             its provenance and authenticity (the  burden  being  upon  the
             appellant to establish those matters) or


         (b)  that the Tribunal employed the term 'self-serving' as  meaning
             that the evidence in question supported the  appellant's  case
             (the criticism made of that phrase in the authorities cited by
             the applicant) it being clear, when read within the context of
             paragraph 24 as a whole, that the  Tribunal  was  legitimately
             commenting upon the fact that  that  evidence  was  not  truly
             independent of the appellant.  Permission to appeal  upon  the
             grounds raised by subparagraphs (ii) and (iii) of ground 1  is
             therefore refused.  Moreover, it is not understood how  ground
             2  operates  'distinctly'  or  independently  of   ground   1.
             Permission to appeal on ground 2 is therefore also refused."

14.  I agree with the reasons for refusal and I am not satisfied that  there
    is any proper basis for granting permission on those grounds.  There is
    a right to renew an application for permission to appeal when the First-
    tier  Tribunal  only  grants  permission  on  limited  grounds  but  no
    application was made in the present case.  Mr Muquit  also  raised  the
    issue  of  UB  (Sri  Lanka)  and  whether  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness before the First-tier Tribunal arising from the respondent's
    failure  to  disclose  the  Policy  Guidance  and  Country  of   Origin
    Information referred to in that judgment.  However, that issue was  not
    raised in the grounds of appeal and there is nothing in the grounds  to
    indicate that this was an issue  which  might  be  raised.   Mr  Muquit
    tentatively argued that ground 2 could be taken as referring  generally
    to issues of risk but the  ground  specifically  relates  back  to  the
    credibility findings.

15.  The judgment in UB (Sri Lanka) was issued in  February  2017.   If  the
    appellant sought to rely  on  that  judgment,  the  Tribunal  and  more
    particularly the respondent should have been given  notice  before  the
    hearing.  I have considered whether I should adjourn  this  hearing  to
    give the appellant an opportunity to apply to amend his grounds and the
    respondent the opportunity of considering  the  issues  but  I  am  not
    satisfied that the interests  of  justice  require  this  course.   The
    appellant is not without remedy: it is open  to  him  to  make  further
    representations based on the judgment in UB (Sri Lanka), if so advised,
    and it will be for the respondent to decide whether and to what  extent
    that judgment impacts on the appellant's circumstances.

16.  I now turn to the issue of whether the judge erred in  law  by  failing
    to treat the appellant as a vulnerable witness and whether  she  failed
    to take into  account  the  psychiatric  evidence  when  assessing  the
    appellant's credibility.

17.  I was referred  to  the  Tribunal  decision  in  JL  (medical  reports-
    credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145 and in  particular  [26]  which  I
    should set out in full:

         "26. A second error we discern consists in the judge's treatment of
             the appellant's vulnerability (the appellant's ground 3).   It
             is clear from her determination that despite disbelieving much
             of the appellant's evidence including the account she gave  of
             her  psychological  problems  (the  judge  placed   particular
             emphasis on the appellant's ability to  perform  well  in  her
             studies) the judge was prepared  to  accept  that  she  was  a
             vulnerable person.   To be specific, she  appeared  to  accept
             that the appellant had been the victim of  physical  abuse  at
             the hands of her  former  boyfriend  in  the  UK  [104];  and,
             although rejecting the reasons given, accepted  that  'it  may
             well be the  appellant  has  certain  mental  health  issues'.
             Given that the judge described the  respondent's  reasons  (as
             set out in the preceding  para)  as  'cogent'  and  that  they
             included reliance on inconsistencies,  it  was  of  particular
             importance to see what findings, if any, the judge made  about
             the possible relevance to  these  of  the  appellant  being  a
             vulnerable person.  In the case of a vulnerable person, it  is
             incumbent on a Tribunal judge to apply the guidance  given  in
             the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  2  2010,  Child,
             Vulnerable adult and sensitive appellant guidance.   At  [14]-
             [15]  of  this  guidance,  which  dealt  with  assessment   of
             evidence, it is stated:


             '14. Consider the evidence, allowing  for  possible  different
                  degrees  of  understanding  by  witnesses  and   appellant
                  compared to those who are not vulnerable, in  the  context
                  of evidence from others associated with the appellant  and
                  the background evidence  before  you.   Where  there  were
                  clear discrepancies in the  oral  evidence,  consider  the
                  extent to which the age, vulnerability or  sensitivity  of
                  the witness was an element of that discrepancy or lack  of
                  clarity.


             15.  The decision should  record  whether  the  appellant  has
                  concluded  the  appellant  (or  a  witness)  is  a  child,
                  vulnerable  or  sensitive,   the   effect   the   Tribunal
                  considered the identified vulnerability had  in  assessing
                  the evidence before it and thus whether the  Tribunal  was
                  satisfied whether the appellant had established his or her
                  case  to  the  relevant  standard  of  proof.   In  asylum
                  appeals, weight should be given to  objective  indications
                  of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind.'


             Whilst in [14] above the focus is  on  oral  evidence,  it  is
             clear from [15] and the guidance read as a whole that the same
             approach should inform  assessment  of  discrepancies  in  the
             written record."

18.  At the heart of Mr Muquit's submission is that the judge  failed,  when
    assessing the evidence and in particular  the  discrepancies,  to  take
    account of the fact that the  appellant  was  suffering  from  moderate
    depressive episode and PTSD.  He argued that the judge  approached  the
    report on the basis that she had found that the appellant had not  been
    arrested in 2014 and that for this reason it was not  relevant  whereas
    it was relevant as part of the evidence as a whole.

19.  In [26], the judge said:

             "I have regard to the psychiatric report  of  Dr  Saleh  Dhumad
             who, according  to  the  information  in  his  report  had  two
             interviews for two hours with the appellant.  I note  only  one
             interview date of 4.11.2016 was recorded in the report so  that
             I can only surmise that the two interviews  were  conducted  on
             the same day.  Whilst I  note  Dr  Dhumad's  diagnosis  of  the
             appellant suffering from moderate depressive episode and PTSD I
             find for all the reasons I have set out above that these do not
             relate to a second arrest of the appellant  in  2014.   I  also
             consider it worth noting that  the  appellant/his  family  have
             invested some considerable effort and finances  (Q209  AIR)  in
             getting him to the UK and  he  has  by  his  account  made  two
             attempts  to  relocate  to  the  west,  the  first   apparently
             resulting in a failed asylum bid in France, after which I  have
             found he was reasonably likely deported back to Sri  Lanka  and
             where he was, by his own account able to proceed safely through
             the airport.  I consider in the ordinary course of events  that
             the potential or  prospect  of  all  these  efforts  coming  to
             nothing is a material factor which would also reasonably likely
             weigh on the appellant mind and cause some distress.   This  is
             not a factor which appears  to  have  been  considered  in  the
             psychiatric  report.   In  sum,  given  I  have  accepted   the
             appellant's account of his arrest and  detention  in  2011-2012
             but rejected his account of arrest, detention and  mistreatment
             in 2014 and his account of there being  continued  interest  in
             him from the Sri Lankan authorities, I do not consider that  Dr
             Dhumad's report takes the appellant's case any further  forward
             in relation to the facts of his claim.  I found he was  not  of
             adverse interest to the Sri Lankan  authorities  when  he  last
             left the country, and I do not consider that his stated  mental
             health issues changes that."

20.  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  judge  has  committed  the  error  of
    discounting the report when  assessing  credibility  or  that  she  has
    prejudged credibility before  taking  the  report  into  account.   The
    judge's comments that she found  for  the  reasons  set  out  that  the
    moderate depressive episode and PTSD did not relate to a second  arrest
    of the appellant and  that  having  rejected  his  account  of  arrest,
    detention and ill-treatment in 2014  she  did  not  consider  that  the
    report took the case any further forward in relation to  the  facts  of
    the claim must be read in context and the  phraseology  should  not  be
    analysed as if a statute.

21.  The judge said in [15] when assessing credibility that  she  took  into
    account the evidence including the  expert  reports  and  came  to  the
    overall conclusion that the appellant had not been truthful.  She  then
    said that there were material inconsistencies and  implausibilities  in
    the appellant's evidence for which he  had  been  unable  to  give  any
    credible or reasonable explanation and  these  cumulatively  served  to
    undermine his account and the reasons he claimed to fear  returning  to
    Sri Lanka.  The judge has comprehensively set out those matters in  the
    following paragraphs.  She deals with his evidence about the  basis  of
    his claim in [16]-[25].  She introduces [26] by saying that she has had
    regard to the psychiatric report of Dr  Dhumad  and  in  [27]-[28]  she
    deals with the appellant's post-flight activities in the UK.

22.  In [30] the judge finds that the  appellant's  credibility  is  damaged
    under s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,  etc.)
    Act 2004 because he misrepresented his date of entry into the UK to the
    respondent and he sought to conceal the fact of having  been  a  failed
    asylum seeker in France.  He claimed to have entered the UK in  October
    2014 but had previously claimed to the respondent that he  entered  the
    UK  in  December  2015.   He  had  not  claimed  asylum  until  he  was
    encountered and arrested in December 2015 and  she  considered  that  a
    person who had genuinely fled his home  country  in  the  circumstances
    claimed by the appellant would have looked to present his circumstances
    to the authorities as soon as possible and certainly  well  within  the
    year of his arrival.

23.  I am not satisfied that it could be argued that the judge  had  reached
    her findings on credibility without taking  into  account  the  adverse
    factors set out in [30].  Indeed, in [31] she says that it is for  "all
    these reasons that the appellant's account of the reasons he claims  to
    have left Sri Lanka in 2014 is not to be believed".  I am therefore not
    satisfied that the judge approached the  psychiatric  evidence  on  the
    basis that she had already decided that the appellant had not  in  fact
    been arrested in 2014 as claimed.  The judge noted that the psychiatric
    report was prepared on the basis of two interviews for  two  hours  but
    there was only one interview date and she reasonably surmised that  the
    two interviews were conducted on the same day.  The judge was  entitled
    to comment that the appellant's own history of making a  failed  asylum
    claim in France and then being returned to Sri Lanka  might  reasonably
    weigh on his mind and cause some distress.

24.  The judge had concerns about the psychiatric report set out in [26].  I
    note that at para 18.5 of the report Dr Dhumad said that in his opinion
    the appellant was fit to attend a court hearing and give oral  evidence
    but he was depressed and his concentration was poor and it  was  likely
    to get worse.   If  he  were  to  be  cross-examined,  he  respectfully
    recommended that he was given regular breaks and allowed enough time to
    comprehend the questions.  I am not satisfied that there is anything to
    indicate that this was not the case at the hearing.   The  judge  noted
    and understood the appellant's account.  He was represented  and  there
    was an opportunity to make submissions on the weight to be attached  to
    his evidence in the light of the psychiatric report. I am not satisfied
    that the judge erred by failing to make a specific finding  on  whether
    the appellant was a vulnerable  person  or  not.  The  purpose  of  the
    Practice Direction is to ensure that proper  account  is  taken  of  an
    appellant's vulnerability. I am satisfied that the judge  did  so.  She
    considered the substance of the psychiatric report and its implications
    and relevance to the assessment of credibility, and she explained  why,
    taking the report into account, she did not find the  appellant  to  be
    credible. The substance of the approach set out in JL (China) has  been
    followed.

25.  When the decision is read as a whole,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
    ground  on  which  permission  was  granted  is  made  out.  The  judge
    considered  all  the  relevant  evidence  and  reached   findings   and
    conclusions properly open to her for the reasons she gave.

Decision

26.  The First-tier Tribunal did not err in law  and  its  decision  stands.
    As I have already indicated, if further matters now  arise  which  were
    not before the judge it is  open  to  the  appellant  to  make  further
    representations to the respondent.  The anonymity  order  made  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal remains in force until further order.




Signed        H J E Latter                       Dated:  22 May 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter







