
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06866/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 21st October 2019                 |On 24th October 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                    MAMA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, Lei Dat and Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The Appellant is a national of Sudan born in 1973.  He  appeals  with
       permission the decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herwald) to
       dismiss his protection appeal.

    2. For the purpose of this appeal the material finding of fact  made  by
       the First-tier Tribunal is that the Appellant is a non-Arab Darfuri.

    3. Having made that finding the First-tier Tribunal directed  itself  to
       the country guidance in AA (non-Arab Darfuris - Relocation) Sudan  CG
       [2009] UKAIT 00056 and MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00010
       (IAC),  to  the  effect  that  all  non-Arab  Darfuris   would   face
       persecution in Sudan on the basis of their ethnicity alone.  Applying
       that country guidance to the accepted  facts  about  the  Appellant's
       ethnicity, the Appellant would win his appeal.

    4. The Tribunal was not however  satisfied  that  the  country  guidance
       continues to apply. It noted the  Respondent's  submission  that  the
       situation in Sudan has improved for non-Arab Darfuris and  found  the
       Respondent's Country Policy and  Information  Note  ('the  CPIN')  to
       constitute cogent evidence justifying departure from the guidance  in
       AA and MM.  It was driven to the conclusion  that  "things  are  very
       different for Darfuris now, particularly in Khartoum". On that  basis
       the appeal was dismissed.

    5. I am satisfied that in so doing the First-tier Tribunal erred. Whilst
       Mr Tan did submit that Judge Herwald had been entitled to  reach  the
       decision that he did on the basis of the evidence before  him,   this
       is something of a moot  submission  given  that  the  Respondent  now
       accepts that the information in the CPIN is not capable of displacing
       the extant country guidance, which should continue to be applied: AAR
       & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris - return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 00282 (IAC).

    6. I should also note that the Respondent had submitted, by way of 'Rule
       24 response' dated the 2nd October 2018 that any error in approach to
       the country guidance notwithstanding, that guidance  did  not  assist
       this Appellant, who has not lived in Darfur since he was five, having
       latterly lived in Khartoum. Before me Mr Tan accepted  that  in  fact
       this personal history had no bearing on the  outcome  of  the  appeal
       since the Tribunal has made it  clear  that  it  is  an  individual's
       ethnicity, as opposed to place of residence,  which  counts  in  this
       context:  MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010.

    7. I therefore set the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  aside  and
       substitute it by a decision allowing the appeal.




       Anonymity

    8. The Appellant is a refugee. As such I am satisfied, having had regard
       to the guidance in the Presidential  Guidance  Note  No  1  of  2013:
       Anonymity Orders, that it would be appropriate to make  an  order  in
       accordance with Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
       Rules 2008 in the following terms:

           "Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
           Appellant is granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings
           shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his
           family.  This direction applies to,  amongst  others,  both  the
           Appellant and the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
           direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Decisions

    9. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal contains material  error
       of law and it is set aside.

   10. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows:

       "the appeal is allowed on protection grounds".

   11. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st October 2019
