
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06718/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Columbus House, Newport              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 April 2018                              |On 26 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  mrs k m h
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION continued)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr F Magennis, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Services


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

   1. The  appellant  (hereafter  the  Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  has
      permission to challenge the decision of Judge Lloyd of the First-tier
      Tribunal (FtT) posted on 13 October 2017 allowing the appeal  of  the
      respondent (hereafter the claimant), a national of Iran, against  the
      refusal of his protection claim. The judge found that  the  appellant
      was a genuine convert to Christianity and as such would  be  at  real
      risk of persecution if returned to  Iran.  The  SSHD's  grounds  take
      issue with the judge's positive finding as regards the genuineness of
      the claimant's conversion. She contends that it was made in isolation
      from the very clear findings made by FtT Judge Davidge sent on 20 May
      2015 that the appellant was seriously lacking in credibility. In  her
      decision Judge Davidge found, inter alia, that the claimant  and  her
      daughter had repeatedly lied and that her  account,  as  between  the
      screening  interview,  the  substantive  interview  and  her  witness
      statements and oral evidence, was "riddled with  inconsistencies  and
      discrepancies,  the  explanations  about  which  have  added  to  the
      incoherence of her account".


      I heard excellent submissions from  both  representatives,  Mr  Mills
      amplifying the written grounds and Mr  Magennis  contending  (as  had
      been stated  in  the  skeleton  argument)  that  the  judge  had  not
      misapplied Devaseelan since para 39(2) of the guidance in  that  case
      permitted him to make the assessment that he had. Para  39(2)  states
      that:

           "Facts happening since the first Adjudicator's determination can
           always be taken into account  by  the  second  Adjudicator.   If
           those facts lead the second Adjudicator to the conclusion  that,
           at the date of his determination and the  material  before  him,
           the appellant makes his case, so be it.  The previous  decision,
           on the material before the first Adjudicator and at  that  date,
           is not inconsistent."

    Mr Magennis pointed to  a  number  of  passages  where  the  judge  had
    addressed  Devaseelan  e.g.  at  paragraphs  1,  18,  44  and  54   and
    highlighted  the  fact  that  the   judge   directly   confronted   the
    difficulties potentially posed to the claimant's account  by  the  fact
    that she had been found not credible in her previous claim.   He  noted
    that of particular importance to the judge was the fact that there  was
    corroboration from two independent witnesses who gave live evidence and
    the SSHD did not challenge the evidence that the claimant had  attended
    at the Iranian Christian Fellowship in Plymouth and regularly  attended
    church.

2.   I consider the SSHD's challenge to the judge's findings  is  made  out.
    It is true that the judge stated that he was applying the guidance  set
    out in Devaseelan and that he had stated in his decision that  he  took
    the previous decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Davidge  as  his
    starting point.  It is also true  that  the  basis  of  the  claimant's
    asylum appeal on the last occasion  was  different  from  the  one  the
    claimant was advancing now.  Previously she based her claim on  a  fear
    of political persecution as someone who was politically active  against
    the government and a "fighter for the rights of women".  The  basis  of
    the present claim was that she would be at  risk  as  someone  who  had
    converted to Christianity since the time of her  last  appeal.   It  is
    also true that the judge's assessment did  not  rely  entirely  on  the
    claimant's account but took into  account  the  corroborative  evidence
    given by two  independent  witnesses.   However,  reading  the  judge's
    decision, I cannot see any real engagement with the findings  of  Judge
    Davidge or any effective demonstration that he actually took them as  a
    starting point.  Instead what one finds is that the judge deciding that
    the previous findings were irrelevant because "the issue in the present
    appeal is quite distinct from  that  which  was  at  the  root  of  the
    previous application and appeal" (paragraph 18; see also paragraph 54).
     The two claims were indeed distinct, but at the root of both  was  the
    issue of the claimant's credibility.  It is trite law that just because
    a person has lied about an asylum-related matter in the past  does  not
    mean they are lying about it in the present, especially when the  facts
    now relied on (in this case, the  conversion)  were  not  in  existence
    previously.  At the same time, it was incumbent on the judge to explain
    why he  considered  the  claimant's  previous  lies  (which  the  first
    Tribunal Judge clearly found to be very extensive) were not to be taken
    as indicative of untruthfulness in her present claim.  The closest  the
    judge came to engaging with the issue was at  paragraph  57  where  the
    judge stated:-

           "I find no ground other  than  pure  and  utter  speculation  to
           conclude that because the Appellant's  conversion  followed  her
           appeal rights exhausted status her  conversion  must  have  been
           caused by the dismissal of her claim.  The  Appellant  does  not
           dispute that she went to church after having her asylum  claimed
           refused.  That however provides no  basis  for  this  appeal  to
           conclude that she converted to Christianity merely  because  she
           had no further appeal rights to pursue.  The Appellant is  quite
           honest that the turmoil of her despair and  her  state  of  mind
           following her failed appeal she attended church on the advice of
           a friend to find peace and tranquillity.  She was affected badly
           by depression and anxiety and that was aggravated by the failure
           of her asylum claim.  She attended church for the first time  in
           September 2015 on the advice of one  friend  in  particular  who
           found peace in the Christian religion.   She  became  a  true  a
           (sic) Christian by a sort of 'journey' that Reverend Maynard has
           referred to in his evidence.  At the same time, he is  realistic
           and  pragmatic enough to acknowledge that he  cannot  look  into
           the inner spirituality of a person and judge  whether  they  are
           genuine converts or not.   However,  he  has  insight  into  the
           workings of the Christian Church and the Christian faith and  he
           has had exposure to other asylum seekers.  He is as sure  as  he
           can be that the Appellant is a genuine  convert.   That,  in  my
           conclusion is further support for the Appellant discharging  the
           lower standard of proof to which he must accord in this appeal."

3.   However,  there  are  two  serious  difficulties  with  this  analysis.
    First, the question the judge addresses here concerns whether there was
    a causal correction between dismissal of her  previous  claim  and  her
    conversion.  That  was  not  the  essential  question.   The  essential
    question was whether,  irrespective  of  causation,  the  claimant  had
    undergone a genuine  conversion.   Second,  the  only  characterisation
    given to the submission made by the SSHD, that her conversion  was  not
    genuine was that it was based  on  "pure  and  utter  speculation".   A
    judicial finding that a claimant has previously lied extensively cannot
    fairly be characterised as "pure and utter  speculation".   Third,  the
    only reply (it was agreed by the parties) that the claimant  made  when
    it was put to her in cross-examination that she had been found  by  the
    previous judge not to be a credible witness  was  to  say  "I  went  to
    church to [achieve] inner tranquillity".  That reply cannot be said  to
    offer any explanation for why she had lied before or why she should not
    be considered to be lying this time.  I agree with Mr Mills that when a
    previous judge has found a claimant to have lied extensively, a  proper
    application of Devaseelan principles requires a  recognition  that  the
    claimant faces an uphill test.  It is not enough simply to say that the
    nature of the asylum claim is quite or very different.

4.   It must be frustrating for the claimant that she fails in  her  attempt
    to defend the SSHD's grounds because of  errors  on  the  part  of  the
    judge, but at the same time she cannot expect to succeed  in  achieving
    status as a refugee without a proper assessment of her credibility, one
    that does more than pay lip service, to  previous  adverse  credibility
    findings of a quite serious kind.

5.   For the above reasons I set aside the decision of  the  FtT  judge  for
    material error of law.

6.   I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Lloyd).  None of the judge's findings of fact can  be  preserved,
    although the next judge will of course wish to  consult  Judge  Lloyd's
    decision for a record of what the claimant and her  witnesses  said  in
    oral testimony.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 25 April 2018

[pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
