
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06816/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 13 November 2019              |On 3 January 2020                |
|                                 |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                  SA (IRAQ)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Schon, instructed by Brighton Housing Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is an Iraqi national who was born on 18 August 2000.   He
    appeals against a decision which was issued by Judge  Rae-Reeves  ("the
    judge")  on  30  August  2019,  dismissing  his  appeal   against   the
    respondent's refusal of his claim for international protection.

 2. For present purposes it suffices to adopt the concise  summary  of  the
    appellant's claim which appears at [1]-[5] of the grounds of appeal  to
    this Tribunal.  The appellant is a Sunni Kurd from Kirkuk.  He lost his
    mother in a car accident at the age of six and lost his father when  he
    was a teenager.  The appellant stated that his father had been in  debt
    to an official from the Patriotic Union of  Kurdistan  ("PUK").   After
    his father' death, that man had kidnapped the appellant  and  tried  to
    extort money from the appellant's family.  A threat was  also  made  to
    sell the appellant into prostitution.  The appellant managed to  escape
    and fled Iraq with the assistance of his neighbour's son, with whom  he
    travelled for much the ensuing  journey.  He  arrived  in  the  UK  and
    claimed  asylum  on  13  November  2016  (aged  16).   The  appellant's
    protection claim was based on the events which preceded his  departure.
    He also claimed to be entitled to subsidiary protection as a Sunni Kurd
    from Kirkuk.

 3. The respondent refused the application nearly three years later, on  30
    June 2019.  She did not accept that the appellant was from  Kirkuk  and
    concluded that he was actually from the IKR: [20]-[25].   She  did  not
    accept any part of the appellant's account of the events which preceded
    his departure from Iraq: [26]-[33]. She considered that  the  appellant
    could return directly to the IKR and that he could  obtain  replacement
    civil status documentation there,  with  the  assistance  of  his  male
    relatives: [36]-[45].  She concluded that  the  appellant  could  avail
    himself of a sufficiency of protection in the IKR  and  that  he  could
    relocate to Sulaymaniyah or Dohuk: [46]-[56] and  [57]-[67].   She  did
    not consider there to be any  alternative  basis  upon  which  she  was
    required to grant the appellant leave to remain: [69]-[90].

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appeal came before the judge, sitting at Hatton Cross, on 15 August
    2019.  The appellant  was  present  and  represented  by  Ms  Schon  of
    counsel.  The respondent was also represented  by  counsel.   Ms  Schon
    presented the judge  with  a  very  lengthy  skeleton  which  contained
    copious citation from authority.  The appellant gave evidence  and  the
    representatives made submissions.

 5. In his reserved decision, the  judge  comprehensively  disbelieved  the
    appellant's account.  At [22], he explained that his concerns as to the
    truthfulness of the appellants account stemmed from three  points:  his
    ability to fund the trip to the UK; his account of the kidnapping;  and
    his ability to obtain a CSID.  At [23]-[26],  [27]-[30]  and  [31]-[40]
    respectively, the judge explained why his concerns about those  aspects
    of the appellant's account caused him to reject it and to  dismiss  the
    appeal. The judge did not accept that the appellant was in fear of  the
    PUK.  Nor did he accept that he was from Kirkuk.  He concluded that the
    appellant could return to  the  IKR  and  could  obtain  a  replacement
    document with the assistance of is family members.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 6. Permission to appeal was sought on no fewer  than  seven  grounds.   At
    nine pages of single-spaced  type,  the  grounds  are  only  marginally
    shorter than the decision under appeal.  It was submitted that:

      i) the judge had failed to bear  the  appellant's  age  in  mind  when
         assessing the credibility of his account;

     ii) insufficient reasons had been given for rejecting  the  appellant's
         claim to be from Kirkuk;

    iii) the  judge  had  not  considered  the  appellant's  entitlement  to
         humanitarian protection;

     iv) various concerns had not been put to the appellant;

      v) material matters had been overlooked in assessing  the  credibility
         of the appellant's account;

     vi) the judge had made findings  which  were  confused  and  irrational
         regarding the appellant's entry to the UK; and

    vii) the judge had failed to apply anxious scrutiny to  the  appellant's
         claim.

 7. Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Macdonald considered each of these
    grounds to be arguable.

 8. By ground one, Ms Schon highlights the fact that the appellant attained
    his majority on 18 August 2018.  He was  a  child  during  the  claimed
    events in Iraq, as he was when he entered the UK and when he  gave  his
    account of those events to the respondent during two interviews and  an
    initial witness statement.  Although the appellant was an adult by  the
    date of the hearing, she submits that it was incumbent  on  the  judge,
    when assessing the credibility of the appellant's account, to take into
    account the fact that he was a minor when the events occurred and  when
    he gave his account of those events to the respondent.  She notes  that
    this point was made at [31]-[33] of her skeleton  argument  before  the
    FtT.  Amongst other authorities, she cites the decision  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in KS (benefit of the doubt) [2014] UKUT 552 (IAC),  in  which
    it was held that 'a child-sensitive application of the  lower  standard
    of proof may still need to be given to persons if they  are  recounting
    relevant events that took place at a time when they were minors'.

 9. At the outset of the hearing before me, I  invited  Mr  Tufan  to  make
    submissions  on  the  first  ground.   I  explained  that  it  was   my
    provisional view that  there  was  merit  in  this  ground.   Mr  Tufan
    submitted that the ground disclosed no legal error on the part  of  the
    judge.  He submitted that the judge was clearly aware of the fact  that
    the appellant was a minor at material times.  He submitted that it  was
    clear from [23](v) and [32] of the judge's decision that the judge  had
    adopted a proper approach to the evaluation of the appellant's account.



10.  I  indicated  at  the  hearing  that  I  did  not  accept  Mr  Tufan's
    submissions.  I found that the judge had erred materially in law in the
    manner contended in ground one.  I said that  I  would  set  aside  the
    judge's decision and remit the appeal for  a  hearing  de  novo  before
    another judge at Hatton Cross.  My reasons for reaching that conclusion
    are as follows.

Analysis

11. Mr Tufan was evidently correct insofar as he submitted that  the  judge
    was aware of the appellant's age.  The judge gave the appellant's  date
    of birth at [1] and [3] of  the  decision.   In  the  second  of  those
    paragraphs, the judge also noted that the appellant entered the UK when
    he was 16 years old.  At [17], he  recorded  that  he  had  received  a
    letter from West Sussex County Council.  That letter confirmed, amongst
    other things, that the appellant was a Former Relevant Child under  s24
    of the Children Act 1989.  I note also that the judge's typed Record of
    Proceedings records a  preliminary  discussion  with  counsel  for  the
    respondent, in which she accepted (at  the  judge's  request)  that  it
    would be inappropriate to adopt those parts of the  refusal  letter  in
    which section 8 of the Treatment of Claimants Act was  invoked  against
    the appellant, given his age when he travelled to the UK.

12. At [23](v), the first of two  paragraphs  relied  on  by  Mr  Tufan  in
    defence of the decision, we find this section:

         "I also reject the Respondent's assertion that the Appellant should
         not have gone into the car with Perot.  As a teenage  boy,  he  may
         have felt that he had absolutely no choice but  to  follow  Perot's
         command if, indeed, the incident took place."

13. Then, at [32], there is a sentence  in  which  the  judge  rejected  an
    aspect of the appellant's account in the following way:

         "Even accounting for the Appellant's age and vulnerability,  it  is
         beyond credibility to think that by calling or contacting Haji  Ali
         his alleged assailant will somehow track him or exert influence  on
         him in the UK."

14. Notwithstanding those references, it is by  no  means  clear  from  the
    judge's decision as a whole that he adopted the approach which had been
    correctly  urged  upon  him  a  [31]-[33]  of  Ms   Schon's   skeleton.
    Consideration has been given to the proper approach  to  asylum  claims
    made by children (or former children) in a number of  authorities.   Ms
    Schon cited KS (Afghanistan) and I have reproduced the relevant section
    of [99] of that decision above.  Also worthy of mention is  the  rather
    shorter review of the authorities at [38]-[42] of AA  (Afghanistan)  CG
    [2012] UKUT 16 (IAC).  Both decisions pre-date what  was  said  by  the
    Senior President of Tribunals in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123;
    [2018] 4 WLR 78, in which the Ryder LJ (with whom Underhill  and  Gross
    LJJ agreed) gave general guidance on the approach to be adopted by  the
    Immigration and Asylum Chamber to the fair determination of claims  for
    asylum from children and other vulnerable individuals.

15. At [30]-[33] of his  judgment,  the  Senior  President  emphasised  the
    importance of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2  of  2010.   At
    [33], he cited paragraphs 13-15 of that guidance in full.  Paragraph 15
    is in the following terms:

         "[15]    The  decision  should  record  whether  the  Tribunal  has
         concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a  child,  vulnerable  or
         sensitive,  the  effect  the  Tribunal  considered  the  identified
         vulnerability had in assessing the  evidence  before  it  and  this
         whether the  Tribunal  was  satisfied  whether  the  appellant  had
         established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.   In
         asylum appeals, weight should be given to objective indications  of
         risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind."

16. In this case, it was not contended that the appellant was a  vulnerable
    witness at the date of the hearing.  What was contended,  instead,  was
    that the appellant had been vulnerable, by dint  of  his  age,  at  all
    times prior to 18 August 2018, and that it was incumbent on  the  judge
    to consider and assess the effect that this  vulnerability  might  have
    had on the account  given  by  the  appellant.   In  my  judgment,  the
    references at [23] and [32] of the judge's decision  do  not  establish
    that  he  adopted  that  approach  throughout  his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's  credibility.   The  judge  raised   concerns   about   the
    plausibility of various aspects of the appellant's account  throughout,
    and the appellant's age was relevant to the weight to  be  attached  to
    those points.  The judge made  further  criticism  of  the  appellant's
    account because  it  was  insufficiently  detailed,  but  his  age  was
    relevant in that connection also.  Equally, the judge  noted  that  the
    appellant's later account was discrepant with that he had given to  the
    respondent in some respects, but his  age  was  also  relevant  to  the
    evaluation of such inconsistencies.

17. The judge was obviously not required to accept the appellant's  account
    simply because he had claimed asylum as a child.  On any  proper  view,
    there are significant difficulties with the  account  given.   But  the
    context in which that account had initially been given  had  to  colour
    the judge's assessment in the way set out in the authorities  described
    above and it is by no means clear that the judge adopted that approach.
     In particular, it is by no means clear that the judge turned his  mind
    to consider whether the difficulties with the appellant's account might
    be attributable to  the  age  at  which  that  account  was  originally
    provided, or the age of the  appellant  when  the  events  in  question
    occurred.  Despite the obvious care  with  which  the  judge  otherwise
    conducted the hearing and determined the appeal, I  have  come  to  the
    clear conclusion that his decision is vitiated by  the  legal  error  I
    have described, and that it cannot stand.

18. In the circumstances, the proper course is for the appeal to  be  heard
    completely afresh in the FtT and  I  order  that  it  be  remitted  for
    consideration by another judge at Hatton Cross to that end.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT was erroneous  in  law  and  is  set  aside  in  its
entirety.  The appeal is to be remitted to another judge at Hatton Cross  to
be reheard de novo.



Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                                    [pic]
                                MARK BLUNDELL
                      Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

                               02 January 2020

