








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06801/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 4th October 2018              |On: 19th October 2018                    |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                     S M
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan counsel, instructed by Westgate Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


   1. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 21  July  1983.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Loke, dismissing his asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
      rights claims. The appellant  had  no  evidence  to  substantiate  his
      assertion that he has been resident in the UK since 1999.


   2. Judge Loke found  that  the  'account'  the  appellant  gave  was  not
      credible [34]. She came to that view because of the vagueness  of  his
      account regarding his alleged political activities.


   3. She found that s.8 of the 2004 Act applied to him in two ways:  first,
      the fact that he had not made an asylum claim previously  despite  his
      claim that he  had  been  resident  here  for  19  years  damages  his
      credibility. She did not find it credible that although  he  told  his
      Bengali friends about his problems, he  was  never  advised  to  claim
      asylum and therefore claimed that he never knew the process [36].


   4. Secondly, the giving of a false alias to the immigration officers when
      he was encountered on 14 January  2014  damaged  his  credibility.  He
      initially gave a false alias and stated that he had leave to remain in
      the UK. That is not in dispute [37].


   5. The appellant then gave his real name to the immigration officers. The
      Home Office indicates that he stated  that  he  wished  to  return  to
      Bangladesh. In oral evidence however he denied that. At  Q145  of  the
      substantive asylum interview, he was asked why he told the immigration
      officers that he was happy to return to Bangladesh. His  response  was
      that whatever he said was because he was frightened. He  thought  they
      were going to send him back and he was sorry for what he said.


   6. She noted that the appellant did not deny having stated  that  he  was
      happy to return to Bangladesh in his  asylum  interview.  Despite  his
      oral evidence, she did not find him credible. Furthermore,  she  found
      that he would have disputed the comment in the interview if he had not
      said what was claimed by the immigration officer.


   7. She accordingly found that he did indeed tell the immigration officers
      that he was happy to go to Bangladesh. Accordingly, the fact  that  he
      was willing to return damages the credibility of  his  case  generally
      [38].


   8. She stated that she considered the arrest  warrant  and  charge  sheet
      'with care' at [39]. It was contended that the documents  should  have
      been verified by the respondent and that the decision in  PJ  applied.
      However, the documents before her "were of a far less clear provenance
      to the documents before the Court in PJ. There was no evidence  as  to
      how they had been obtained.


   9. The appellant gave evidence that  the  documents  produced  after  his
      appeal was filed, were obtained by means of a man he  knew  as  Razul.
      However, the charge sheet and arrest warrant  were  obtained  for  the
      purpose of the appellant's initial application. There is  no  evidence
      as to how these documents were obtained. She therefore  did  not  find
      that this is an exceptional case which required the respondent to have
      conducted verification checks before rejecting the documents [40].


  10. She had regard to the report of a Home  Office  fact  finding  mission
      conducted in May 2017, and published in  September  2017.  One  source
      noted that 'forced or fraudulent' police or court  documents  are  not
      easily obtainable because of counter signature processes and the  fact
      that all documents can be checked against a database.


  11. However, Judge Loke noted that in the very same report  at  Annex  D.,
      the official told the delegate  that  there  was  no  national  police
      computer system in place. Crimes can only  be  reported  to  a  police
      station within the jurisdiction  of  where  the  crime  occurred.  The
      officials said that forged  and  fraudulent  documents,  for  example,
      arrest warrants and/or court summons were easily obtainable [41].


  12. She found that there was no evidence as to  the  provenance  of  these
      documents. She applied Tanveer Ahmed and found  that  these  documents
      carry little weight [42].


  13. Further, she stated that the  appellant's  account  of  his  political
      activities is vague and lacking in detail. In his interview as to what
      he had to do to join the BNP, his answers provided  no  details  about
      what he had to do. That damaged his credibility [43].


  14. When asked why he joined the BNP, his response was because  "it  is  a
      good party, that's why." However, he was  unable  to  demonstrate  any
      knowledge of the tenets or principles  of  the  BNP  which  she  would
      expect, given his claims to have been Broadcasting Secretary [44].


  15. Despite being pressed, the appellant provided no  details  as  to  his
      responsibilities as Broadcasting Secretary [45]. Nor  did  he  provide
      any further details about his role or responsibilities in his  witness
      statement. None was provided in  oral  evidence.  She  considered  the
      submission that with respect to the BNP age limit, it was possible for
      the appellant to have joined the Youth Wing which did not  require  an
      age limit. She found  that  was  possible;  however,  in  his  witness
      statement the appellant confirmed that he was a member of the JCD. The
      country guidance states, unequivocally, that  senior  members  appoint
      JCD members who must be over the age of 18 - [47].


  16. Whilst she might have been open to the possibility that the age  limit
      was waived in his case, she found his account not to be credible [48].




  17. She noted that the appellant claimed in  his  witness  statement  that
      there may have been  'interpretational'  difficulties  at  his  asylum
      interview. He claimed to have been scared and may not have  understood
      the questions. However, she noted at [15(iii)] that he indicated  that
      whilst he was scared, and may not have understood  the  questions,  he
      then said that he was able to understand the  interpreter.  She  found
      that he did not have problems with the interpreter. His answers  given
      at interview demonstrate that he  understood  the  questions.  In  any
      event, none were corrected or expanded on in his  answers,  either  in
      his witness statement or his oral evidence [49].


  18. She had regard  to  the  letters  provided  by  alleged  BNP  members.
      However, given that she did not find the appellant credible,  she  did
      not find that the letters contained the truth of his position. [50]


  19. She accordingly found that  it  is  not  reasonably  likely  that  the
      appellant is wanted for prosecution in Bangladesh. He gave a  skeletal
      and general  account  in  interview  which  does  not  demonstrate  as
      reasonably likely that he was present at either of the events referred
      to in his interview.


  20. She noted at [53] that the newspaper  articles  produced  contained  a
      number of names, one of which is 'Suhel Miah, Press Secretary  of  the
      BNP'. Neither the appellant in his  interview  nor  in  oral  evidence
      indicated that he is the person named in  this  article.  His  counsel
      initially stated that the appellant was not so named but  then  stated
      "yes." She found that the appellant is not named in  the  article.  He
      claimed to be a broadcasting secretary for a local JCD wing of the BNP
      and not the Press Secretary of the BNP. Nor did the appellant  at  any
      stage claim that he suffered injury by shooting at these incidents.


  21. She took account of photographs provided by  the  appellant,  none  of
      which included him in  the  pictures  and  are  not  evidence  of  his
      involvement in any BNP demonstrations [54].


  22. He has not engaged in any BNP activities in the UK. He claims to  have
      supported the BNP, however he is not  a  member.  The  extent  of  his
      claimed involvement is that he attends meetings and demonstrations. He
      provided no  further  details  than  that.  There  is  no  independent
      evidence of his playing any part in the BNP activity in the  UK  [55].
      She did not find that it is reasonably likely  that  he  has  had  any
      involvement with the BNP in Bangladesh or in the UK,  or  that  he  is
      wanted in Bangladesh in respect of his previous activities [56].


  23. There is no documentary evidence of his assertion that he entered  the
      UK  in  1999.  Taking  his  evidence  at  the  highest,  the  earliest
      photographs he has produced in the  UK  were  in  2007.  Mr  Ali  gave
      evidence of knowing the appellant in 2007 [58].


  24. When encountered by  immigration  officers  on  14  January  2017,  he
      informed them  that  he  had  entered  the  UK  by  lorry  four  years
      previously, namely in 2013. He does not deny stating this.  She  found
      that there is no credible reason why he would say  he  had  only  been
      resident for four years rather than the 18 years [59].


  25. With regard  to  submissions  concerning  the  risk  of  suicide,  she
      directed herself in accordance with J v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 629.  She
      found that the evidence that was limited entirely to what is  said  in
      his asylum interview, did not meet the test. She went  on  to  dismiss
      his Article 8 claim.


  26. On 13 August  2018,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Andrew  granted  the
      appellant permission to appeal on the basis that it is  arguable  that
      the Judge did not consider section 8 of the 2004 Act in the round, but
      appears to have taken this as his starting point. Further,  the  Judge
      made no findings in relation to the evidence of his witness. This  may
      have affected her findings in relation  to  credibility.  Further,  at
      paragraph 66 of the decision she noted that the Judge referred to  Sri
      Lanka. That is not the country from which the appellant comes.


The hearing before the Upper Tribunal


  27. Mr Khan, who did not represent the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, adopted the grounds of appeal. The decision did not  reflect
      on Mr Ali's live evidence.


  28. Section 8 should be the starting point for assessing  the  appellant's
      credibility and should not merely be taken in the round having already
      drawn a conclusion on credibility as a whole.


  29. He referred to Mr Ali's witness statement dated 25 June 2018.  Mr  Ali
      stated in paragraphs  8-10,  that  he  is  aware  of  the  appellant's
      immigration status and his circumstances in  Bangladesh.  Due  to  his
      circumstances, from time to time he has helped him whenever  he  needs
      help. Since last year, he has been living at his home. He has  allowed
      him because of his circumstances. He is  living  free  of  charge  and
      getting free meals too. They used to live in the same flat  above  the
      restaurant where they both worked. He became a family friend. All  his
      children know him as their uncle.


  30. In his evidence before the Tribunal, Mr Ali stated that the  appellant
      told him he had been in the UK since  1999.  He  told  him  about  his
      problems when they met. He also overheard  conversations  between  him
      and the appellant and his lawyer about the warrants  against  him.  He
      then advised the appellant to see a solicitor after he was arrested in
      2017.


  31. Mr Khan submitted that Judge Loke made no findings in  respect  of  Mr
      Ali's evidence.


  32. Ms Pal accepted that the Judge made an  error  in  referring  to  "Sri
      Lanka" at [66]. However, this is not  material.  The  Judge  was  well
      aware that she was dealing with an appellant from Bangladesh.


  33. Although there was not a specific finding regarding Mr Ali's evidence,
      the Judge made extensive findings of fact from [34] onwards.


  34. She considered the arrest warrant and charge sheet with care. She also
      had regard to the letters provided by alleged BNP members. She did not
      find that the letters contained the truth of the appellant's position.




  35. She also had proper regard to photographs provided by the appellant.


Assessment


  36. Ms Pal accepted that  the  Judge  has  made  no  specific  finding  in
      relation to the evidence of Mr Ali contained in his witness statement.
      She however had regard  to  his  oral-7  evidence,  and  set  out  and
      summarised his cross examination at [16]. In particular he  claims  to
      have overheard conversations between  the  appellant  and  his  lawyer
      concerning warrants against him.


  37. However, the Judge  has  gone  on  to  consider  in  some  detail  the
      appellant's claims relating to the arrest warrant and charge sheet.


  38. She referred to the decision in PJ. She noted that in that appeal, the
      same documents had been independently obtained by two lawyers, both of
      whom had provided evidence  of  obtaining  the  documents  by  way  of
      requesting them from the Court. The respondent did  not  dispute  that
      the two persons were indeed lawyers  in  that  case.  Accordingly  the
      Court held that in those circumstances, clear evidence  by  way  of  a
      verification check should have been made in order to find  that  those
      documents were not authentic [39].


  39. As already noted, Judge Loke found that the documents before her  were
      of a far less clear provenance. There was simply an assertion that the
      documents produced after his appeal was filed, were obtained by a  man
      called Razul. She found however  that  the  charge  sheet  and  arrest
      warrant were obtained for  the  purpose  of  the  appellant's  initial
      application.


  40. There was however no evidence as to how those documents were obtained.
      In those circumstances, she found that  this  was  not  a  case  which
      required  the  respondent  to  conduct  verification   checks   before
      rejecting them.


  41. She also had regard to the evidence at Annex D of the Home Office fact
      finding mission to  which  I  have  referred.  Forged  and  fraudulent
      documents for example, arrest  warrants  and/or  court  summons,  were
      easily obtainable.


  42. Judge Loke has properly directed herself in  accordance  with  Tanveer
      Ahmed. She noted that in considering whether the document  is  one  on
      which reliance should properly be placed, all  the  evidence  must  be
      looked at in the round. In  the  circumstances,  she  found  that  the
      documents carried little weight.


  43. She has also properly considered that s.8 of the 2002 Act  applied  to
      him. In the decision granting  the  appellant  permission  to  appeal,
      Judge Andrews noted that the Judge did not consider s.8 in  the  round
      but appears to have taken this as his (sic) starting point.


  44. However, Judge Loke expressly stated at [34]  that  having  considered
      all the evidence as a whole, including the  background  evidence,  the
      documentary evidence and the credibility submissions on behalf of  the
      appellant, she had come to the conclusion that the account  given  was
      not credible.


  45. She came to this view because of  the  vagueness  of  the  appellant's
      account of his alleged political activities. She then stated that  she
      also found that s.8 applied to the appellant in the two ways that  she
      identified at [36-38].


  46. I  find  that  Judge  Loke  has  undertaken  a  detailed  and  careful
      assessment of the evidence. She  has  given  proper  reasons  for  her
      findings, including the contention that the appellant might  have  had
      'interpretational difficulties' at  the  asylum  interview.  She  also
      considered the letters provided by alleged BNP members.


  47. She considered in detail the appellant's claims that he is wanted  for
      prosecution in Bangladesh. She noted that he was unable  to  give  any
      details as to how the alleged fight started. He simply  gave  skeletal
      and general accounts in the interview which did not  demonstrate  that
      it was reasonably likely that he was present at either event.


  48. No point was  raised  as  to  her  findings  at  [53],  regarding  the
      newspaper articles referring to Suhel Miah.


  49. Nor was there any challenge to her finding that the appellant has  not
      engaged in any BNP activities in the UK. Nor was there  any  challenge
      to her finding that the appellant did not enter the  UK  in  1999,  as
      claimed.


  50. The fact that she referred to Sri Lanka in her Article 8 assessment is
      clearly nothing more than an immaterial error.  His  whole  claim  was
      based on his activities in Bangladesh. She  was  well  aware  that  he
      would be returned to Bangladesh.


  51.  The  Judge  has  undertaken  a  detailed  assessment  and  has  given
      sustainable reasons for all her findings. There are no material errors
      of law.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making  of
      any material error on a point of law. The decision  shall  accordingly
      stand.


      Anonymity direction continued.






      Signed                             Date 12th October 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C Mailer









