
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06065/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th October 2019                 |On 23 October 2019                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                    E M M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jafar, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"), and
    as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, EMM is  granted
    anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly
    identify her or any member  of  her  family.   This  direction  applies
    amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply  with  this  direction
    could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a national of Kenya.  She arrived in the  UK  on  12th
    February 2019 having been granted a Tier 5 TW  (Charity)  migrant  visa
    valid until 4th March 2020. She claimed asylum on 1st  March  2019  and
    her claim was refused by the respondent for the reasons set  out  in  a
    decision dated 19th June 2019.


 3. The decision of 19th June 2019 gave rise to an appeal that was heard by
    FtT Judge Burns ("the  judge")  on  25th  July  2019.  The  appeal  was
    dismissed for the reasons set out in  a  decision  promulgated  on  7th
    August 2019. It is that decision that is  the  subject  of  the  appeal
    before me.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Andrew on 2nd September 2019.


 4. The factual background to the claim is not in issue. It is set  out  at
    paragraphs [13] to [15] of the judge's decision.


         "13. The appellant is a single woman  aged  nearly  28  years.  The
         appellant's family home is in a rural area namely Kiungani  village
         near Kitale in the far west of Kenya. She attended  school  in  the
         Kitale area  and  after  school  obtained  a  Diploma  in  Business
         Administration from the Technical Institute in  Kakamega,  and  she
         can speak and write English  well.  She  worked  in  Kenya  selling
         clothes and working for a charity.


         14.  She had several lesbian relationships in Kenya, from a  fairly
         young age. She conducted these in secret or discreetly because  she
         feared reprisals from her family and members of the public  if  she
         was discovered.


         15.   When  her  father  discovered  her  involvement  in   a   gay
         relationship in February 2018 he assaulted her with a "block with a
         nail in it".  She suffered injuries and reported the assault to the
         police, who did nothing about it. After that she went to live  with
         an aunt. She was given an opportunity to visit the UK to work for a
         charity and entered the UK on 12/2/2019 on her own  passport  on  a
         charity worker visa."


 5. The judge went on to consider the material relied upon by the appellant
    to establish that she is at risk upon return. The judge found that  the
    report of Mr Murugi, was not helpful in  deciding  the  issues  in  the
    appeal.  The judge also considered the judgement of the High  Court  in
    Kenya dated 24th May 2019 in petition 150  of  2016,  noting  that  the
    court had dismissed petitions which sought to obtain declarations  that
    the provisions of the Kenyan criminal code that criminalised  gay  sex,
    were unconstitutional.  The judge referred to an unreported decision of
    Judge Norton-Taylor in another appeal, that the appellant relied  upon.
    Having considered all the background material before him, at  paragraph
    [36], the judge noted that the information as a whole, paints  a  mixed
    picture with different sources pointing different ways. He said:


         "... I do not find it a helpful or sensible approach  to  focus  on
         particular sources either positive or negative, to the exclusion of
         other sources pointing the  other  way,  but  rather  to  read  the
         material as a whole. Having done that I regard the  policy  summary
         which I have set out in paragraphs 22 above, as balanced, fair  and
         correct."


 6. At paragraph [37], the judge stated:


         "I conclude on the basis of the COI as a whole and in summary that


           . The situation for LGBT people in Kenya is  discriminatory  and
             still unsatisfactory but a liberalisation process is  underway
             and has been for some  time,  although  law  reform  is  still
             required.


           . Violence and  abuse  against  some  LGBT  persons  does  occur
             occasionally, and in some of those instances, but not  always,
             the police are unco-operative.


           . In Nairobi in particular  there  is  an  expanding  space  and
             opportunity for LGBT persons to live open lives in  reasonable
             safety.


           . In general, the problems faced by LGBT persons in  Kenya,  and
             certainly in Nairobi do not meet the threshold of  seriousness
             which amounts to persecution of those persons or  their  being
             at a real risk of serious harm."


 7. The judge then addressed the possibility  of  internal  relocation  and
    stated at paragraphs [38] and [39] as follows:


         "38. The appellant is a well-educated and healthy young  woman  who
         has already lived away from home (when studying  at  Kakamega,  and
         more recently in the UK). She has  worked  in  various  employments
         before and  is  capable  of  earning  her  own  living  and  living
         independently.


         39.  I see no reason why she could not  successfully  re-locate  to
         Nairobi  where  I  find  that  although  she  may  encounter   some
         discrimination, she would be able to enjoy  an  open  lesbian  life
         without suffering persecution or running a  real  risk  of  serious
         harm. It is obvious that many other gay Kenyans are  already  doing
         so."





The appeal before me


 8. Mr Jafar adopted the grounds of appeal  dated  15th  August  2018.   He
    submits the issue in the appeal was whether it would  be  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to internally relocate to  Nairobi.  He  submits  the
    judge erred in law by equating the  infernal  flight  alternative  test
    with a breach of Article 3 or persecution. He submits the judge  failed
    to consider the effect of being stigmatised because homosexual activity
    is illegal, in light of background material that members  of  the  LGBT
    community are prevented access  to  social  services,  healthcare,  and
    employment.


 9. He submits  the  judge  failed  to  ask  himself  whether  in  all  the
    circumstances, internal relocation was reasonable, and would allow  the
    appellant to live a relatively normal life. He refers to  the  decision
    of the House of Lords in AH  (Sudan)  -v-  SSHD  [2006]  UKHL  49,  and
    submits that although the judge recognised that the situation for  LGBT
    people in Kenya is discriminatory, the judge failed to consider whether
    that discrimination is an obstacle to  living  a  normal  life  without
    discrimination. He refers to  extracts  from  the  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note Kenya: Sexual orientation and gender  identity  (March
    2017) ("COI Report") and submits the background material confirms  that
    although  same-sex  conduct  between  women  is  not   interpreted   as
    prohibited under the penal  code,  lesbians  -  like  gay  men  -  face
    considerable prejudice and discrimination, in part  because  of  stigma
    associated with  the  criminalisation  of  same-sex  relationships.  He
    submits the background material demonstrates that the  LGBTI  community
    experience  discrimination  in  accessing  healthcare,  education   and
    employment, with the continued existence of the laws being a key causal
    factor.


10. Mr Jafar submits the overall  effect  of  the  discrimination  directed
    against the LGBT community is such that where they live in  open,  they
    are forced to live in  unconscionable  conditions.   He  refers  to  an
    extract set  out  in  paragraph  6.1.10  of  the  COI  Report  (source:
    Huffington Post, Lesbian, Bisexual and Queer Women Speak Out in  Kenya,
    20 February 2016) that states one impact of  rights  abuses  among  LBQ
    women is high levels of "stress-related problems, such  as  depression,
    insomnia and anxiety.". It is said that  as  a  result  of  accumulated
    stress and depression, "a large part of 'lesbian culture' in the larger
    cities in Kenya consists of  heavy  drinking  and  drug  abuse.".   The
    report states that mental  health  and  substance  abuse  services  are
    scarce and difficult to access for all Kenyans, and LBQ women face  the
    additional burden of identifying the rare providers who will help  them
    without judging their sexuality or gender identity.  Mr  Jafar  accepts
    that there is no evidence that the appellant has any predisposition  to
    heavy drinking or drug abuse, or that she turned  to  drink  and  drugs
    previously, when living in Kenya.


11. Mr Jafar submits the judge failed to consider  whether  the  cumulative
    effect of the conditions for the LGBT community in  Kenya  amounted  to
    persecution, and whether it  is  unduly  harsh  for  the  appellant  to
    relocate to Nairobi. He submits the idea that a young female  can  live
    openly as a homosexual, even in Nairobi, is irrational.  He  refers  to
    the background material and submits there is evidence of  mob  violence
    and evidence that the  Police  never  prosecute  for  violence  against
    homosexuals.  They sometimes step in to protect by the individual,  but
    they never prosecute the perpetrator.  Mr Jafar  submits  the  lack  of
    redress against the discrimination is such that although  homosexuality
    exists, it exists in a culture  where  homosexuality  is  not  in  fact
    accepted.  Mr Jafar submits the extract from paragraph  6.1.10  of  the
    COI Report at paragraph [34] of the decision  demonstrates  that  women
    living in the lower middle class and lower class  neighbourhoods  where
    people interact more intensively with each  other  than  in  high-class
    areas, are more at risk of violence and public abuse that tends  to  be
    tied to  social  policing  of  rigid  gender  norms.   He  submits  the
    appellant does not come from a  "high  class  family",  and  she  would
    therefore find herself living in a lower-middle-class  and  lower-class
    neighbourhood.  He submits that at paragraphs  [38]  and  [39]  of  the
    decision, there was no attempt by the judge to assess  the  appellant's
    background and to establish whether it would be be unduly harsh for the
    appellant to internally relocate to Nairobi.  Mr Jafar accepts that  at
    [37], the judge refers to Nairobi as  having  an  expanding  space  and
    opportunity for LGBT persons to live open normal  lives  in  reasonable
    safety, but submits that would only apply if the appellant  could  live
    in a high class area.


12. In reply, Mr Walker referred to paragraph [37] of  the  decision  where
    the judge provides an overview of  his  assessment  of  the  background
    material noting that there is improvement in  Kenya.   He  referred  to
    paragraph 2.4.3 of the COI  Report  in  which  it  is  said  that  "The
    attorney  general  has  said  that  it  is  not  government  policy  to
    discriminate against persons based  on  their  sexual  orientation  and
    gender identity, and that Kenya would pass legislation to protect  LGBT
    people from discrimination. However, at the time of  publication,  such
    laws have not been enacted." .  He also referred to paragraph 2.5.3  of
    the COI Report that states; "Internal relocation is not  viable  if  it
    depends on the person concealing their sexual orientation and/or gender
    identity in the proposed new location for fear of persecution".


13. He agrees with Mr Jafar that the issue before the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge was one of internal  relocation  and  at  one  point,  Mr  Walker
    appeared to suggest that there is an error of law in  the  decision  of
    the judge.  When I pressed him, as to the respondent's position, and if
    the respondent's position is that there is an error of law,  what  that
    error is, he was unable to identify an error and submitted that  having
    considered the background  material,  it  was  open  to  the  Judge  to
    conclude that the appellant can successfully relocate to Nairobi.


Discussion


14. The appellant claims she would be at risk from societal  attitudes  and
    intolerance (including violence) directed against  the  LGBT  community
    and that in light of the background material,  the  conclusion  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge that the appellant can successfully  relocate
    to Nairobi, is irrational.


15. There can be  no  doubt  that  the  Kenyan  Penal  Code  prohibits  and
    criminalises  consensual  same-sex  conduct  between  adults,  but,  as
    appears  to  be  acknowledged  by  Mr  Jafar,  the  mere  existence  of
    legislation criminalising homosexual acts could not in itself amount to
    persecution.  (see the CJEU's decision in Minister voor  Immigratie  en
    Asiel v X and Y; Z v Minister voor Immigratie en Asiel (Cases  C-199/12
    to C-201/12) [2014] Imm AR 440 at [55] and [56]). At paragraphs [20] to
    [35] of the decision, the First-tier  Tribunal  judge  dealt  with  the
    background  evidence  not  only  in  relation  to  criminalisation  and
    prosecution for consensual same-sex conduct but  also  in  relation  to
    societal  attitudes  towards  the  LGBT  community.  In   the   overall
    assessment of the background material set out at  paragraph  [37],  the
    judge  concluded  "The  situation  for  LGBT  people   in   Kenyan   is
    discriminatory and still unsatisfactory but a liberalisation process is
    underway and has been for some  time,  although  law  reform  is  still
    required.".


16. Mr Jafar in essence submits the judge failed to consider the background
    evidence concerning the intolerance,  societal  attitude  and  violence
    directed against the  LGBT  community  in  Kenya,  and  the  background
    material that the police condone or actually contribute to it.


17. The material to which Mr  Jafar  drew  my  attention,  in  truth,  adds
    nothing of a significantly different flavour to the evidence  to  which
    the judge expressly referred in his determination. The  judge  accepted
    in his summary at paragraph [37] of  the  decision  that  the  evidence
    shows that LGBT people in Kenya may be subjected to discrimination  and
    that  violence  and  abuse  against  some  LGBT  persons   does   occur
    occasionally, and in some of  those  instances,  but  not  always,  the
    police  are  uncooperative.  That  is  entirely  consistent  with   the
    background material that Mr Jafar  drew  my  attention  to.  The  judge
    carefully considered all of the background material at paragraphs  [22]
    to [34] of the decision, and at paragraph [36], the  judge  noted  that
    the information as a whole,  paints  a  mixed  picture  with  different
    sources pointing different ways. It is clear that the judge had well in
    mind the material to which he was referred.


18. Discrimination against members of a  particular  social  group  in  the
    country of origin is not enough, even though such discrimination  might
    be contrary to the standards of human rights prevailing in the state in
    which asylum is sought.   In  my  judgement,  although  the  background
    evidence undoubtedly established a level of intolerance, discrimination
    and sometimes actual hostility towards the LGBT community in Kenya,  it
    was not irrational for the judge to find that exposure to that  society
    would not create a real risk of serious harm, particularly in Nairobi.


19. The judge noted at [37], that although the situation for LGBT people in
    Kenya is discriminatory and unsatisfactory, a liberalisation process is
    underway and has been for some time. He also noted that in  Nairobi  in
    particular, there is  an  expanding  space  and  opportunity  for  LGBT
    persons to live open normal lives in reasonable safety. The judge found
    that in general, the problems faced  by  LGBT  persons  in  Kenya,  and
    certainly in Nairobi, does not meet the threshold of seriousness  which
    amounts to persecution of those persons, or their being at a real  risk
    of serious harm.


20. The judge did not find it a helpful or sensible approach  to  focus  on
    particular sources either positive or negative,  to  the  exclusion  of
    other sources pointing the other way, but rather to read  the  material
    as a whole. The judge referred to the  background  evidence  concerning
    the "wider" situation in Kenya.  His approach  was  neither  irrational
    nor  unreasonable.   In  my  judgement,  the  appellant  is  unable  to
    establish that the judge failed to have regard or proper regard to  the
    background material.


21. The internal relocation alternative is an assertion that  although  the
    appellant may risk persecution or breach of fundamental rights  in  her
    home area, she could find safety somewhere else in Kenya. I accept that
    the internal relocation alternative must not be used so as  to  require
    the appellant to live in a way that replicates the persecution that she
    was fleeing.  The basis of comparison in assessing internal  protection
    is between the proposed location (i.e.  Nairobi)  and  the  appellant's
    home area.


22. Here, the question of internal relocation remained a two-part question.
    First, are there risks of  serious  harm  or  persecution  in  Nairobi.
    Second, if not, is it unduly harsh expect the appellant to relocate  to
    Nairobi.


23. Having carefully considered the background material  and  set  out  his
    conclusions at paragraph [37], it was open to  the  judge  to  conclude
    that there is no reason why the appellant cannot successfully  relocate
    to Nairobi. The judge recognised that the appellant may encounter  some
    discrimination in Nairobi but found that she would be able to enjoy  an
    open lesbian life without suffering persecution or running a real  risk
    of serious harm. A summary  of  the  relevant  facts  was  set  out  at
    paragraphs [13] to [15] of the decision. Following  her  father  having
    discovered her relationship in February 2018, and until  her  departure
    from Kenya in February 2019, the appellant was able  to  live  with  an
    aunt.  Having concluded that there  is  no  reason  why  the  appellant
    cannot successfully relocate to Nairobi, the judge noted  that  on  the
    facts here, the appellant is a well-educated and  healthy  young  woman
    who has already lived  away  from  home.  She  has  worked  in  various
    employments and is  capable  of  earning  her  own  living  and  living
    independently.


24. Adopting what is said in  the  COI  Report  at  5.2.2,  while  societal
    intolerance is prevalent throughout  the  country,  relocation  may  be
    relevant and reasonable where the threat  from  a  non-state  actor  is
    localised.  What  is  required  is  a  consideration  of  the  person's
    individual circumstances, and that is what in my  judgment,  the  judge
    did here.  The judge's reasons, which are detailed  between  paragraphs
    [18] and [39] must be read fairly and as a whole. It is plain in  doing
    so, in my judgment, that the judge found that it is  not  unduly  harsh
    for the appellant to relocate to Nairobi where she  would  be  able  to
    enjoy an open lesbian life.


25. In my judgement, the  conclusion  reached  by  the  judge  was  neither
    irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,  or  a  conclusion
    that was wholly unsupported by  the  evidence.  On  appeal,  the  Upper
    Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first  instance,  unless  it
    really cannot understand the original judge's thought process  when  he
    or she was  making  material  findings.  In  my  judgement,  the  judge
    identified and resolved key conflicts in the evidence and gave a  brief
    explanation of the conclusions he reached on  the  background  material
    and whether the appellant can  internally  relocate  to  Nairobi.   The
    conclusions reached by the judge were conclusions  that  were  properly
    open to the judge on the evidence before him. The conclusions cannot be
    said to be perverse, irrational or conclusions that were not  supported
    by the evidence. The appeal was dismissed after the Judge had carefully
    considered the facts  and  circumstances  of  the  claim  and  all  the
    evidence before him.


26. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there  was  a
    material error of law in the decision of the FtT, and it  follows  that
    the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


27. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Burns is dismissed.


Signed                                  Date          21st October 2019


       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




FEE AWARD


I have dismissed the appeal and there can be no fee award


Signed                                  Date          21st October 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

