
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06534/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 October 2018                            |On 23 October 2018            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    T E Y
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Smith, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  Eritrea  who  made  an  application  for
    international protection. It was refused and he appealed and  following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 17 July 2018, Judge of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Manyarara dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal.  The
    Appellant had claimed to be a refugee on the basis that he would be  at
    risk if returned to his country of origin consequent upon his political
    opinion.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted on 15  August
    2018 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Andrew.  Her  reasons  for  so
    doing were:-

         "1.  The Appellant seeks permission to appeal, in time,  against  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Manyarara)  who,  in  a
         determination  promulgated  on  17th  July   2018   dismissed   the
         Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision to  refuse  to
         grant international protection.

         2.   I am satisfied that there are arguable errors of  law  in  the
         decision. The Judge has not  considered  whether,  if  returned  to
         Eritrea, the Appellant would be liable to be recalled  to  military
         service. Further, the Judge has not considered the further  country
         information supplied in relation to the likelihood or  not  of  the
         Appellant having completed his military service."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset Mr Tarlow invited me to remit this appeal to  the  First-
    tier for a de novo hearing. He conceded that for the reasons  shown  at
    paragraph 2 of Judge Andrew's decision to grant  permission  to  appeal
    the Judge had materially erred. Inevitably Ms Smith  did  not  seek  to
    argue against this.

 5.  I  find  that  Mr  Tarlow  acted  both  properly  and  fairly  in  the
    circumstances. The Judge has materially erred and omitted to deal  with
    crucial  aspects  of  this  appeal  and  particularly  so   where   the
    Appellant's age places him at risk of military service in  his  country
    of origin.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Manyarara.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date  15  October
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
