
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06164/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 December 2018                            |On 11 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                 mr S I H S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr W Rees, Counsel instructed by Marks & Marks
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15 May 1948 and appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  respondent  to
    refuse his protection claim in a decision  dated  1  May  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 12 September  2018,  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal K Moore dismissed the  appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 2. The appellant appealed with permission on the grounds that:

      1) the judge erred in his assessment of the medical evidence;

      2) the judge failed to adequately consider Article 8 and  specifically
         had  failed  to  consider  paragraph  276ADE,  the  issue  of   the
         appellant's integration and Section 117A to  Section  117D  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act.

Discussion

 3. The respondent in his Rule 24 notice relied on the decision and reasons
    and submitted that the judge correctly directed himself and that it was
    not incumbent on the judge to expressly address paragraph  276ADE  (VHR
    (unmeritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367).

 4. Mr Rees, whilst he did not expressly withdraw the appeal as he  had  no
    instructions to do so, submitted that he could add nothing  further  to
    the grounds and quite sensibly conceded that  there  were  difficulties
    with both the grounds of appeal and the grant of permission (which  had
    stated that arguably the judge had not dealt with Article 8).

 5. Mr Rees conceded before me, that the judge from paragraphs [39] to [42]
    addressed Article 8, including addressing Section 117B.   Although  the
    judge did not make any specific findings on paragraph 276ADE he was not
    required to do so.  It was not in dispute  that  the  only  grounds  of
    appeal was on human rights, outside of the Immigration  Rules.   Whilst
    that  consideration  should  be  considered  from  the  prism  of   the
    Immigration Rules, contrary to the grounds there was nothing  that  was
    not adequately considered by the judge in his detailed consideration of
    the issues including the appellant's medical conditions.  There is, for
    example, no challenge to the finding that there is treatment  available
    in Pakistan for the appellant's conditions.  Those were  findings  that
    were available to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. Although the grounds of appeal also argued that  the  judge  failed  to
    deal adequately with the medical evidence Mr Rees again  accepted  that
    even if there was an error it would not be material given the  totality
    of the findings made by the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. Although the grounds assert that the judge found there was  a  lack  of
    reliable medical evidence, that is to misrepresent the judge's findings
    where he stated, at [39], that there was evidence given and provided by
    the appellant with regard to his heart condition.  There was no  error,
    material or otherwise, in the judge going on to find that there was  no
    reliable evidence from a consultant that the appellant would be  unable
    to fly as claimed.  The evidence provided was  in  the  form  of  a  GP
    report.  The judge had before him a  letter  from  the  appellant's  GP
    dated 13 November 2017 indicating that the patient was elderly and  had
    a history of heart condition for which he takes medication.  There  was
    a further letter dated 9 September 2018, the day  before  the  hearing,
    which stated that the patient had dizzy spells and  headaches  and  had
    had a CT scan two days previously for which he was awaiting results and
    that his health condition should be considered.

 8. The judge properly directed himself that there was a high threshold  in
    relation to Article 3 and there is  no  sustainable  challenge  to  the
    judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the  medical  evidence   and   the
    appellant's condition, findings which were available to him.   There is
    no material error of law established in either ground which  amount  to
    no more than a disagreement with the judge's sustainable findings.

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed and there can therefore be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
