
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06518/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 5 November 2018                  |On 22 November 2018                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                 MR M A A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Alam of Counsel, instructed on a public access
basis
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of  Tanzania  born  on  25  May  1973.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom and subsequently made  an  asylum  claim.
    This application was refused in a decision dated  28  June  2017.   The
    Appellant appealed and his appeal came before Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Burns for hearing on  9  October  2017.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 11 October 2017, the judge dismissed the appeal.



 2. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought on  a  number  of
    grounds challenging both the judge's decision in relation to the asylum
    appeal and also in relation to the fact the Appellant had at  the  time
    of the  decision  and  hearing  two  qualifying  children  and  it  was
    submitted that their best interests had not been  properly  taken  into
    consideration,  nor  all  the  relevant  factors  in  relation  to  the
    reasonableness of expecting them to leave the United Kingdom.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Lindsley  on
    limited grounds in relation to Article 8 only in a  decision  dated  22
    January 2018 in the following terms:

         "However I am satisfied that  there  are  arguable  errors  in  the
         decision under Article 8 ECHR as it is arguable  that  insufficient
         weight was given to the fact  that  the  Appellant's  children  had
         lived in the UK for more than seven years  in  accordance  with  MA
         (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705.  It is  arguable  that  significant
         weight was given to this factor when assessing the  best  interests
         of the children and to the assessment of whether it was  reasonable
         for them  to  be  required  to  leave  and  that  the  decision  is
         insufficiently reasoned on this point."

     Hearing

 4. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal I heard  submissions  from  Mr
    Alam, Counsel instructed on a direct access basis and  for  Mr  Tan  on
    behalf of the Secretary of State.  In his submissions, Mr Alam observed
    that the grounds of  appeal  had  been  handwritten  by  the  Appellant
    himself.  He acknowledged that the application for permission to appeal
    in respect of the asylum aspect of the appeal had not  been  successful
    and as essentially the grounds could be summarised as firstly the judge
    had inadequately reasoned his assessment of the reasonableness  of  the
    return of the two qualifying children to  Tanzania,  and  secondly,  in
    failing to apply the judgment of the Court of Appeal in  MA  (Pakistan)
    [2016] EWCA Civ 705.

 5. He submitted that the fact that the children had resided in the UK  for
    over seven years was a fundamental part of the appeal.  This was  dealt
    with very briefly at [18] where the judge summarised the basis  of  the
    claim.  At [64] the judge dealt with the issue of  reasonableness  very
    briefly, finding that the best interests of the children were to remain
    in the family unit.  He noted  that  the  two  oldest  children  attend
    primary school and speak English but he expected that they would  speak
    Swahili despite the fact that there was  no  evidence  to  that  effect
    before the judge and his finding was thus entirely speculative.

 6.  He  further  noted  at  [68]  when  considering  the  public  interest
    considerations, that the Appellant  speaks  English,  therefore  it  is
    likely that the  Appellant  would  communicate  with  his  children  in
    English rather than in Swahili.  The submission recorded  at  [18]  was
    that the children would have linguistic  difficulties  if  returned  to
    Tanzania because they do not speak Swahili.

 7. Moreover he submitted there was no consideration by the judge  at  [64]
    as to the length of residence of the children or  the  difficulties  or
    disruption they would face on return to Tanzania, which  clearly  plays
    into the question of whether it is reasonable to expect them  to  leave
    the UK.

 8. In respect of the judgment of the Court of Appeal in MA  (Pakistan)  Mr
    Alam sought to rely on the judgment of Lord Justice Elias at  [46]  and
    [49] where His Lordship made the point that if a child had been in  the
    United Kingdom for seven years or more this  would  need  to  be  given
    significant weight, both because of its relevance  to  determining  the
    nature and strength of best interests of the children  and  that  leave
    should be granted unless there are powerful reasons  to  the  contrary.
    At no stage in the judge's decision did he make any  reference  to  the
    fact the children were qualifying children having resided  continuously
    in the UK  for  more  than  seven  years  or  to  the  judgment  in  MA
    (Pakistan).  He submitted that this amounted to  a  material  error  of
    law.

 9. In his submissions Mr Tan drew my attention to [42] of the decision and
    reasons where the judge made reference to the school reports  submitted
    on behalf of the two oldest children and found

         "neither have reached secondary school age and accordingly  I  find
         that neither are at an age where their educational progress will be
         undermined by a change of school if they were to move to  Tanzania.
         They are more than likely to change school at the end of year 6  in
         any event".

10. He  submitted  that  the  judge  had  considered  the  children's  best
    interests at [64] finding that they were to remain with  their  parents
    as a family unit and at [69] and [70] in relation to the assessment  of
    proportionality, the  judge  had  considered  both  the  Supreme  Court
    judgment in Zoumbas [2013] UKSC 74 and Kaur (children's best  interests
    public interest interface) 2017 UKUT 00014 (IAC).   Following  on  from
    that the judge went on to find it was reasonable for  the  children  to
    relocate with their parents to Tanzania.

11. Mr Tan also sought to rely on the recently handed down decision of  the
    Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria) and Others [2018] UKSC 53 at  [18]  where
    the Court found that it was inevitably relevant to consider  where  the
    parents are expected to be since it will normally be reasonable for the
    child to be with them.   He  submitted  that  this  was  essentially  a
    narrowing of the focus of the Article 8  considerations  but  what  the
    court  were  doing  were  setting   out   the   prism   through   which
    reasonableness should be viewed and that was residence of the family as
    a whole in Tanzania.

12. Mr Tan submitted that the judge had considered all the  points  in  the
    Appellant's favour and there was no material error of law.

13. In his response, Mr Alam acknowledged that he had not read the  Supreme
    Court judgment in KO (Nigeria) however it did not appear  that  it  had
    engaged with the aspects of the judgment of Lord Justice  Elias  in  MA
    (Pakistan) upon which  he  sought  to  rely  viz  [46]  and  [49].   He
    submitted there was an absence  of  any  proper  consideration  of  the
    material facts of the children.   The  oldest  child  was  born  on  28
    December 2007, thus at the time his appeal came before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal he was two months short of having resided continuously in  the
    United Kingdom for ten years having been born here.  He  submitted  the
    judge had failed to address his mind to this point and  his  length  of
    residence was clearly a material factor.  He  submitted  there  was  no
    reference to the children's dates of birth or indeed  to  the  youngest
    child at all,  despite  the  fact  that  that  child's  best  interests
    required consideration.  He submitted the judge's reasons  are  clearly
    inadequate in that no significant weight had been given  to  the  facts
    and there was no reflection of the length of  residence  of  the  first
    Appellant.

14. I found a material error of law at the hearing and heard submissions in
    order to re-make the appeal.

15. Mr Tan acknowledged that since the hearing of the appeal by  the  First
    tier Tribunal the elder child had been granted British nationality.  He
    accepted that in light of  the  Home  Office  guidance  in  respect  of
    private life: "Family Migration: Appendix FM Section 1.0b  Family  Life
    as a Partner or Parent and Private Life:  Ten  Year  Route"  Version  1
    22/2/18 at page 76 it was not open to him to submit it  was  reasonable
    for him or the family to now leave the United Kingdom.

16. In light of Mr Tan's helpful concession Mr Alam did not  seek  to  make
    any further submissions.

     Findings

17. In respect of the error of law  in  the  decision  of  the  First  tier
    Tribunal Judge, it is apparent, as Mr Alam submitted, that there is  an
    absence of detailed consideration  of  the  individual  facts  of  each
    child.  The oldest child was born on 28  December  2007,  thus  he  was
    almost 10 at the date of the hearing. His slightly younger  sister  was
    born on 25 January 2010 and was  thus  8  years  at  the  date  of  the
    hearing.  There is no reference within the decision and reasons of  the
    First tier Tribunal Judge  to  their  length  of  residence,  which  is
    clearly material to  any  proper  or  satisfactory  assessment  of  the
    reasonableness of expecting them to return.

18. Whilst at [42] the judge acknowledged that he  had  read  their  school
    reports and that they  were  hardworking  and  able,  he  found  simply
    because they were still at primary school age and would change  schools
    in any event, that their educational progress would not  be  undermined
    by a change of school if they were to move to Tanzania.   At  [64]  the
    judge found it was in the children's  best  interests  to  remain  with
    their parents as a family unit.

19. Whilst the Judge acknowledged at [64] that the two oldest children were
    qualifying children, he went on to find only that he was not told  that
    there were any specific health concerns.   He  reiterated  his  finding
    that they were still at primary school and then went on  to  find  that
    they speak English, but expected that they would speak Swahili or  have
    a very good understanding of the language, given  that  both  of  their
    parents gave evidence via an interpreter.

20. Whilst that last finding is speculative, I find it was a  finding  open
    to the judge on the basis of the evidence before him. However, I do not
    find that the Judge's findings form a sufficient foundation to then  go
    on to find it would be reasonable to expect the children to  leave  the
    United Kingdom, in light of the fact that the children were all born in
    the UK; had never visited Tanzania and  the  qualifying  children  were
    almost 10 and 8 years of age at the hearing [66].

21. It is clear that the judgment in MA (Pakistan) was based  on  the  Home
    Office guidance, the version in force at that  time  being  the  August
    2015 version which  makes  clear  at  11.2.4  that  once  seven  years'
    residence requirement is satisfied there need to be strong reasons  for
    refusing leave.  This is because:

         "after such a period of time the child will have put down roots and
         developed social, cultural and educational links  in  the  UK  such
         that it is likely to be highly disruptive if the child is  required
         to leave the UK.  That may be less so when the  children  are  very
         young because the focus of their lives will be  on  their  families
         but  the  disruption  becomes  more  serious  as  they  get  older.
         Moreover in these cases there must be  a  very  strong  expectation
         that the child's best interest will be to remain in the UK with his
         parents as part of a family unit and that must rank  as  a  primary
         consideration in the proportionality assessment."

22. At [49] Lord Justice Elias went on to hold

         "However the fact that the child has been in the UK for seven years
         would need to be given significant weight  in  the  proportionality
         exercise for two related reasons: First because of its relevance to
         determining the nature and strength of the child's best  interests;
         and second because it establishes as a starting  point  that  leave
         should  be  granted  unless  there  are  powerful  reasons  to  the
         contrary."

23.  Thus  it  is  clear  that  not  only  is  the  judge's  assessment  of
    reasonableness flawed by the failure to engage  with  either  the  Home
    Office guidance or the judgment in MA  (Pakistan)  but  also  that  his
    findings in respect of the proportionality of removal are  also  flawed
    for the same reasons.  That is the basis of one which I found an  error
    of law in the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns.

24. I then proceeded to remake the appeal in light of the further  evidence
    submitted on behalf of the Appellants. The oldest child, AMAA had  been
    registered as a British  citizen  on  29  May  2018.   A  copy  of  the
    certificate of registration was provided and also a copy of the child's
    British passport issued on 25 June 2018.

25. In light of that evidence Mr Tan helpfully and  correctly  accepted  in
    light of the Home Office guidance at pages 76 to 77 that it  would  not
    be reasonable to expect a British child to leave  the  United  Kingdom,
    which provides as follows:

         "Where the Child is a British citizen

         Where the child is a British citizen it will not be  reasonable  to
         expect them to leave the UK with the applicant  parent  or  primary
         carer facing removal.  Accordingly where this means that the  child
         would have to leave the UK because in practice the child  will  not
         or is not likely to continue to live in the UK with another  parent
         or primary carer EX.1(a) is likely to apply."

26. Reference is then made to the fact that in some circumstances it may be
    appropriate to refuse leave if there has been persistent criminality or
    a very poor immigration history. Mr Tan did not seek to argue that that
    was the case in respect of this particular family and indeed  there  is
    no evidence to that effect.

27. Therefore, in light of the acceptance by the Secretary  of  State  that
    the oldest child meets the requirements of EX.1(a) of  Appendix  FM  of
    the Immigration Rules that the requirements of  the  Immigration  Rules
    are met. It follows that it will  be  disproportionate  to  expect  the
    family to leave.

28. The appeal is consequently allowed on human rights grounds (Article 8).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 14 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
