

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal number:
PA/06669/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 8 March 2019                           | On 13 March 2019              |
|                                          |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                SOZAN ROSTAMI
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Chaudry, of Latta & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  Mill,
    promulgated on 3 July 2018.  Her grounds are set out in her application
    dated 5 September 2018, numbered 1 - 6.

 2. Ground 1 says that in holding against the appellant  her  inability  at
    screening interview to provide the date of her marriage and the date of
    birth of her husband, the  judge  gave  "insufficient  weight"  to  her
    explanation that she  had  just  arrived  from  a  long  and  difficult
    journey; the lack of importance given to such dates in her culture; and
    the corrections made to her interview once she recovered.

 3. On inspection of the evidence during submissions in the UT, it  appears
    that the appellant's account of her journey is that  she  travelled  in
    the back of three lorries  over  about  eight  days  from  Turkey,  her
    journey ending near the door of the police station in Glasgow where her
    interview took place.  That would certainly  have  been  an  exhausting
    experience, and  she  did  say,  "I  am  very  tired";  (2.3,  page  A3
    respondent's bundle).  However, she also said she was well and ready to
    be interviewed, and gave  generally  coherent,  indeed  quite  detailed
    answers.  Honest witnesses, of any cultural background, vary  in  their
    knowledge and accuracy over dates; but probably most  people  know  the
    date of their marriage, and the date of birth  of  their  spouse.   The
    amount of weight to be given to any item of  evidence  is,  within  the
    bounds of reason, a matter for the judge.  Nothing in  ground  1  rises
    above disagreement with the judge's weighing of the evidence.

 4. Ground 2 cites background evidence that "a large number  of  Kurds  are
    inclined to join whatever protest that  arises",  and  says  that  goes
    against the finding at [23] that it seemed unlikely that the  appellant
    would choose  to  participate.   This  is  variously  characterised  as
    "speculation ... contrary of the evidence", failure  to  provide  clear
    reasons, and failing to engage with background evidence.   However,  in
    substance this is only insistence that the evidence  should  have  been
    interpreted in the appellant's favour.  The judge was entitled to  draw
    from lack of political interest, and awareness of the danger  attached,
    that it seemed unlikely the appellant would involve herself.

 5. Ground 3 takes the same points as 1 and 2, under a heading of  lack  of
    clear reasoning, and adds nothing.

 6. Ground 4 alleges that the judge misconstrued the  appellant's  evidence
    about where she and her husband were at  the  demonstration,  how  they
    came to be separated, and whether she could have seen his  arrest.  The
    judge is said to have found inconsistency and contradiction where there
    was none.

 7. Ground 5 is the same point, but put under the  heading  of  failing  to
    give the appellant a  fair  opportunity  to  deal  with  the  perceived
    deficiency in the evidence.  This takes the  matter  no  further.   The
    evidence, on examination, was either self-contradictory or it was not.

 8. Grounds 4 - 5 together make the appellant's best point.  She  does  not
    appear in the evidence cited to say anything  about  her  distance  and
    degree of separation from her husband, or the size and density  of  the
    crowd, which renders her account "entirely  incredible".   It  was  not
    evidence a judge was bound to accept,  but  the  reasons  given  hardly
    justify so emphatic a rejection.

 9. Ground 6 criticises the judge for founding upon the apparent absence of
    any grieving  process  by  the  appellant  on  finding  out  about  her
    husband's death and points to her statement that she was distraught.

10. This ground does not fairly represent  the  relevant  passages  in  the
    decision.  The judge's point was not that the appellant never said that
    she grieved.  It is based on such matters as her not knowing  the  date
    when her father-in-law told her that her husband had  died;  not  being
    interested in finding out any more; retaining no contact  details;  the
    unlikelihood of her agreeing to meet another man, with whom she shortly
    formed a relationship, even before she knew her husband to be dead; and
    so on.  The discussion of this  issue  in  the  decision  is  detailed,
    sensible, and not shown to involve any error.

11. Mr Chaudry sought also to challenge [22-23]  of  the  decision.   Those
    points were not in the grounds, although they might have been taken  as
    legitimate expansion.  They amounted to  further  disagreement  on  the
    facts, rather than identifying any error of law.

12. Finally, Mr Chaudry submitted that the judge  erred  also  at  [34]  on
    section 8 of the 22004 Act.  This is also not on the  grounds,  and  Mr
    Govan said it came too late.

13. There is nothing wrong with [34] in its own terms.  It is open  to  the
    criticism that it overlooks the appellant's evidence that she travelled
    by lorry, without any real chance to claim elsewhere.  In  the  context
    that she was found for much wider reasons to be generally an unreliable
    witness, this is not a criticism which takes her very far.

14. The one point  of  any  substance  is  at  ground  4.   As  Mr  Chaudry
    submitted, it goes directly to an event at  the  heart  of  the  claim.
    Nevertheless, the decision must be read fairly and as a whole.  It  has
    not been analysed to show overall deficiency of  reasoning.   It  gives
    many good reasons for finding  the  appellant  a  generally  unreliable
    witness, summing up at [35] not only that she failed to show  that  she
    attended a demonstration, but also failed to show that she was married;
    that her husband, if he ever existed, was a member of the KDPI; or that
    she formed a genuine romantic relationship with a British Citizen, such
    as to cause unwanted attention from her family in Iran.

15. The decision of the FtT shall stand.

16. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.

      [pic]

      11 March 2019
      UT Judge Macleman




