
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06960/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11 June 2019                         |On 4 July 2019                     |
|                                        |                                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     ZK
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. D. Revill, Counsel instructed by Selva & Co.
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Loke, promulgated  on  30  January  2019,  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity  direction,  continuing
    that made in the First-tier Tribunal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:-


    "In an otherwise careful and focused decision, it is arguable that  the
    judge  had  misinterpreted  the  Appellant's  replies  in  the   asylum
    interview which led the judge to wrongly make  an  adverse  credibility
    finding in relation to the Appellant."

 4. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
    representatives following which I reserved my decision.

Error of Law Decision

 5. I have carefully considered the grounds and decision.  I find that  the
    grounds of appeal are not made out.  At the hearing Ms. Revill withdrew
    [15]  and  [16]  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and  I  have  given   no
    consideration to these paragraphs.


 6. The grounds of appeal submit that the Judge erred in his assessment  of
    the evidence, with particular reference to Q79 to  Q82  of  the  asylum
    interview as referred to at [17] of the decision.

 7. In [7] and [8] of the grounds it is submitted that the Judge  erred  in
    finding at [17(a)] that MA was with the Appellant on the visit in 2007.
     The Judge states at [17(a)]:

    "The appellant gives an account of being asked about his father and MA.
     MA was a person who was with him on that visit (Q79-83) of  interview.
    The appellant states that MA was not arrested.  Given the appellant was
    asked about MA, who was with him on the trip, I would have expected him
    to have been arrested as well."

 8. I have carefully considered Q79 to Q83 of the asylum  interview  and  I
    find that the Judge has not misinterpreted the evidence, and  there  is
    no error in his findings.  At Q79, having  mentioned  that  "there  was
    another guy - MA", the Appellant was asked what were they asking  about
    MA.  His reply is recorded as "when I was in PAK I was  hanging  around
    with MA".  He was then asked again what they were asking him about  MA.
    At Q80 and Q81 he was asked about MA being  suspected  of  having  hurt
    somebody.


 9. At Q82 Appellant was asked when and what time he  had  spent  with  MA.
    His reply is recorded as "when I  went  PAK  2007  after  finishing  my
    studies my dad wanted me to study in a  MADRASSA  and  MA  was  looking
    after me".  He then said that he did not study in the madrassa, and was
    asked "Then why did you hang around with
    MA - if you never went to the madrassa?".  He replied "My dad told  him
    to look after me".  At Q83 he was asked whether MA  was  arrested  with
    him and he said no.

10. I find that the Appellant's evidence at Q79 to Q83 is that MA was  with
    him on the visit to Pakistan in 2007.  His evidence  is  that  he  hung
    around with MA.  That is what the Judge has recorded.  He found that MA
    was a person who was with the Appellant on  his  trip  to  Pakistan  in
    2007.  The grounds of  appeal  are  wrong  when  they  state  that  the
    Appellant never said in his asylum interview that MA was  with  him  on
    that visit.  It is  quite  clear  in  the  asylum  interview  that  the
    Appellant said that during his trip to Pakistan in 2007 he was  hanging
    around with MA.  The Judge has not misread the evidence.  The Appellant
    was with MA in Pakistan in 2007, according to the evidence that he gave
    in  his  asylum  interview.   Given  what  the  Appellant  claims   the
    authorities were asking him about MA, about him  having  "hurt  someone
    really badly", it was open to the Judge to  find  that  he  would  have
    expected MA also to have been arrested.

11. At [9] of the grounds it is submitted that the Judge did not  give  any
    reasonable explanation for  doubting  the  Appellant's  claim  that  he
    stayed with his uncle who worked  for  the  intelligence  agency.   The
    grounds submit that it is perfectly possible that the Appellant's uncle
    gave him refuge so that he was not arrested by the authorities.

12. At [17(b)] of the decision the Judge states:

    "Given the appellant's uncle was a member of the intelligence services,
    I do not find it credible that his uncle would have the appellant  stay
    with him after having absconded."


    I find that the Judge did not need to say more than this.   It  is  the
    Appellant's evidence that he was on the run from the  authorities,  yet
    he claims to have stayed with his uncle who was a member of those  same
    authorities.  There is no error in the  Judge  finding  that  it  lacks
    credibility that a member of the intelligence services would allow  the
    Appellant to stay with him.  As submitted by Mr. Avery there would have
    been serious professional issues for the Appellant's uncle  if  it  was
    discovered  that  he  had  been   hiding   the   Appellant   in   these
    circumstances.

13. At [10] of the grounds there is no error of  law  alleged.   Rather  it
    submits that the Appellant meant to say something  else  regarding  the
    FIR.

14. At [11] of the grounds it is submitted that the Judge erred as he found
    it inconsistent that the  Appellant  remained  in  Pakistan  after  his
    release, but this question was not put  to  the  Appellant  during  the
    asylum interview or at  the  appeal  hearing.   At  [17(d)]  the  Judge
    states:

    "The appellant was released on 26 December 2007, however [he]  did  not
    fly to the United  Kingdom  until  15  February  2008.   I  would  have
    expected the authorities to have made efforts in that  period  to  have
    located the appellant.  I would not have expected the appellant to have
    been able to obtain a  student  visa  and  leave  the  country  in  the
    circumstances."

15. I find that there is no error of law here.  It was open to the Judge to
    find that he would not have expected the Appellant to have been able to
    obtain a student visa and leave the  country  given  his  account.   In
    relation to his uncle the grounds refer to Q77 of the asylum interview.
     All this states is the name of the Appellant's uncle who the Appellant
    claimed had arranged both his releases.  At Q78 the Appellant describes
    his uncle as a very resourceful man.  This does not preclude the  Judge
    finding that he would not have expected the Appellant to have been able
    to leave on a student visa.

16. At [12] of the grounds it states that the Judge did not engage with any
    explanation given at the hearing as to how  the  Appellant  managed  to
    escape.  I was not referred to any such explanation by Ms. Revill.   At
    [7] and [8] of the decision the Judge set out the Appellant's  evidence
    in examination and in cross-examination.  It  is  not  alleged  in  the
    grounds of appeal that there is any error in these paragraphs, or  that
    the Judge has failed properly to record  the  evidence.   There  is  no
    reference in these paragraphs to any detailed explanation  of  how  the
    Appellant managed to escape.  The  Judge  records  that  the  Appellant
    agreed that he left on his passport in 2007.  The allegation  that  the
    Judge did not deal with detailed oral evidence is not made out.

17. At [12] of the grounds it again refers to MA.  I have found above  that
    the Judge did  not  err  in  his  interpretation  of  the  evidence  of
    regarding MA given the Appellant's evidence that he hung around with MA
    in Pakistan in 2007.

18. The grounds allege at  [12]  that  the  Judge  misunderstood  that  the
    Appellant was able to travel to the United Kingdom  without  coming  to
    the attention of the authorities.  The Appellant's evidence was that he
    left on his passport in 2007 as set out at [8(vi)].  The Judge has  not
    misunderstood the evidence.

19. The grounds go on to  allege  that  the  Judge  erred  in  judging  the
    credibility of the Appellant on the wrong standards.  I find that  this
    ground is not made out for the reasons set out above.   The  Judge  has
    not applied too high a burden of proof.  He set out the evidence  given
    at the hearing, which has  not  been  challenged.   He  considered  the
    asylum interview and he has not erred  in  his  interpretation  of  the
    evidence given at the asylum interview.  I find that  the  grounds  are
    not made out.  I further note that the grounds do not allege that there
    are any errors in the rest of the decision.

Notice of decision

20. The decision does not involve the making of a material error of law and
    I do not set it aside.


21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 30 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
