

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06167/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 11 October 2018                     |On 24 Oct October 2018              |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     E J
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Clark, of Counsel, instructed by B H T
                    Immigration Legal Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. Both the Secretary of State  and  the  appellant  have  sought  and
         obtained permission to appeal against the determination  of  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge Sweet who dismissed the  asylum  limb  of  this
         appeal but allowed it on  humanitarian  protection  and  article  8
         grounds. The determination was promulgated on  25  June  2018.  For
         convenience, I shall refer to the parties as they were at the First-
         tier.

      2. The appellant is an Afghan national born  on  1  January  2000.  He
         claims to  have  left  Afghanistan  in  August  2015  and  to  have
         travelled across Pakistan, Iran, Turkey, Bulgaria, Serbia, Croatia,
         Hungary, Austria, Germany and France before arriving  clandestinely
         in the  UK  in  April  2016.  He  was  encountered  by  immigration
         officials at Dover and he then claimed asylum.

      3. Permission to appeal was granted to both parties on 15 August  2018
         by First-tier Tribunal Judge Hollingworth.  The  matter  then  came
         before me on 11 ct 2018 when I heard submissions from Mr Clark  and
         Mr Melvin. I deal with each of the challenges in turn.

      4. The complaint made by the appellant is that  he  was  a  vulnerable
         witness as identified by  a  clinical  psychologist  and  that  the
         modifications  set  out  in  the  psychologist's  report  were  not
         followed by the judge when  conducting  the  hearing.  It  is  also
         argued  that  the  judge  did  not  factor   in   the   appellant's
         vulnerability when assessing his evidence. Reliance was  placed  on
         AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123. It was also argued that  the
         judge failed to appreciate the guidance set out in JA (Afghanistan)
         [2014] EWCA Civ 450 as to the difficulties in interviewing  without
         an interpreter being present and where an applicant is  vulnerable.
         The judge's credibility  findings  are  also  criticized  as  being
         unfairly  based  on  plausibility  issues,  as  being  inadequately
         reasoned and irrational.

      5. Mr Clark in his submissions expanded on those  criticisms.  A  full
         record is contained in my Record of Proceedings. Having  considered
         the submissions and the evidence I reach the following conclusions.



      6. Whilst it is plain that breaks were taken during the course of  the
         evidence, and that was acknowledged by  Mr  Clark,  it  is  unclear
         whether the judge had regard to the ground  rules  set  out  by  Ms
         Rogers in her  report.  He  certainly  did  not  have  the  initial
         discussion as to how to proceed as urged by Counsel and recommended
         in the report. Whilst no problems appear to have arisen, the danger
         as Mr Clark submitted is that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  not
         taken in the way advised which raises  the  concern  that  had  the
         recommended procedure been followed the  appellant  may  have  been
         able to give his evidence more fully and  coherently.  It  is  also
         unclear what weight  was  given  to  Ms  Roger's  report  when  the
         appellant's  evidence   was   assessed.   The   reference   to   an
         acknowledgment of vulnerability comes after the judge has made  his
         adverse findings and conclusions on the asylum claim. Plainly  that
         is the wrong approach. All the evidence should have been considered
         before a conclusion was reached. Although  Mr  Melvin  appeared  to
         argue that the report should not be given  the  same  weight  as  a
         report from a psychiatrist, there  is  no  reason  for  Ms  Rogers'
         credentials and expertise to be  questioned.  Mr  Clarke's  closing
         submissions on the matter of procedural unfairness at  the  hearing
         could not have remedied that problem.

      7. There are also issues with the  judge's  reasoning  which  is  very
         brief and appears to be contained in a single paragraph  49.  These
         reasons do not consider the evidence as a whole and do not  explain
         why the account was rejected as implausible. The core claim has not
         been properly considered and the judge appears to have rejected the
         claim because the appellant had not faced risk on his  way  to  the
         UK. The material issues were not addressed  and  material  evidence
         not considered.

      8. The respondent criticizes the findings and decision on humanitarian
         protection and article 8. It is argued that as the appellant was an
         adult at the date of the hearing, the judge had misapplied the case
         law on unattended children and Mr Melvin added the point  that  the
         appellant could not be described as unattended as he was  still  in
         contact with family in Afghanistan. Moreover, as the decisions were
         based on  Ms  Rogers'  report  which  in  turn  was  based  on  the
         appellant's account, they  were  unsafe  as  the  accuracy  of  the
         account was debatable.

      9. Plainly, the respondent's arguments  have  merit.  As  the  judge's
         findings on the evidence and  the  appellant's  account  have  been
         questioned and criticized by the appellant himself, it follows that
         what he said to Ms Rogers has to be carefully assessed and this was
         not done. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant  had  family  in
         Afghanistan and his assessment on return and the risks  facing  the
         appellant, now a  young  adult,  should  have  been  made  in  that
         context. There is also no consideration of section  8  matters  and
         the article 8 claim has been allowed in a single assessment without
         any assessment of the evidence regarding health  care  and  support
         available in Afghanistan. For these reasons, I  conclude  that  the
         determination is entirely unsustainable and  the  decision  is  set
         aside.

     10. Decision

     11. The First-tier Tribunal made errors of law.  The  decision  is  set
         aside. It shall be  remade  by  another  judge  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal at a date to be arranged.

     12. Anonymity

     13. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed










    Upper Tribunal Judge
    Date: 22 October 2018
