
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06105/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 4 March 2019                         | On 19 March 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   ms d A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:    Mr A Bandegani, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national  of  Sri  Lanka.   She  has  permission  to
    challenge the decision of Judge O'Keeffe  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sent on 14 November 2018 dismissing her appeal against a decision  made
    by the respondent on 26 April 2018 refusing her protection claim.

2.   It is unnecessary to set out in detail the  appellant's  grounds  since
    both  representatives  were  in  agreement  with  me  that  the   judge
    materially erred in law.

3.      The appellant's first ground contended  that  the  judge  had  dealt
    unfairly with the request  for  adjournment.   At  the  outset  of  the
    hearing the judge recorded that  the  appellant's  representatives  had
    applied for an adjournment so that a report could be obtained from a Dr
    Thomas.  There had previously been an adjournment in June for the  same
    purpose.  Having heard from Ms Smith, the appellant's representative on
    that occasion, the judge concluded that she had been unable to give any
    further explanation as to why the report was not available.  The  judge
    stated at paragraph 5:

         "I formed the view that the appellant had had ample opportunity  to
         prepare her case in order that a fair hearing of her  appeal  could
         take place.  In the absence of any explanation for the  failure  to
         provide the evidence  as  directed,  I  formed  the  view  that  an
         adjournment  would  be  unlikely  to  place  the  Tribunal  in  any
         different position on a future hearing date.  I had regard  to  the
         overriding objective set out in Rule 2 of  The  Tribunal  Procedure
         (First-tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Rules  2014
         and determined that I could  hear  the  appeal  fairly  and  justly
         without an adjournment and refused the application.  I put the case
         back to allow Ms Smith time to complete the appellant's statement."

4.   I am persuaded  that  the  first  ground  is  made  out.   The  written
    adjournment request had set out that the report from  Dr  Thomas  would
    address among other things (a)  whether  there  were  clinical  reasons
    capable of explaining the severe delay in claiming asylum on  the  part
    of the appellant; and (b) whether there were clinical  reasons  capable
    of explaining an alleged vagueness in the  appellant's  account.   From
    paragraph 5 it is clear that the main concern  of  the  judge  was  the
    failure of the appellant's representatives to explain the further delay
    in the production of a medical report.  The great difficulty with  that
    becomes clear when one turns to what the judge stated next in paragraph
    6:

         "After an adjournment, Ms Smith told me that she had now heard from
         Dr Thomas who had indicated that her report could be ready within 3
         weeks.  I indicated that I was not prepared to alter  my  decision.
         I commenced the case in the afternoon after Ms Smith had provided a
         witness statement from the appellant  and  from  her  brother.   Ms
         Smith said she did  not  intend  to  call  the  appellant  to  give
         evidence.  I formed the view that given the appellant's stated  ill
         health, it was not necessary for her to give evidence in  order  to
         determine this appeal."

5.   From paragraph  6,  it  is  clear  that  the  judge,  having  now  been
    furnished with an explanation for the late production of the report and
    also provided with a specific time line within which the  report  could
    be ready, failed to take stock.  It is not clear that  the  judge  took
    cognisance of this updating that had taken place.  Had the  judge  done
    so she would have had to realise that the appeal could  only  go  ahead
    before her as one in which the appellant was not going to give evidence
    yet  in  which  she  would  have  to  assess  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account and to do so without the benefit of  a  potentially
    relevant  explanation  for  shortcomings  in  the  appellant's  written
    accounts.  The judge proceeded to find shortcomings in the  account  of
    the appellant which included  at  paragraph  50  that  the  appellant's
    credibility was in her view damaged  by  the  delay  in  the  appellant
    making a claim and in paragraph 51 by  the  account  of  the  appellant
    being vague and unsubstantiated. On both of these matters  the  medical
    evidence was of potential importance.

6.   In such circumstances for the judge to say that  an  adjournment  would
    be "unlikely to place the Tribunal  in  any  different  position  on  a
    future hearing date" was clearly unwarranted.  Accordingly, I  consider
    that the first ground alleging procedural unfairness is made out.

7.      The  second  ground  alleges  that  the  judge  erred  in  law  when
    considering that the appellant was not financially  independent  within
    the meaning of Section 117B of the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum
    Act 2002.  The judge considered that as the  appellant  relied  on  her
    brother, she  was  financially  dependent.   That  overlooked  that  in
    accordance with the decision of the Supreme  Court  in  Pereira  [2018]
    UKSC 53 financial dependence refers to reliance on the state.

8.   I am satisfied that these errors were material to the  outcome  of  the
    judge's assessment both as regards the protection claim and the Article
    8 claim.

9.   This is not at all to say that the appellant will have an easy task  at
    a further hearing.  Mr Bandegani confirmed that  as  a  result  of  the
    medical report which has now been made available, the appellant will be
    able to give oral evidence at the  next  hearing.   In  light  of  that
    information I shall give directions to ensure that sufficient  time  is
    provided for the taking of such evidence in addition to that from other
    witnesses (on the last occasion there were two further witnesses).  If,
    however for any reason the appellant is unable to give evidence at  the
    next hearing the appellant's representatives must be on notice that the
    judge will in those circumstances proceed with the evidence such as  it
    is together with the new medical report.  There is clearly no scope for
    any further adjournment.

10.  Given the judge's errors concerned the credibility of  the  appellant's
    assessment, I see no alternative to remitting the case to be  heard  by
    the First-tier Tribunal (not before Judge O'Keeffe).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 14 March 2019

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
