
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06794/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 October 2019                   |On 21 October 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FINCH

                                   Between

                                M C (TURKEY)
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. B. Ali, Aman Solicitors Advocates (London) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND TO THE APPEAL


1.   The Appellant is a national of Turkey. He entered  the  United  Kingdom
    on 1 September 2014 and applied for asylum on that same day. The  basis
    of his claim was that he had been a supporter of the BDP (the Peace and
    Democracy Party) and the HDP (the People's Democratic  Party)  and  had
    attended marches and distributed leaflets for  them.   His  application
    was refused on 16 May 2018 and he appealed.  His appeal  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Monson in a  decision  promulgated  on  14
    June 2019 and First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow granted him  permission
    to appeal on 19 July 2019.


ERROR OF LAW HEARING


2.    At the start of the hearing, both representatives told  me  that  they
    had had a chance to discuss the appeal outside  court  and  had  agreed
    that there were errors of law in the decision under challenge and  that
    the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo
    hearing.


ERROR OF LAW DECISION


3.    The Appellant is of Kurdish origin and when in Turkey  he  was  living
    in Gaziantep. It is his case that on 3 August 2013 he was  detained  by
    plain clothes police officer when he was leaving  a  BDP  building  and
    interrogated. He was told that the authorities believed that he and his
    father supported the PKK. He was detained for two days and subjected to
    torture. It is also the Appellant's case that he was detained again  on
    6 August 2014 for two days and accompany a  group  of  village  guards,
    gendarmes and army officers who were looking for members of the PKK who
    were crossing over into Syria. When he was released, he was  told  that
    he would have to sign on every three days. As he was afraid of  further
    ill-treatment, he then fled from Turkey.


4.   At paragraph 49 of  his  decision,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Monson
    found that:


         "It  is   also   reasonable   to   question   whether   the   stark
         inconsistencies between the  screening  interview  and  the  asylum
         interview,  and  the  further  stark  inconsistencies  between  the
         appellant's account of the circumstances leading up to  his  second
         detention in the  MLR  as  against  what  he  said  in  the  asylum
         interview, can be explained away on the basis  of  the  appellant's
         mental ill-health...I do not consider that PTSD reasonably accounts
         for his failure to display knowledge of the HDP and BDP  consistent
         with him being a supporter of these parties...".


5.   When doing so he failed to take into account the psychiatric report  by
    Dr. Brady, who examined the Appellant on 27  April  2015  and  27  July
    2015. She noted in paragraph 23 of her report  that  during  his  first
    appointment his distress was such that he was  unable  to  answer  even
    simple questions about his current circumstances or mental  health  and
    that it was necessary to bring the session to an end as he had a  panic
    attack.  However, he was more relaxed at the second appointment and she
    was able to reach a diagnosis of post-traumatic stress  disorder.   She
    also noted in paragraph 44  of  her  report  that  she  had  considered
    whether he might be feigning or exaggerating his symptoms but concluded
    that he made no attempt to overstate or exaggerate  his  symptoms.  She
    also added "on the contrary,  he  explained  clearly  and  on  multiple
    occasions how his symptoms have improved since he arrived in the UK".


6.   At paragraph 67 she also noted that:


         "[The Appellant] was interviewed when he was held in detention,  an
         environment that plausibly exacerbated his pre-existing symptoms of
         PTSD. There was little explicit consideration of the impact of  his
         mental health difficulties by the interviewer apparent in the  SEF,
         despite [the Appellant] raising this issue on  multiple  occasions.
         Therefore, it is entirely plausible that the interview and evidence
         he gave in his SEF is compromised and does not reflect  a  full  or
         accurate  picture  of  [his]  history  (indeed  there   have   been
         additional subsequent disclosure when I have interviewed him  in  a
         more relaxed setting). As outlined  at  paragraph  45,  [his]  high
         levels of shame also contributed to his inability to  disclose  the
         full details of  his  ill-treatment  in  Turkey,  particularly  the
         sexual abuse he described to me".


7.   At paragraph 61 she also said:


         "I note that the questioning may have seemed  somewhat  adversarial
         in nature to [the Appellant] (for example  paragraphs  234  to  236
         [which related to when he started supporting HDP]. The  interviewer
         repeatedly pushes for specific details even when it is  clear  that
         [the Appellant] is becoming confused".


8.   In my view, this amounted to a failure to take  into  account  evidence
    which was clearly relevant to the Judge's findings of fact in  relation
    to a core element of the Appellant's case.


9.   I have also reminded myself that, in paragraph 24 of  JA  (Afghanistan)
      v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 450, Lord
      Justice Moore-Bick found:


         "In the absence of a statutory provision of the kind to be found in
         section 78 of the Police and Criminal Evidence Act 1984, I  do  not
         think that in proceedings of this kind the tribunal has  the  power
         to exclude relevant evidence. It does, however, have an  obligation
         to consider with care how much weight is  to  be  attached  to  it,
         having regard to the circumstances in which it came into existence.
         This is particularly important when considering the significance to
         be attached to answers given in the  course  of  an  interview  and
         recorded only by the person asking the questions on behalf  of  the
         Secretary of State. Such evidence may  be  entirely  reliable,  but
         there is obviously room for mistakes  and  misunderstandings,  even
         when the person being questioned speaks English fluently...".


10.  In the current  case,  the  Appellant  was  potentially  vulnerable  by
      reason of his mental ill-health and his interview took place in Boston
      Police Station at 22.54 having arrived in the United Kingdom by  lorry
      earlier that day and when he was not legally represented.


11.  In relation to the second ground of appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Monson stated at paragraph 51 of his decision that "the core claim runs
    counter to the background evidence since a  crack-  down  on  suspected
    supporters of the PKK did not being until the re-emergence of  the  PKK
    conflict in July 2015".


12.  This was despite the fact that there was evidence before the  Judge  at
    page B103 of the Appellant's Bundle to indicate  that  35  people  were
    killed in October 2014 when protesting in support of the HDP. There was
    also evidence at page B123 of the Appellant's Bundle  that  there  were
    226 attacks against the HDP between 2014 and 2016 and evidence at  page
    B139 of the Appellant's Bundle that there were several hundred  attacks
    targeting HDP election offices in the run-up to the elections  of  June
    and November 2015.


13.  This amounted to a failure on the part of the  Judge  to  consider  the
    Appellant's case in the context of the appropriate country evidence.


14.   For  these  reasons  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Monson's   decision
    contained material errors of law.





DECISION


(1)  The Appellant's appeal is allowed.


(2)  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de  novo
    before a First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Monson or First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow as the errors made deprived
    the Appellant of a fair hearing of his appeal.


Nadine Finch

Signed                                  Date 17 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Finch


