
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06755/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 September 2019                 |On 25 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT


                                   Between

                                   M P S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Blake, Counsel, instructed by York Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 27 March  2019  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Hussain which refused the asylum and  human  rights
    appeal of MPSM.

 2. MPSM is a national of Sri Lanka born in 1983.  He came to the UK on  13
    June 2009 as a student.  He obtained  an  extension  of  leave  and  in
    February 2011 returned to Sri Lanka for a visit.  He maintains that  on
    15 March 2011 he  was  arrested  by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  and
    detained until 23 March 2011, being  severely  mistreated  during  that
    period of detention.  He maintains that his father obtained his release
    by  payment  of  a  bribe  and  that  the  appellant  then  left  after
    arrangements had been  made  for  him  to  do  so  using  his  existing
    passport, the appellant arriving back in the UK on 23 March 2011.   The
    appellant also maintains that after he came back  to  the  UK  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities visited his family home on 25 March 2011.

 3. The appellant applied for further leave  on  15  April  2011  but  this
    application was refused on 29 June 2011.  He made a further application
    to remain as a Tier  1  Entrepreneur  on  14  December  2011  but  that
    application was  also  refused  on  12  January  2015.   The  appellant
    remained in the UK illegally.  On 16 October 2017 he maintains that his
    brother  was  arrested  after  the  authorities  mistook  him  for  the
    appellant and his brother was beaten during the arrest.  The  appellant
    maintains that this incident compelled him to claim asylum in the UK on
    8 December 2017.  On 29 April 2018 the respondent  refused  the  asylum
    claim.

 4. The appellant appealed and on 6 March 2019 his appeal came before First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  Hussain.   Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the
    appellant relied on a report from a Consultant Psychiatrist, Dr  Dhumad
    dated 19 June 2018.  Dr Dhumad also provided an addendum report dated 5
    March 2019.  In the addendum report in paragraph 5.1, Dr Dhumad stated:

         "5.1 [The appellant's]  presentation,  in  my  opinion,  consistent
             (sic) with a diagnosis of severe Depressive  Episode,  without
             psychotic symptoms and Post-Traumatic Stress Disorder.  In  my
             opinion his condition  has  deteriorated  over  the  past  few
             months, he became more hopeless and anxious  due  to  fear  of
             deportation.

         5.2  He is currently on antidepressant medication  Sertraline;  his
             GP increased the dose from 50 to 100mg and received  a  couple
             of sessions of psychological therapy in Liverpool.  He remains
             depressed and  anxious,  his  depression  in  my  opinion  has
             worsened; he is severely depressed and suicidal."

 5. Dr Dhumad found in paragraphs 5.5 that the appellant was not fit to fly
    and went on in paragraph 5.7 to state:

         "In my opinion he is  currently  fit  to  give  oral  evidence  and
         participate in Court Hearing.  He is vulnerable  person  and  needs
         some adjustment to the court hearing.  He  is  severely  depressed,
         hopeless and his concentration is poor.  He  is  very  anxious  and
         scared of facing the authorities.  Therefore, he needs  extra  time
         and more breaks to help him calm down and  manage  his  anxiety  to
         participate meaningfully."

 6. The First-tier Tribunal said this about Dr Dhumad's report:

         "19. In support of  his  claim,  the  appellant  has  enlisted  the
             assistance of a Consultant Psychiatrist  by  the  name  of  Dr
             Saleh Dhumad.  In Section  16.1  of  his  report,  the  expert
             diagnosis the appellant with moderate depressive  episode  and
             in paragraph 16.2  as  suffering  from  post-traumatic  stress
             disorder.  In paragraph 16.3, he states that the risk  of  the
             appellant committing suicide is moderate.  In paragraph 5.3 of
             a subsequent report, the expert maintains the opinion that the
             risk  of  suicide  is  moderate,  which  would   significantly
             increase in the event of a negative  decision  by  the  court.
             What I am not clear about is how this expert was able to  form
             these  opinions  without  the  benefit  of  knowledge  of  any
             previous  history  of  mental  issues  on  the  part  of   the
             appellant.  The conditions described would not  have  suddenly
             developed just before he was examined by the expert,  which  I
             presume was no more than an interview, and yet the expert does
             not seem to have called  the  medical  notes  of  whoever  has
             treated him for  these  conditions,  if  they  arose  earlier.
             Indeed, there appears to be no evidence that the appellant had
             reported his symptoms to his General Practitioner for support.
              The report appears to have been produced, purely, to  support
             the asylum claim.

         20.  Whilst it is not my place to challenge the diagnosis made by a
             medical practitioner, it is for me to decide whether, I accept
             that  the  conditions  arose  because   of   the   appellant's
             experiences  back  in  Sri  Lanka.   Since  I  find  that  the
             appellant has not established that he was  the  victim  of  an
             arrest in 2008 or in 2011, it follows that I am not  satisfied
             for the reasons  earlier  mentioned,  that  they  support  the
             appellant's claim.

         21.  The appellant  has,  in  addition,  enlisted  another  medical
             expert named Dr Andres Izquierdo Martin, who, in  section  5.5
             of his report states that the cigarette burns on the appellant
             were consistent with an  unwilling  and  intentionally  caused
             injury with a hot round object.  But  as  the  expert  states,
             there could be other  reasons  for  the  symptoms.   With  the
             passage of time the visibility of the  scars  would  obviously
             have diminished (sic); the scars would  have  been  much  more
             prominent following his return in 2011 yrt (sic) he chose  not
             to make his asylum claim then."

 7. The appellant's grounds of appeal challenge  these  paragraphs  of  the
    decision on a number of bases.

 8. Firstly, the grounds maintain that the report of Dr  Dhumad  identified
    the appellant as a vulnerable witness who should have been  treated  as
    such by the Tribunal under the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No.2 of
    2010: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant Guidance".   Even
    if the First-tier Tribunal  disputed  the  causes  of  the  appellant's
    mental disorder, he did not dispute the presence of the mental  illness
    diagnosed by Dr Dhumad.  The judge should have weighed the  appellant's
    evidence against the background of that  diagnosis.   This  could  have
    made a material  difference,  for  example,  in  the  judge's  negative
    findings on the appellant's delay in claiming asylum after he  returned
    to the UK in 2011, those findings being set out in paragraphs 12 to  14
    of the decision.

 9. Further, the grounds maintain that the judge failed to address  at  all
    the appellant's vulnerability,  gave  no  consideration  to  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance, failed to  make  an  express  finding  that  the
    appellant was vulnerable (or not) and  gave  no  consideration  to  the
    impact of  the  appellant's  mental  health  on  his  ability  to  give
    evidence.

10. The grounds also maintain that the paragraphs set out above  show  that
    Dr Dhumad's report was not taken into account as part of  the  holistic
    assessment of credibility but was found to attract no weight where  the
    judge had already  found  that  the  appellant  was  not  credible,  in
    particular in paragraph 20 which states "I find that the appellant  has
    not established that he was the victim of an arrest in 2008 or in 2011,
    it follows that I am not satisfied for the reasons  earlier  mentioned,
    that [the reports of Dr Dhumad] support the appellant's claim".

11. The grounds also submit that the finding in paragraph 19 of the  report
    that there appeared to be no history of treatment for  the  appellant's
    mental disorder or consultation with his GP was a material  mistake  of
    fact where Dr Dhumad did identify that the appellant had  seen  his  GP
    and  been  diagnosed  with  a  mental  health  problem  and  prescribed
    medication.  This is shown in paragraphs 10.4  to  10.6  of  the  first
    report where Dr Dhumad sets out the appellant's account of  his  mental
    health deteriorating in 2015, seeing his GP in December 2017.

12. Further, in paragraph 16.2 of the first report, Dr Dhumad  stated  that
    he had considered:

         "... the possibility that he might be feigning or exaggerating  his
         mental illness.  I have not taking (sic) his story  at  face  value
         but  carefully  examined  his  symptomatology  and  his   emotional
         reactions  during  the  interview.   I  have  also  considered  the
         evidence before me.  It is my clinical opinion  that  his  clinical
         presentation is consistent with the diagnosis  of  depression,  and
         PTSD.  In my experience it is extremely difficult to feign a  full-
         blown mental illness (as  opposed  to  individual  symptoms).   The
         Istanbul  Protocol  advises  that,  in   formulating   a   clinical
         impression for the purpose of reporting physical and  psychological
         evidence of torture, examining  physicians  should  ask  themselves
         whether the clinical picture suggests a false allegation of torture
         ..."  My impression is that his clinical presentation is compatible
         with the experience of intense fear of expected threat to life".

13. It is my conclusion that the treatment of the evidence of Dr Dhumad was
    flawed for all of the reasons set out  in  the  grounds  and  that  the
    decision therefore had to be set aside to re-made de novo. The  grounds
    of appeal also had merit where the First-tier Tribunal did not  address
    correctly the finding of Dr Martin on the  appellant's  scarring  being
    "typical of intentionally caused injuries" and  "likely  to  have  been
    caused by torture as described by the Appellant"; see paragraph 6.2  of
    the report of Dr Martin.

14. Further, as indicated in  ground  3  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal fails to address or provide reasons
    for rejecting potentially material documents provided by the  appellant
    in support of his claim.  These were a police  report  from  Sri  Lanka
    dated 6 October 2017 and a letter from a Sri Lankan lawyer, Mr  Chanaka
    Edirisinghe.  I am satisfied that these documents had the potential  to
    allow for the appeal to receive a different outcome and that where they
    were not addressed at all by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, a  material
    error of law arises.

15. For all of the reasons set out above, it  is  my  conclusion  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error on  a  point  of
    law such that it must be set aside to be remade. Mr Kotas conceded  for
    the respondent that the grounds of appeal had merit and that the appeal
    should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-made. Where  the
    re-making must be de novo it is appropriate for the  remaking  to  take
    place in the First-tier Tribunal in line with paragraph 7 of Part 3  of
    the Senior President's Practice Statement dated 25 September 2012.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses an error  on  a  point  of
law and is set aside to be remade.

The appeal will be remade de novo in the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:  [pic]                                          Date:  24  September
    2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
