
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06259/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 March 2019                     |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     HAK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Imamovic
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 20 January 1992. He first entered the  United
    Kingdom in September 2012 as a student. Further applications for  leave
    to remain were refused and a subsequent appeal dismissed. Between April
    and July 2016, the appellant reported to the  Immigration  Services  at
    Birmingham airport. On 27 October 2016, he  failed  to  report.  On  17
    January 2017, he was served with a  notice  of  illegal  entry.  On  27
    January 2017, he made a  claim  for  asylum.  The  Secretary  of  State
    refused that claim in a decision dated  15  June  2017.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    4 September 2017, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals, with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

    The Grounds of Appeal

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  on  26
    January 2018. The grant pre-dates the decision of the Upper Tribunal in
    Safi and others (permission to appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC).
    The grant is not limited although the text under the heading  'Reasons'
    makes it abundantly clear that  permission  was  only  intended  to  be
    granted in respect of Article 8 ECHR. Upper Tribunal Judge  Grubb  gave
    detailed reasons for rejecting the other grounds of appeal.  Mr  Mills,
    who appeared for the Secretary of State, argued  that,  notwithstanding
    Safi, this was a rare case where the reasoning  of  the  judge  was  so
    clear that the grant of permission  should  be  restricted  as  he  had
    intended. Whilst there is force in  that  submission,  I  permitted  Ms
    Imamovic, who appeared for the appellant, to argue all the grounds.  As
    will become apparent, I have concluded that none  of  the  grounds  has
    merit so the Safi point falls away.

 3. A problem also arose at the hearing regarding the correct text  of  the
    renewed grounds of appeal. The appellant  no  longer  relies  upon  the
    manuscript grounds which were refused in the First-tier  Tribunal.  The
    court file has a copy  of  typed  grounds  submitted  nonrenewal  which
    contain 21 paragraphs. It is clear from Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Grubb's
    grant of permission [3] that he was looking at  grounds  containing  at
    least 26 paragraphs. Neither I nor Mr Mills had the additional  grounds
    of appeal. Ms  Imamovic  provided  copies  and  I  gave  Mr  Mills  the
    opportunity to read the full text before we proceeded.

    The Appellant's claimed relationship with Ms Descartes

 4. The appellant claims to be in a relationship with a Ms  Descartes.  The
    judge found that the claim was not genuine [15]. The challenges made in
    the grounds of appeal are, frankly, little more than disagreements with
    the findings which the judge made on the evidence. At [13],  the  judge
    considered the evidence of Ms Descartes and the  documentary  evidence.
    Inter alia, she made a finding that the appellant was paying money into
    Ms Descartes' account. The appellant disputes this, claiming  that  the
    judge 'closed off other possible findings' in reaching the finding that
    which appears in her decision.  I  reject  that  submission.  There  is
    nothing irrational or, indeed, unfair about the analysis  and  findings
    contained in the judge's decision at  [13].  Indeed,  the  decision  is
    clear and lucid, a description which cannot be applied  to  grounds  of
    appeal.

 5. Ms Imamovic sought to introduce new evidence which had not been  before
    the judge. In particular, she sought to  rely  upon  a  letter  from  a
    clergyman  which  he  claimed  clarified  the  marriage  plans  of  the
    appellant and his  claimed  partner  and  cast  doubt  on  the  judge's
    negative findings at [13]. The letter postdates the judge's decision by
    several months. At [13], the judge has considered  the  evidence  about
    the marriage plans and identified a major discrepancy, a finding  which
    was patently available to the judge  on  the  evidence  which  she  had
    before her. The clergyman's evidence does no  more  than  to  offer  an
    opinion which conflicts with findings of the judge, an opinion  it  was
    not even provided until some months after the  judge  had  reached  her
    decision. There is no  basis  at  all  for  accepting  the  appellant's
    submission that the letter undermines the judge's decision. Judge  made
    findings of the evidence which was before her; cannot have erred in law
    by failing to consider evidence which was not produced to the Tribunal.

 6. In any event, the judge has included an alternative  finding  regarding
    the relationship at [16]. On  the  basis  that  the  appellant  and  Ms
    Descartes are in a genuine relationship,  the  judge  finds  that  they
    could return together  to  Pakistan  and  live  there  in  a  Christian
    community. The additional grounds of appeal  address  this  finding  at
    [29]. The paragraph in the grounds opens with a bare assertion that the
    judge's finding is wrong,  refers  (without  comment)  to  the  country
    guidance upon which the judge relied and concludes by  saying,  'it  is
    submitted that the  assessment  of  the  appellant's  relationship  was
    conducted in an unfair and unreasonable  manner  which  constitutes  an
    error  of  law.'  No  particulars  are  given  of  this  unfairness  or
    unreasonableness. No challenges made to the  judge's  finding  that  it
    would be safe for the couple to return to Pakistan and  live  there  as
    Christians. No challenge is made to the judge's finding (albeit  brief)
    at [16] which effectively disposes of the family life  element  of  any
    Article 8 ECHR appeal. Consequently, even if the judge has made  errors
    in her findings regarding the relationship (which I do not find  to  be
    the case), the findings at [16]  are  sufficient  to  dispose  of  that
    aspect of the appeal.

    Private Life (Article 8 ECHR and Paragraph 276ADE)

 7. Both parties accept that the judge  did  not  address  the  appellant's
    private life. Indeed, this is the only aspect of the  appeal  on  which
    Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb intended to grant  permission.  Ms  Imamovic
    accepted that the only relevant subparagraph of Paragraph 276ADE of  HC
    395 (as amended) is (vi):

    (vi) subject to sub-paragraph (2), is aged 18 years or above, has lived
    continuously in the UK for less than 20 years (discounting  any  period
    of imprisonment) but there would be very significant obstacles  to  the
    applicant's integration into the country to which he would have  to  go
    if required to leave the UK.

 8. It was clearly an error on the part of the judge to omit  consideration
    of the appellant's private life which had been pleaded, albeit  in  the
    briefest possible terms. However, I have a discretion whether or not to
    set aside the decision of the judge. In exercising that  discretion,  I
    have had regard to the strength of the appellant's appeal to remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the basis of his private life. The appellant came
    to the United Kingdom as recently as 2012.  There  are  in  the  bundle
    which was before the judge two brief character references;  I  am  told
    that the fresh evidence  which  the  appellant  now  seeks  to  produce
    contains any more  such  references.  As  regards  the  application  of
    Paragraph 276, such evidence is irrelevant. The appellant is a 27-year-
    old male in apparent good health. There is no reason to suppose that he
    has abandoned all contact  with  former  family  and  acquaintances  in
    Pakistan; as Mr Mills pointed out, he remains on good  terms  with  his
    family living there. There are  no  obvious  obstacles  preventing  the
    appellant's reintegration into Pakistani society; indeed,  Ms  Imamovic
    did not suggest to me that any  existed.  I  find  that  the  appellant
    simply cannot establish a claim that there would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to his integration  in  Pakistan.  Given  that  he  fails  to
    satisfy Paragraph 276  and  has  only  resided  in  he  country  for  a
    relatively brief period, the support of friends and acquaintances  here
    does not begin to suggest the existence of a  viable  claim  to  remain
    outside the rules under Article  8  ECHR.  In  the  circumstances,  and
    notwithstanding her error, I have decided not to set aside the  judge's
    decision.

    Notice of Decision

 9. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 19 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

