
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06426/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 5 December 2018                            |On 11 January 2019           |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     S S

                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Woodhouse   (of HS Immigration Consultants)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.    The claimant is a national of Iran.  He was born on 11 May 1984.  He
entered the United Kingdom ("UK") for the first time  on  9 October 2015,
having obtained leave to do so for the purposes of study.  So, he left  Iran
lawfully travelling on a lawfully obtained Iranian  passport.   He  returned
to Iran for temporary purposes in December 2015 but came back to the UK  in
January 2016.   He  again  returned  to  Iran  for  temporary  purposes  in
May 2016, before coming back to the  UK  in  June 2016.   He  was  due  to
complete  his  studies  and  return  to  Iran  in  January 2017  but,   on
22 December 2016, he claimed asylum and has remained in the UK ever since.
On 21 June 2017 the Secretary of State made a decision to refuse to  grant
him international protection.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal ("the
tribunal") and his appeal was heard on 3 August 2017.  On 7 August 2017 the
tribunal decided to dismiss his appeal and its  decision  was  sent  to  the
parties on 10 August 2017.  The claimant then obtained permission to appeal
to the Upper Tribunal.  That led to a hearing  before  the  Upper Tribunal
(before me) and, thereafter, to my decision of 8 August 2018 in which I set
aside the tribunal's decision, whilst preserving the bulk of  its  findings,
and directed a further hearing before the Upper Tribunal (again before  me)
so  that  the  decision  could  be  remade.   That  hearing  took  place  on
5 December 2018.  Representation was as stated above and I am grateful  to
each representative.  What follows is an explanation as to why, in  remaking
the decision, I have  decided  to  allow  the  claimant's  appeal  from  the
Secretary of State's decision of 21 June 2017.

2.    I have directed anonymity in this case.  The tribunal did  not  do  so
but it does seem to me that publication of this decision  in  a  form  which
would enable persons other than the parties to identify the  claimant  might
lead to some risk to him resulting.  No contrary view was  expressed  before
me.

The law in brief

3.    In order to demonstrate entitlement to  international  protection  the
claimant must show that, upon return to his home country, he  would  face  a
real risk of:

      "(a)  being persecuted for one of the five  reasons  set  out  in  the
           1951 Refugee Convention;


      (b)   being treated in such a way as to give rise to entitlement to  a
           grant of humanitarian protection;


      (c)   being treated in such a way  as  to  bring  about  a  breach  of
           Article 3 of the European Convention on Human Rights (ECHR)."

4.     Matters  are  to  be  assessed  as  at  the  date  of   the   hearing
           (5 December 2018).

The claimant's case and what is left of it.

5.    The claimant, in  pursuing  his  original  claim  to  be  entitled  to
international protection, told the Secretary of State and  subsequently  the
tribunal,  that  he  is  gay.   He  claimed  to  have  had  a  lengthy   gay
relationship  and  another  shorter  such  relationship,  whilst  in   Iran.
Nevertheless, he says  that  in  July 2012  he  married  a  female  Iranian
national but that he only did so for reasons of social and family  pressure.
 The marriage failed.  He says that since coming to the UK he has had a  gay
relationship with a man I shall call H and another gay relationship  with  a
man I shall call T.  He says that H is also an  Iranian  national  and  that
when H returned to Iran in November 2016 he was stopped by the  authorities
at the airport  and  footage  showing  H  and  the  claimant  having  sexual
relations with each other was discovered on his mobile telephone.   He  says
that the authorities in Iran are seeking him out as a result  of  that.   He
also says (and this has been the main focus of this  hearing)  that  he  has
posted items on Facebook which shows that he is gay and  that  he  has  also
entered into other internet activity which also supports that proposition.

6.    The tribunal decided that he is not gay, that he had lied about  being
gay, that he did not have a relationship with H and that he did not  have  a
relationship with T.  It accepted that he had posted  items  on  gay  social
media but thought that had been done merely  to  artificially  bolster  what
was essentially a false claim.

7.     The  reasons  why  I  set  aside  the  tribunal's  decision,   whilst
preserving the bulk of its findings, are contained in  my  written  decision
of 8 August 2018 which the parties already have.  But, put simply, I  took
the view that the tribunal's credibility findings were sustainable and  free
of legal error but that it had erred in  failing  to  consider  whether  the
claimant's internet activity, notwithstanding the dishonest motive  for  it,
might come to the attention of the Iranian authorities such as  to  put  him
at risk on return.  So, in consequence of my  decision,  the  claimant  only
has such an argument now available to him.  He pursues it.

The respondent's position

8.     The  respondent,  with  respect  to  the  claim  as  originally  put,
comprehensively disbelieved the claimant's account.   As  to  the  remaining
part of the claim still  outstanding,  the  respondent  (through  Mr Mills)
accepted  that  if  the  Iranian  authorities  have  viewed  the  claimant's
Facebook postings and in consequence have perceived him as being gay  or  as
having promoted a gay  lifestyle,  that  would  result  in  his  being  ill-
treated.  However, Mr Mills argued that it would be unrealistic to conclude
that the Iranian authorities would monitor  internet  activity  to  such  an
extent that they would have already detected the claimant.  As to  any  risk
which might arise on return on the basis that he would not be already  known
to the authorities, he would be able to  delete  his  own  Facebook  account
prior to travelling.  He could be expected to do  that  as  that  would  not
amount to his lying (asylum claimants cannot be expected to  lie)  since  he
would only be deleting material  which  constituted  an  untruthful  facade.
There was  no  Country Guidance  decision  which  suggested  that  everyone
returning or returned to Iran  would  be  questioned  and  asked  for  their
Facebook password so that Facebook activity could be checked on  arrival  in
Iran.

The evidence and what it tells me

9.    It will be obvious, from what I have  said  already,  that  I  am  not
revisiting the question of whether or not the claimant is  gay  or  has  had
gay relationships.  The tribunal made an authoritative  decision  that  none
of what he had said as to that was true.  The soundness of its findings  has
been accepted by the Upper Tribunal and those findings have been preserved.
 I am concerned  with  the  evidence  concerning  risk  resulting  from  the
claimant's internet activity notwithstanding his false  motive  in  pursuing
such activity.

10.   I have, before me, all of  the  documentation  which  was  before  the
tribunal when it heard the appeal.  That includes the standard  Home Office
bundle and a bundle  which  had  been  filed  on  behalf  of  the  claimant.
Contained within those documents are the claimant's  witness  statements  of
16 January 2017  and  26 January 2017  and  some  photocopied  documents
evidencing his Facebook activities and his use of  a  quite  well  known,  I
think,  gay  dating  website  known  as  "Grinder".   There  is  also   some
background country material.  In addition to that I  was  provided  with  an
additional bundle of documents on behalf of the  claimant  which  contained,
amongst other things, a copy of his witness statement of  27 November 2018
and some further documents concerning his internet activity.  Also  included
was  an  expert  report  prepared  for  the  purposes  of   this   case   by
Dr. Mohammad Kakhki ("the expert") and which is dated 26 November 2018.  In
addition to that I heard oral evidence from the  claimant  though  that  was
very brief indeed.  In evidence-in-chief he did nothing more than adopt  his
most recent witness statement and he was not cross-examined.

11.   I shall focus, first of all, upon what the  evidence  tells  me  about
the nature of the  claimant's  internet  activity.   The  bundle  which  was
submitted on his behalf for the purposes  of  the  appeal  to  the  tribunal
contains a number of pages which are,  essentially,  extracts  from  on-line
discussions it appears he has had with gay males.  I am satisfied  from  the
content of the exchanges (and such was  not  disputed  and  I  think  cannot
sensibly be disputed) that a reader of those extracts will  readily  realise
that they are reading exchanges on a gay  dating  website.   There  are,  in
addition to the conversational content, some pictures of the claimant.   His
nationality is ascertainable (see page 59 of the bundle) from a reading  of
the extracts which have been produced as is his first name  (see  page 43).
There is a page which has his picture in part superimposed  over  a  picture
of a number of naked males with his full name below his picture.  I  am  not
sure whether that is an extract from his  Facebook  entries  or  whether  it
relates to something he has posted elsewhere on  the  internet.   There  are
then  what  appear  to  be  extracts  from  his  Facebook  page  and   those
demonstrate an interest in gay related issues and there are  a  few  further
photographs of a similar nature to that I have just referred to.

12.   There are then,  some  further  documents  in  the  claimant's  bundle
prepared for the hearing before me, described as  "Facebook  screen  shots".
Essentially, they give a similar impression to the other  documents  I  have
just referred to but there  is  an  additional  element  which  suggest  the
claimant has an association with an Iranian Christian community in  the  UK.
It is important to stress, though, that  it  has  never  been  part  of  the
claimant's case that he is, in fact, a Christian.

13.   I now turn to the evidence concerning the manner  and  intensity  with
which the Iranian authorities check internet activity on  the  part  of  its
citizens.  That sort of evidence is  potentially  important  because  it  is
argued on behalf of the claimant that his  internet  activity  will  already
have been detected by the Iranian authorities.

14.   The pivotal evidence  here  is  what  is  contained  in  Dr. Kakhki's
report.  Actually, a good deal of that report is given over to what sort  of
treatment might be meted out to those who are gay or who have been  seen  to
be promoting a gay lifestyle.  It is  understandable  that  the  expert  has
focused upon that but it is not a central issue before  me  given  Mr Mills
acceptance as noted above.  So my focus, for the purposes  of  this  appeal,
is largely upon what is said by the expert  about  the  nature  of  internet
surveillance carried out by the Iranian authorities.

15.   As to that, it is stated at page 29 of the report  that  the  Iranian
authorities have been known to monitor internet  activity  and  engage  over
the internet with people who are gay "in order to entrap  them  via  on-line
chat/messenger".  At page 30 of the report reference is made  to  a  person
described as "a British woman" (though it  seems  she  is  a  dual  British-
Iranian national) who had been arrested when returning to Iran for  a  visit
on the basis of her Facebook activity and imprisoned.  It is  said  that  it
is thought that she had  "described  the  Government  as  being  'again  too
Islamic' ".  Reference is made at page 32 to an organisation known as  the
"Cyber Police of Islamic Republic of Iran" which it is said was established
in  2011  for  the  purposes  of  preventing,  investigating  and  combating
Cybercrime.  Examples are  then  given  of  other  persons  who  have  found
themselves in difficulties with the Iranian authorities  in  consequence  of
social media/internet activity.   At  page 41  of  the  report  Dr. Kakhki
observes that it is clear that the Iranian Security Forces "are very  active
in  monitoring  on-line  activities,  particularly  social   media   sites".
Dr. Kakhki then goes on to express his opinion as to the likelihood of  the
claimant's activities having come to the attention of the  authorities.   He
says this:

       "82. Therefore it is, in my opinion, likely that the details of  [the
      claimant's] activities whilst in the UK, including  his  social  media
      activities as well as his participation  in  Persian  LGBT  activities
      would have come to the attention of the  Iranian  authorities  through
      various means including use of informants as well as  surveillance  of
      his Facebook contacts  and  connected  groups.   He  would  likely  be
      investigated on return to Iran for homosexuality and promoting beliefs
      which are contrary to the State religion policies/general  beliefs  of
      Iranian citizens.  The risk of harm facing [the claimant]  stems  from
      punishments as set out in the Penal Code as well as the likelihood of
      extremely harsh investigative techniques and extra  judicial  violence
      at the hands of conservative vigilante groups.


       83.  It is important to note in this  regard  that  [the  claimant's]
      Facebook account identifies him by his real  name  and  by  a  profile
      picture.  He is connected to a large network of people  (262 friends)
      and groups who share pro-homosexual  messages  and  materials  through
      their network.  Depending on  the  subjective  interpretation  of  the
      damage these materials would have caused to  the  Islamic  society  of
      Iran, legal liability would also be applied.   The  motivation  behind
      [the claimant's] Facebook posts, from the point of view of the Iranian
      authorities, is immaterial.  He will be considered to  have  committed
      criminal offences and accordingly be liable for punishment as a result
      of the objective facts.   In  other  words,  the  existence  of  these
      homosexually charged materials on his public Facebook page (which  are
      against the general beliefs of the Iranian public/Islamic society)  is
      sufficient in and of itself to  lead  to  criminal  investigation  and
      liability regardless of [the claimant's] motive  for  publishing  this
      material via social media."

16.   So, all the above is really the key evidence for the purposes of  this
appeal given the narrow issues with which I am now concerned.

Conclusion

17.   I have decided that there is a real risk (which I have interpreted  as
a risk which is more than fanciful) that the claimant's internet  activities
will have come  to  the  attention  of  the  Iranian  authorities.   I  have
concluded, though that is uncontroversial because Mr Mills accepts this  is
so, that such will  result  in  a  real  risk  that  the  claimant  will  be
persecuted for reasons of perceived (not  actual)  sexual  orientation  upon
return to Iran.  My having reached those conclusions, it  is  not  necessary
for me to go on to consider whether, as a person not already  known  to  the
authorities, he is likely to be questioned upon return at  the  airport  and
if so what is likely to be disclosed and whether that is likely to  lead  to
a real risk of persecution.  But I shall  say  something  about  certain  of
those matters below in  recognition  of  Mr Mills  careful  and  thoughtful
submissions on those points.

18.   I accept that the Iranian authorities  determinedly  seek  to  monitor
internet activity by its citizens.  I accept that  they  are  concerned,  in
doing so, to see whether they are able  to  detect  evidence  of  what  they
might perceive to be anti-Islamic views and activities by such citizens.   I
largely base my conclusions as to that upon  the  content  of  the  expert's
report.  Mr Mills did not say anything, in submissions to me, to place  any
of that in issue.

19.   The above does not mean, of course, that the Iranian  authorities  are
capable of detecting all internet activity of a type they  would  disapprove
of.  Mr Mills makes the point that there must be very many Iranian citizens
who are active on the internet and that it would be a  huge  undertaking  to
attempt to monitor more than a fraction of that activity.  As he put it  the
authorities "can't monitor everyone in the world  on  Facebook".   No  doubt
that is right.  But they do seek to do what they can in that regard and,  as
the examples given by Dr. Kakhki in his report indicate, they do  sometimes
detect activity by Iranians located abroad and that does sometimes  lead  to
persecutory  ill-treatment  being  subsequently  meted  out  to  them.   The
question is whether, in the circumstances of this particular case, there  is
a real risk that the authorities will have detected  the  internet  activity
of  this  particular  claimant.   In  considering  that  key   matter,   his
motivation (which has been found to be dishonest) is not  relevant.   It  is
the authority's perception which is relevant.  But neither  is  it  relevant
that, if he has been detected, he will in all probability (according to  the
expert  and  the  background  country  material)  receive  persecutory  ill-
treatment.  It is only the risk, and  whether  it  is  more  than  fanciful,
which I need to address.

20.   I have not found this an  easy  task.   The  Iranian  authorities  are
obviously determined,  indeed  zealous,  but  cannot  hope  to  monitor  all
internet traffic, or anything approaching that, generated  by  its  citizens
either within Iran or overseas.  On the preserved findings the claimant  did
not come to the attention of the authorities through  the  footage  said  to
have been contained on H's mobile telephone.  All of  that  was  a  fiction.
Nor does it seem to me that there is anything in  his  profile,  absent  his
internet activity, which would have excited  the  adverse  interest  of  the
Iranian authorities.  So really it comes down to  whether  they  might  have
happened upon him, as a result of the use  of  surveillance  techniques,  by
chance.  As to that, whilst I am not able to  make  a  precise  finding,  it
appears that the  claimant's  internet  activity  designed  to  artificially
enhance or create an asylum claim would have commenced around  the  time  he
actually made his claim or possibly, if he had thought  things  through  and
planned ahead, slightly before then.  As I have noted, he made his claim  on
22 December 2016.  So, potentially, he has had two years to attempt to lay
down an artificial internet imprint.  What is said in  Dr. Kakhki's  report
does suggest a particular interest in Facebook pages and  postings.   As  is
pointed out by Dr. Kakhki and Mr Woodhouse, his Facebook account identifies
him by way of his real name and by a profile picture.   Thus,  his  Facebook
account is, essentially, a public one.  Presumably taking steps to  keep  it
private or to limit its accessibility would have run counter to his  purpose
in manufacturing an untruthful but accessible  internet  profile.   Although
the expert has not set much  store  by  this,  his  activity  has  not  been
limited to Facebook and he has exchanged messages on Grinder.  That sort  of
activity is capable of increasing the risk of detection.  In broad terms,  I
suppose, the greater the activity the greater the risk of detection.

21.   I do note Dr. Kakhki's own view that it  is  likely  the  appellant's
activities will have come to the attention of the authorities.   I  am  not,
though, so sure that I should attach any weight to that as  it  is  only  an
opinion which is not necessarily of more value than any other person's  view
on the matter.  Dr. Kakhki is a  relevant  expert  and  I  acknowledge  his
expertise and knowledge of the Iranian authorities and  the  ways  in  which
they do monitor internet traffic.  But it seems to me that the  decision  as
to whether, given all of  that,  the  risk  this  claimant  will  have  been
detected is, essentially, a judgment call rather than something which  might
authoritatively be assessed by an expert.  Accordingly, I have made  my  own
unfettered decision on the point albeit noting  the  expert's  view.  Whilst
taking account of Mr Mills submissions, I have concluded  that  bearing  in
mind the resources and effort put in by the Iranian authorities, bearing  in
mind that the claimant's Facebook activities have been  public,  bearing  in
mind that his internet activity is not limited to Facebook, bearing in  mind
that he has been active via the internet for  some  considerable  time,  the
risk of detection has albeit I think narrowly, become something which  ought
properly to be characterised as being more than fanciful.

22.   My above conclusion means, in my judgment, that the  authorities  will
have an adverse interest  in  the  claimant  and  will,  to  the  real  risk
standard, detain him at the airport once he returns  to  Iran.   Dr. Kakhki
has set out what he feels is likely to happen if he has come to the  adverse
attention of the authorities.  I  accept  his  expert  view  that,  in  such
circumstances, it is likely that  he  would  be  detained,  ill-treated  and
punished by various means including flogging.  As I  say,  I  do  not  think
Mr Mills takes a different view.  Accordingly,  I  conclude,  with  a  full
appreciation that the outcome might in the circumstances  seem  unattractive
to some, that the claimant is a refugee.

23.   I could stop there but I would like to deal with a  couple  of  points
which do not now have relevance to my decision but which  were  the  subject
of quite interesting argument before me.  As to those matters, reliance  had
been placed, on the claimant's behalf, upon what was said in AB  and  Others
(Internet Activity  -  State  of  Evidence)  Iran [2015]  UKUT 0257  (IAC)
concerning the risk of persons returning or being returned  to  Iran,  being
questioned by the authorities upon return and  being  asked  about  internet
activity which they might have been involved in.   Indeed,  the  grounds  of
appeal to the Upper Tribunal (not drafted  by  Mr Woodhouse)  appeared  to
treat AB and Others as if it was a  Country Guidance  decision.   Mr Mills
pointed out that it was not.  He also pointed out  that,  according  to  its
own headnote, the view had been taken  that  the  material  put  before  the
Upper Tribunal did not disclose a sufficient evidential  basis  for  giving
country or other guidance as to  what  might  be  expected  by  those  being
returned to Iran other than with a "regular" passport in  relation  to  whom
interest may be excited from the  authorities  via  internet  activity.   It
seems to me that since this claimant  does  appear  to  possess  an  Iranian
passport (he acknowledged he had one which was still valid at  the  time  of
his asylum interview) it may be that had  he  not  previously  come  to  the
attention of the authorities via internet activity  he  would  have  had  no
difficulty in passing through the airport in any event.  But  I  agree  with
Mr Mills that it would be wrong to elevate AB to a status it does not have.
 It is clear from the headnote that the only reason it has been reported  is
to place the evidence which it considered in  the  public  domain.   So,  it
does seem to me that, whilst it may be open to claimants to  rely  upon  the
evidence which happens to have been considered in AB it is  not  appropriate
to rely upon its reasoning as if it were a Country Guidance decision  or  to
assume that reasoning is somehow binding or  perhaps  even  persuasive.  But
that is just a non-essential expression of my own judicial opinion.

24.   Further, an interesting issue was raised as  to  whether  or  not  the
claimant could be expected, in the circumstances of  this  case,  to  delete
his Facebook entries before returning to Iran.  The matter is  not  material
to the outcome given my finding that his internet activity has already  come
to the attention of the Iranian authorities.  So,  again,  what  follows  is
simply non-essential opinion.  Mr Woodhouse argued that  expecting  him  to
delete his Facebook entries would be tantamount to  expecting  him  to  lie.
He pointed out the by now well established principle that an  asylum  seeker
cannot be expected to lie.  Mr Mills  argued  that  deleting  the  Facebook
entries would not amount to lying because those entries had themselves  been
dishonest anyway.  I agree with Mr Mills.  It is right to say  that  in  RT
and KM v SSHD [2012] UKSC 38, it was accepted that, when  asked  questions,
asylum claimants could not be expected to lie and  that  that  extended  not
only to persons who had strong convictions they might  have  to  disown  but
also  persons  who  had  no  convictions  at  all.   The  relevant   factual
circumstance was a claimant  who  might  have  to  mislead  by  asserting  a
commitment  to  a  particular  ruling  party  in  circumstances  where  that
claimant had no political affiliations or preferences at all.   But  in  the
instant case, there is a distinction because the claimant  is  not,  at  the
point of deleting the  content  of  his  Facebook  account,  being  asked  a
question at all.  Additionally and  in  any  event,  deleting  the  Facebook
entries  would  not  amount  to  lying  because  the  relevant   indications
concerned in them with respect to the claimant being  gay  are,  themselves,
deliberately false.  It is right to say a claimant  cannot  be  expected  to
lie.  But it is not right to say that a claimant who has  lied  is  required
to continue to maintain that lie.  However, none of that now matters.

25.   The claimant's appeal is allowed  on  asylum  grounds.   I  have  also
decided to allow it under Article 3 of the ECHR for the same reasons.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  In remaking the decision, I allow  the  claimant's  appeal  on  asylum
grounds and on human rights grounds (Article 3 only) against the  Secretary
of State's decision to grant international protection.


Signed:                           Date: 27 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


Anonymity

I grant  the  claimant  anonymity  pursuant  to  rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.  Accordingly, no  report  of  these
proceedings shall either directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member
of his family.  This applies both to the claimant and to  the  Secretary  of
State.  Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                           Date: 27 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

