

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
      Appeal Number: PA/06954/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 May 2017                         |On 10 May 2017                       |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAFFER

                                   Between

                                JANALI ZAMANI
                          (NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mohamed of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Miss Holmes a Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

    1. The Respondent refused the Appellant's  application  for  asylum  or
       ancillary protection on 22 June 2016. His appeal  against  this  was
       dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Courtney  ("the  Judge")
       following a hearing on 20 January 2017.

The grant of permission


   2. Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins granted permission to  appeal  (29  March
      2017) on the basis that it is arguable that the Judge materially erred
      in failing to give proper reasons for dismissing the appeal  where  he
      was a credible witness whose concerns were supported  by  an  expert's
      report,  his  primary  claim  being  that  he  would  be  particularly
      vulnerable as a member of the Hazara community in Afghanistan and  due
      to the length of time he had been out of the country.  Permission  was
      granted in respect of all the grounds.


Respondent's position

    3. It was submitted in the rule 24 notice  (13  April  2017)  that  the
       Judge directed herself appropriately. The  findings  were  adequate.
       The Judge properly considered the country material and the  expert's
       report. The Judge was entitled to find that the  witnesses  evidence
       did not demonstrate that the Appellant would be at risk on return.


   4. Miss Holmes submitted additionally that the  Judge  went  through  the
      evidence with a fine tooth comb and was entitled to look at the source
      of the evidence that was contained within  the  expert's  report.  The
      failure to take the parties view on that was not a material  error  of
      law as the Judge only dealt with this as an aside  and  that  evidence
      related to young men whereas the Appellant is middle-aged.  The  Judge
      was entitled to find as she did regarding attacks on  the  Hazara  and
      was entitled to point out that there are between  1.7  million  and  2
      million Hazara's living in Kabul. The Judge was entitled to find  that
      not all Hazara's are at risk on return. The Judge  was  not  requiring
      the Appellant to change his identity to avoid persecution.


Appellant's position

    5. Despite the lengthy grounds and submissions, the Appellant's case in
       fact turns on one point. Mr Mohamed submitted, in essence, that  the
       Appellant's  account  was  accepted  as  being  credible,  and   the
       Appellant should have been given the opportunity of commenting on  a
       report that was referred to in the expert's report but read in  full
       by the Judge before the Judge made adverse findings.

Discussion

    6. The Judge stated at [44]


          "The Appellant had been out  Afghanistan  for  37  years,  having
          lived in Iran between 1980 and 2006, and coming to the UK. In  Ms
          Stahlmann's view, "Given the many decades  Mr  Zamani  has  lived
          abroad it is virtually impossible that he could  blend  into  the
          social fabric without identifying himself as a stranger and  thus
          exposing himself as a target".  She  takes  the  view  that  "the
          presumed assessment that he would have amounted riches  increases
          the risk of being kidnapped for ransom  considerably  [39].  This
          assertion is sourced to the 2013  study  by  Schuster  &  Majidi.
          However, having read that report in full I cannot  see  that  any
          such reference is made in it..."


    7. I accept, as indeed did both  representatives,  that  the  Judge  is
       entitled to consider a report which is referred to  in  an  expert's
       report. I also agree with both representatives that the Judge should
       have given both parties the opportunity of commenting on a  document
       prior to making a determination based upon it. I disagree with  Miss
       Holmes that this was not a material error of law, as  how  he  would
       reasonably be likely to be viewed on return  actually  goes  to  the
       heart of the case. The Judge should have given  the  opportunity  to
       the parties to comment on the fact that the source of  the  evidence
       contained in the footnote did not appear to the Judge to match  with
       the expert assessment of that report. It was the crux of the case.


    8. For the avoidance of doubt,  I  was  satisfied  that  there  was  no
       material of law regarding the assessment of the  witnesses  evidence
       as the reached conclusions she was entitled to on that.


    9. Having heard submission, I was satisfied that it is  appropriate  to
       remit the matter de novo as the error goes  beyond  those  contained
       within  the  Presidential  Guidance  for  retention  in  the   Upper
       Tribunal. The witnesses evidence will be  considered  afresh  within
       the context of the expert and background evidence, as regarding  the
       issue of risk on return, the findings are set aside.

Decision:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

      I set aside the decision.

    I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de  novo  hearing,
    not before Judge Courtney.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saffer
9 May 2017
