

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06874/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|on 28 September 2017                |on 29 September 2017                  |
|                                    |                                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                    [D O]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Ms N Loughran, of Loughran & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 7 February 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Farrelly dismissed the appellant's appeal against refusal of asylum.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal  to  the  UT.   The  proposed
    grounds 1 and 2 sought to challenge the adverse  credibility  findings.
    Ground 3 said that the judge erred by  failing  to  make  a  definitive
    finding on the appellant's place of origin.   Ground  4  said  that  in
    various respects the judge failed to apply AA [2015] UKUT 544.

 3. In a decision dated 9 August 2017 UT Judge Freeman said that there  was
    no merit in grounds 1 and 2; that no more was required  than  that  the
    judge found the appellant to be from a "contested area"; and  that  the
    points about the  judge's  conclusions  on  relocation  to  Baghdad  or
    Kurdistan were arguable on the basis of AA as re-affirmed in BA  [2017]
    UKUT 18, but did not affect the credibility findings.  Thus, permission
    was granted on ground 4 only.

 4. Mrs O'Brien  conceded  that  the  findings  which  were  made  were  an
    insufficient basis from which to reach the further findings required to
    resolve the case in light of the country guidance.

 5. Representatives concurred that there were no clear findings on  whether
    the appellant has made his case in these related respects:  whether  he
    has, has had, or is able to obtain a CSID or a passport; the extent  of
    his contact or ability to make contact with family members  or  friends
    in Iraq; and the practicalities of his relocation either  in  Kurdistan
    or in Iraq.

 6. I observe that there is nothing in the point at  4(a)  of  the  grounds
    about  the  appellant  not  approaching  the  Iraqi   Embassy   without
    jeopardizing his claim.  It is correct that a person claiming  to  fear
    his national authorities cannot be expected to have recourse  to  them,
    and it is usually inappropriate for the respondent to do so;  but  that
    is not the present situation.

 7. As both representatives correctly mentioned, the guidance in AA has now
    been amended and set out as an annex to AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944.
    That should be the framework for further fact-finding and resolution of
    the case.

 8. Both representatives agreed that the further resolution was apt to take
    place in the FtT, before another judge.

 9. The decision of  the  FtT  is  set  aside.  Its  credibility  findings,
    however, are the starting point for the next decision.

10. In terms of section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  2007  Act  and  of  Practice
    Statement 7.2 the case is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  decision  to
    be reached on the foregoing agreed basis.

11. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Farrelly.

12. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            28 September 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




