
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06406/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Working Remotely By Skype for Business        |                              |
|On 11 March 2021                              |On 24 March 2021              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs L Brakaj of Iris Law Firm, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania who was born  on  6  March  1985.
    She came to the UK on 2 November 2017 with her children.  Her claim for
    asylum was refused on 25 July 2018 and certified as clearly  unfounded.
    Thereafter, the appellant lodged further submissions on 23 April  2019.
    These were considered to be a "fresh claim" and, on 7  June  2019,  the
    Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  claims   for   asylum,
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 3. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 7 January 2012, Judge  P  M  Hands  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant was initially refused permission to appeal by the  First-
    tier Tribunal but,  on  18  November  2020,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ
    Canavan) granted the appellant permission to appeal.

 5. On 21 January 2021, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold Judge Hands' decision.

 6. On behalf of  the  appellant,  her  representatives  filed  a  skeleton
    argument.

 7. The appeal was listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on  11  March
    2021 with  the  Upper  Tribunal  working  remotely.   Mrs  Brakaj,  who
    represented the appellant,  and  Mrs  Petterson,  who  represented  the
    Secretary of State, joined the hearing remotely by Skype for  Business.



The Appellant's Claim

 8. The appellant's claim is that she fears corrupt members of the Albanian
    military to whom, she claims, her husband owed  a  debt  following  his
    service abroad in the Albanian military in Iraq and Afghanistan between
    2003 and 2010 when he left the military.  The appellant claims that  in
    2010 the family were visited by individuals from the military and, as a
    result of that, the appellant and her  family  moved  from  the  family
    home.  Thereafter, the appellant's husband left in 2014 and she has not
    seen him since.  In 2017, the appellant says that she was  attacked  by
    men in the street and has been threatened and her husband's whereabouts
    sought although she is not aware of where he is.

 9. The judge made an adverse credibility finding and did not  accept  that
    the appellant was at risk on return to Albania.  To the extent that the
    judge accepted that the appellant had been attacked in  2017,  she  did
    not accept that this had anything to do with her husband and  any  debt
    he might owe to the corrupt military officers but was, if  anything,  a
    random attack  by  criminals.   The  judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant (or her family) had been approached by military  men  seeking
    her husband who owed a debt to them arising from the  corrupt  practice
    of extorting money from Albanian soldiers who  were  paid  on  missions
    abroad, such as in Afghanistan and Iraq.

The Grant of Permission

10. In granting permission, UTJ Canavan identified the  following  arguable
    error of law:

         "... although many of the judge's findings were likely to  be  open
         to her to make, it is at least  arguable  that  she  may  not  have
         considered material evidence in the expert report  adequately  when
         assessing  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's   account.    The
         appellant did not appear to overstate her case or purport  to  know
         who the men in uniform who threatened her were.  The expert  report
         was not just framed in general terms.  The expert was able to point
         to a specific link between the  appellant's  husband  and  an  army
         officer who  was  documented  to  have  been  involved  in  corrupt
         practices [pg. 279-281].  It is arguable that the  report  provided
         at least one  plausible  explanation  as  to  why  the  appellant's
         husband might owe corrupt army officers money.  In turn, it  is  at
         least arguable  that  if  the  claim  is  taken  at  [its]  highest
         sufficient protection might  not  be  available  if  the  potential
         persecutors are members of the  authorities  who  may  be  able  to
         influence  or  corrupt  officials.   The  grounds   merit   further
         consideration."

The Submissions

11. On behalf of the appellant, the principal ground of appeal is  that  in
    reaching her adverse credibility finding, the judge failed properly  to
    have regard to the expert report of Vebi Kosumi at pages 270-316 of the
    appellant's bundle.  In particular, it  is  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to have regard to para 7  of  that  report  which  refers  to  a
    colonel (whom I shall refer to as "G") as  being  involved  in  corrupt
    practices within the Albanian military and who is named on the military
    ID card of the appellant's husband (at E1 of the respondent's  bundle).
    Mrs Brakaj submitted that this evidence was directly  relevant  linking
    corruption, of the sort  claimed  by  the  appellant,  directly  to  an
    individual connected with  her  husband.   This  was  relevant  to  the
    judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility and the judge made no
    reference to it although, Mrs Brakaj accepted, the judge  had  referred
    to other parts of the  expert's  report  focusing  on  aspects  of  the
    expert's report not directly relevant to the appellant's claim, such as
    issues concerning drug and human trafficking.

12. Secondly, Mrs Brakaj submitted that the judge had failed to have regard
    to the medical evidence  (at  pages  223,  225,  236  and  238  of  the
    appellant's bundle) relating to the appellant's mental health which was
    referred to by the appellant in para 43 of her  witness  statement  (at
    page 8 of the appellant's bundle).  Again, that  was  relevant  to  the
    issue of credibility.

13. Mrs  Brakaj  submitted  that,  although  the  judge  had  rejected  the
    appellant's account that the attack in 2017 had been connected  to  her
    husband's debt, the two incidents could be  related  and  the  expert's
    evidence was relevant to both findings.

14. On behalf of the respondent, Mrs Petterson  relied  upon  the  rule  24
    notice which she developed in her oral submissions.   In  essence,  she
    submitted that the expert's report was focused upon  drug  trafficking,
    human trafficking and the mafia which was no part  of  the  appellant's
    case.  She submitted that the expert referred to a WikiLeeks'  document
    dated 14 November  2008  but  that  predated  by  some  time  when  the
    appellant claimed she  had  been  approached  concerning  her  husband.
    Relying on the rule 24 notice, the expert had  given  no  reference  to
    enable the relevant WikiLeeks' document to be  traced.   Mrs  Petterson
    also relied upon what the expert said in para 7 that the involvement in
    corruption by "G" was something which "may not be directly  linked"  to
    the claims made by the appellant of threats received by individuals  in
    military uniform.

15. As regards the other evidence, Mrs Petterson submitted that  the  judge
    was not required to recite all the evidence and  the  medical  evidence
    went no further than showing there had been mental health  appointments
    which were "low intensity" appointments.

Discussion

16.  The  expert's  report  was  undoubtedly  relevant  to  assessing   the
    appellant's claim, in particular her credibility.  It is true,  as  Mrs
    Petterson submitted, that much of the expert's report  is  directed  to
    the  background  situation  in  Albania  of  drug  trafficking,   human
    trafficking and the  mafia  which  is  not  directly  relevant  to  the
    appellant's claim.  Her claim is, on its face, more limited than  that.
    She claims that as a  result  of  corrupt  practices  in  the  Albanian
    military, soldiers who are posted abroad to places  such  as  Iraq  and
    Afghanistan and who earn money by those postings, are required  to  pay
    (and thereby owe a debt to) corrupt officers in the Albanian  military.
    Paragraph 7 of the expert report directly deals with  that  issue.   It
    recognises, through a WikiLeeks' document, the very kind of  corruption
    which the appellant relies upon and also refers  to  the  officer,  "G"
    whom, at least on  the  basis  of  the  military  ID  document  of  the
    appellant's husband, has a link to the appellant's husband.  I  do  not
    accept Mrs Petterson's submission  that  it  does  not  relate  to  the
    relevant time of the military service of the appellant's  husband.   It
    does.  It relates to a time when he might have incurred the "debt" as a
    result of his tours of duty in Iraq and Afghanistan  between  2003  and
    2010.

17. Of  course,  this  evidence  did  not  (and  does  not)  determine  the
    credibility issue necessarily in  the  appellant's  favour.   It  does,
    however, add to the plausibility of her claim, both in relation to  the
    corrupt practice within the military and also as to "G" and a potential
    connection with the appellant's husband.  The judge ought to have taken
    this evidence into account  before  reaching  her  adverse  credibility
    finding.  There  would,  no  doubt,  be  submissions  made  as  to  the
    reliability of a WikiLeeks' extract which provided no means for  it  to
    be checked and also, as Mrs Petterson pointed out, the expert does  not
    express  an  unequivocal  view  of  the  connection  between  "G"   and
    corruption (on the one hand) and the appellant's claim  (on  the  other
    hand).   He  does,  however,  conclude  the  appellant's   account   is
    plausible.  These are, however, potentially matters for submissions and
    assessment by a judge.  Having not referred to the  relevant  parts  of
    the expert evidence what view the judge in this appeal would have taken
    of the expert evidence is pure  speculation.   I  accept  Mrs  Brakaj's
    submission that this evidence was relevant and significant in assessing
    the credibility of the appellant's account.

18. Whilst it is true that the judge expresses a number of reasons why  she
    does not accept the appellant's account, I cannot be confident that her
    failure to grapple with this expert evidence - on its face relevant and
    significant to a core part of the appellant's claim - was not  material
    and could not have affected her conclusion to  reject  the  appellant's
    account as not credible.

19. In the light of this, it is not necessary  to  resolve  the  additional
    ground (perhaps of less weight) that the judge failed to have regard to
    the appellant's  mental  health  in  assessing  her  credibility.   Her
    failure to consider the expert evidence was, in my judgment, in  itself
    a material error of law which makes  her  adverse  credibility  finding
    unsustainable in law.

20. There will, no doubt, be a number of hurdles that have to  be  overcome
    by the appellant in order to succeed in her claim.   However,  for  the
    reasons I have given, the error of law made in respect of  the  central
    issue decided adversely to the appellant, namely the credibility of her
    claim, results in her decision to dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  as
    being unsustainable.

Decision

21. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material error of  law.
    That decision cannot stand and is set aside.

22. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Hands.



                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                               16 March 2021

