
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06516/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester                 Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 16th November 2018               On 23rd November 2018




                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   MR. M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                          Respondent



Representation:
For the appellant: Ms H Santamera of IAS(Liverpool)
For the respondent: Mr C Bates , Home Office Presenting Officer


                             Decision & Reasons

Introduction

   1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker, who, in a decision promulgated on 27
      July 2018 dismissed the appellant's appeal.

   2. The appellant is an Iranian national who claims he would be at risk
      from the Iranian authorities on the basis of his political opinions.
      He is an Arab it claims to have been promoting their rights in Iran
      and had been involved in social media and distributing materials.
      Since coming to the United Kingdom he has taken part in related
      events. His account is that his friend, who was also involved, was
      arrested by the Iranian authorities. Fearful of what might happen to
      him he left the country. He said he travelled to Turkey and then flew
      by air from there to the United Kingdom, claiming asylum on the day he
      arrived.

   3. The respondent accepted he was an Iranian Arab but did not accept his
      claimed activities or difficulties. The refusal letter refers to him
      producing a forged passport to Home Office officials. Reliance was
      therefore placed upon section 8 of the Asylum and
      Immigration(Treatment of Claimants)Act 2004.

   4. On 4 July 2014 a Mr Dillon, Home Office presenting officer, faxed a
      letter to the appellant's representative enclosing copies of the
      appellant's Visa applications which give his passport details. The
      presenting officer states that the appellant screening and substantive
      interview as well as Home Office records were checked. At no stage did
      he indicated he had travelled on forged passport but said he travelled
      on his own passport. The presenting officer concluded by stating he
      can find no evidence to support the assertion in the refusal letter
      that he had produced a forged passport. Consequently, that paragraph
      was being withdrawn.

   5. When the appeal was listed for hearing before First-tier Tribunal
      Judge Parker there was no presenting officer in attendance. The
      grounds state that at the outset of the hearing the appellant's
      representative provided the judge with a copy of the email referred to
      from the presenting officer. I have checked the judge's record of
      proceedings and find the judge recorded this.

   6. At paragraph 31 the judge stated `the appellant has produced a forged
      passport which damages the credibility... Reference is then made to
      section 8 and that the production of an invalid passport damages his
      credibility.

   7. Mr Bates accepted that the judge's comments about the use of a false
      passport were factually wrong amounted to a material error of law
      given that this was not the case being made by the respondent.

Consideration

   8. It is clear that in preparing the decision the judge believed the
      appellant had entered the United Kingdom using a false passport. By
      doing so his credibility was damaged. Credibility was central to the
      appeal. However the judge overlooked the email from the presenting
      officer. This issue had been raised in advance by his representatives
      and it was then accepted by the respondent that the comment in the
      refusal letter to this effect was wrong. Clearly from the decision
      this was a factor affecting the judge's assessment of credibility and
      so was on a false premise.

   9. The judge did not have the advantage of presenting officer in
      attendance. Whilst it was stated he was told of the email at the start
      the hearing it may be that in preparing the decision the may have
      turned to the refusal letter and overlooked this correction. Whatever
      the reason, this is a material error which fundamentally undermines
      the credibility findings. Consequently, I was set aside the decision
      and remit the matter for a de novo hearing before the First-tier
      Tribunal.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker materially errs in law and
is set aside. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
novo hearing excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Parker.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



