
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06869/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 November 2018                            |On 29 November 2018           |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                     MISS MOTLHATLHEDI MMAPULA PATRICIA
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovic, of Counsel instructed by Pickup Scott
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Botswana, born on 5 September  1971,  who
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 22 May 2018 to refuse the appellant's claim for asylum
    and humanitarian protection.  In a  decision  promulgated  on  17  July
    2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Grimmett   dismissed   the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

         Ground 1 - failing to  take  into  account  a  material  matter  in
         respect of the finding that the appellant has her  sister  and  her
         son in Botswana and in  failing  to  take  into  consideration  the
         appellant's physical and moral integrity in having her personal and
         intimate physical care administered by her son or her sister.

         Ground 2 - failing to  take  into  account  a  material  matter  in
         rejecting the appellant's private life claim, basing this solely on
         the availability of  the  appellant's  son  and  her  sister.   The
         appellant's private life and her  ability  to  reintegrate  is  not
         simply limited to her care needs or medical conditions.

         Ground 3 - failing to  take  into  account  a  material  matter  in
         relation to the judge making  an  assessment,  at  [27],  that  the
         appellant had no real private life whereas the appellant had  lived
         in the UK for thirteen years, had worked and formed  relationships,
         and there was a finding that she is  in  a  relationship  with  her
         partner which forms part of her private  life.   It  was  submitted
         that the appellant is unable to show further private  life  because
         of her three major strokes and current medical  condition  and  the
         judge failed to take this into consideration.

         Ground 4 - failing to  take  into  account  a  material  matter  in
         respect of the appellant being able to  speak  English  before  her
         strokes whereas her inability to  speak  English,  and  indeed  her
         inability to speak at all, was unfairly used against her when  this
         is something that she did not have control over.

Background

 3. The appellant first entered the UK as a visitor in  or  around  October
    2005 and subsequently overstayed.  She claimed asylum in November  2016
    on the basis that she claimed to be at risk from a former  partner  and
    that as  a  lone  female  she  would  be  at  risk  of  female  genital
    mutilation.  The appellant also suffers from aphasia, which  means  she
    finds it difficult to communicate orally and  can  no  longer  read  or
    write as a result of strokes in 2015 and 2016.  The  appellant  claimed
    that her removal would breach her right  to  respect  for  private  and
    family life in the UK.  The  respondent  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge rejected her asylum claim and there  is  no  challenge  to  those
    findings.  The appellant did not give evidence or produce  a  statement
    for her appeal due to her communication difficulties.  The  appellant's
    partner provided a statement.  The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  not
    satisfied that the appellant's health difficulties reached the  Article
    3 threshhold  and  found  that  it  would  not  be  a  disproportionate
    interference with her private life (the judge not being satisfied  that
    there was family life for the purposes of Article  8,  the  appellant's
    partner living in Sweden) for the appellant to return to Botswana.

Submissions

 4. Ms Imamovic expanded on the permission grounds, submitting  that  there
    was no evidence to support the judge's findings that the appellant  has
    her sister and her son in Botswana and the judge had  referred  to  the
    appellant having contact with her sister  whereas  there  was  no  such
    evidence before the Immigration Judge.  However, as I indicated at  the
    hearing, the appellant's partner's statement indicated, stated at  page
    9, that:

         "Naturally Mmapula has tried to maintain some sort  of  clandestine
         contact with some individuals in Botswana for reason other than  to
         Threat level she faces if she were to return (sic).   As  a  mother
         who has a child left to fend for himself she simply could  not  cut
         off communication, but surely maternal instincts would drive her to
         enquire about her son who she knows is in dire straits and probably
         being affected emotionally by the whole unfolding saga".

    The statement also went on to say that:

         "it is not a given that  such  people  she  communicates  with  are
         people who would be of any value and provide support structures, as
         they are also struggling to fend for themselves in most cases  ..."



 5. Whilst Ms Imamovic accepted that this is indicative of current contact,
    she submitted that this was part of the overall difficulties that there
    were in obtaining instructions from the appellant because of  her  lack
    of ability to communicate and that the evidence came from  her  partner
    who is based in Sweden and also unable  to  attend  the  hearing.   She
    referred me to page 3 of his statement where  the  appellant's  partner
    had stated that: "she lost her memory then and lost her  speech  up  to
    now that it's not easy to understand  what  she  wants  to  say."   The
    appellant: "can't speak read and write anymore and I am so  patient  to
    hear her when she wants to tell me something".

 6. Ms Imamovic submitted that even if it was found that the appellant  did
    have some  contact,  what  the  judge  did  not  do  was  consider  the
    appellant's moral and physical integrity and whether it was appropriate
    for her family to undertake the care of the appellant.   She  submitted
    that there was no evidence of contact  and  no  evidence  of  effective
    contact.

 7. In terms of private life and integration Ms Imamovic  expanded  on  her
    grounds that the appellant's ability to form relationships and to  seek
    employment were not adequately considered and this was relevant to  her
    ability to integrate.  She submitted that the appellant did  not  speak
    either English or Tswanan.  The judge did not  assess  the  appellant's
    ability to integrate.

 8. At [34] the judge identified the factors that she had to  look  at  and
    found that the appellant's inability to speak English would "hamper her
    integration"  in  the  UK.   Ms  Imamovic  said  it  was  therefore   a
    contradiction to say that a woman who has been away from  Botswana  for
    thirteen years and whose language  skills  are  such  that  this  would
    hamper her integration in the UK can properly integrate in Botswana and
    submitted that she was unlikely to have the support that she has in the
    UK.  It  was  submitted  that  the  judge  had  not  properly  assessed
    paragraph 276ADE despite citing it at [35].  Ms Imamovic  referred,  as
    she had in the grounds, to the fact that the appellant had worked as  a
    carer and only stopped because of her health difficulties and that  the
    judge had accepted that the  appellant  had  a  relationship  with  her
    partner (although it was not contested that the couple have never lived
    together and this partner is currently residing in Sweden).

 9. In respect of ground 4, it was submitted that at [34]  the  appellant's
    inability to speak English was not assessed fairly.  The  judge  failed
    to weigh out the reason why she failed to speak English, this was not a
    choice and it was disproportionate to take this into  consideration  in
    the wider proportionality balance.

10. Mr Whitwell submitted in  relation  to  the  final  ground  that  under
    Section 117B the judge was required to take into account whether or not
    the appellant spoke English and whether she was financially independent
    and there was no provision for a weighing of reasons and that there was
    no error in the judge taking  into  consideration  that  the  appellant
    could not now speak English.

11. In respect of grounds 2 and 3 Mr Whitwell submitted that the judge,  in
    terms, at [35] referred  to  paragraph  276  and  had  noted  that  the
    appellant had not lived in the UK for twenty years and  ostensibly  the
    consideration  therefore  that  was  being  undertaken  was   paragraph
    276ADE(vi) and the judge addressed whether there were very  significant
    obstacles to her integration and found that there were not, considering
    the evidence as a whole.  This had to be considered  in  light  of  the
    judge's previous findings including in  relation  to  findings  on  the
    appellant's asylum claim and on her private life in general.   At  [27]
    the judge took into consideration that the appellant sometimes  attends
    church and continues to have contact with a social worker and with  the
    NHS.   At  [30]  the  judge  noted  that  the  appellant   can   travel
    independently and was able to get a bus with  no  difficulty  and  walk
    unaided in Leicester city centre using public transport.   Mr  Whitwell
    submitted this was equally applicable to  the  appellant's  ability  to
    integrate into Botswana and it was not indicative of someone who cannot
    integrate anywhere because of her medical difficulties.

12. Mr Whitwell submitted, that at [30], the extent of the  involvement  of
    Social Services which amounts to 11.25 hours' assistance  in  her  home
    and two hours outside of her home per week, does not speak  to  someone
    who has difficulties to the extent that they cannot integrate  at  all.
    Mr Whitwell  submitted  that  most  importantly  the  judge  took  into
    consideration and made findings that the appellant had family and those
    findings were reasoned and wholly adequate.

13. In respect of ground 1 Mr Whitwell submitted that the evidence did  not
    support the submission that the partner's evidence indicated  that  she
    was not in communication with her family.   Page  9  of  the  partner's
    statement referred to current contact.  Mr Whitwell  submitted  it  was
    open to the judge to make the findings  she  did  therefore,  that  the
    appellant was in contact with her family.

14. In reply Ms Imamovic submitted that in terms of Section  117B  she  was
    not submitting that there was no evidence to  find  that  she  did  not
    speak  English.   However  when  coming  to  weigh   up   the   overall
    proportionality she submitted the judge had failed to consider why this
    was the case in the wider proportionality balance.  Whilst she accepted
    that the judge did consider paragraph  276ADE  at  [35]  and  had  made
    findings  at  [28]  and  [29]  as  to  her  medical   conditions,   the
    consideration was very narrow and in  considering  whether  there  were
    very significant obstacles  the  judge  failed  to  consider  that  the
    appellant cannot read or write or speak and that she had lived  in  the
    UK for thirteen years and so that her ability to continue  her  private
    life will be very significantly hampered including her ability to  form
    relationships which is an integral part of her private life.

Consideration and Conclusions

Ground 1

15. I am not satisfied that any of the grounds are made out.  In respect of
    ground 1, it is not the case that there was  insufficient  evidence  on
    which the judge based her findings that the appellant  would  be  cared
    for by relatives in Botswana.

16. The judge gave adequate reasons for reaching the findings she did.  The
    judge took into consideration that the  appellant  has  a  partner  who
    lives in Sweden and found that that relationship did not engage Article
    8 and made alternative findings, if she  was  wrong,  in  that  regard.
    Having dismissed the appellant's asylum claim, including on credibility
    grounds, the First-tier Tribunal went on to not be satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be returning as a lone female given that she has a  son
    in Botswana.  The judge took into consideration the evidence  that  the
    son lives a hard village life and is helped by "some relatives" and the
    judge reached the conclusion that the appellant was  still  in  contact
    with him prior to her strokes because the appellant's partner was aware
    of his movements and that it  was  clear  that  he  was  not  the  only
    relative she has in Botswana.  I am not satisfied that that finding can
    be properly  challenged  including  given  what  was  recorded  in  the
    partner's written statement.  This statement suggests  ongoing  contact
    between the appellant and family/friends in Botswana and  I  note  that
    the judge has recorded, at [31], that the appellant can now communicate
    to  some  extent  in  her  own  language,  Tswana,  according  to   the
    observations of the social worker who carried out  the  assessment  and
    observed the appellant and her partner together.  Although Ms  Imamovic
    referred to page 3 of the partner's statement as recorded in  paragraph
    5 above, that refers to it not being easy for her partner to understand
    'what she wants to say' which suggests she can be understood with  some
    difficulty.  This supports a finding of ongoing contact, as opposed  to
    the only contact being between the partner and family members.  Even if
    that were not the case and the only contact was  from  the  appellant's
    partner  on  her  behalf,  the  judge's  findings,  that  the  evidence
    indicates ongoing contact with family, cannot be faulted.

17. The judge went on to find at [21] that the appellant had not shown that
    her sister was no longer  in  Botswana  and  gave  clear  and  adequate
    reasons for those findings.  Although the appellant claims  the  sister
    is in Zimbabwe having married a Zimbabwean citizen, the  judge  pointed
    out the flaws in that evidence including her earlier statement at D1 of
    the respondent's bundle, the appellant noting her sister  had  returned
    to Botswana where she had been working and this  did  not  suggest  any
    move to Zimbabwe.  The sister's marriage certificate noted she  married
    in Botswana and there was no adequate reason given  for  the  appellant
    not producing evidence that her sister was in Zimbabwe when such  ought
    to have been available.

18. The judge's ultimate conclusion therefore that the appellant,  who  the
    judge did not find credible in her asylum account, had not  shown  that
    she had no-one to return to in Botswana, was one that was available  to
    him on the evidence.  The judge's findings, that her son was there  and
    that her sister and her sister's family were there as well  as  distant
    relatives, could not be said to be irrational.

19. The judge found that there was no  evidence  that  medication  was  not
    available in Zimbabwe or other similar  medication  and  such  was  not
    challenged before me and the judge was  satisfied  that  the  appellant
    would have the support of family members and took this into account  in
    her findings that Article 3  was  not  engaged.   The  fact  that  such
    assistance the appellant  may  receive  in  Botswana  may  involve  the
    appellant's family members undertaking intimate  care,  amounts  to  no
    more than a disagreement  with  the  judge's  conclusions  (and  it  is
    evident the judge was aware of the nature of assistance  she  currently
    receives including as detailed in the  reports  before  her)  including
    given that there is nothing to suggest that the  appellant  had  raised
    any difficulties with having strangers undertake such intimate care  in
    the UK.

20. I take into account that if an Article 3 claim  medical  fails,  it  is
    unlikely Article 8 could prosper without some  separate  or  additional
    factual element and that although the courts have not  said  Article  8
    can  never  be  engaged  by  health  consequences   of   removal,   the
    circumstances would have to be truly exceptional before such  a  breach
    can be established (see most recently SL (St  Lucia)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ
    1894).  No error of law is disclosed in ground 1.

Grounds 2 and 3

21. Although Ms Imamovic criticised the judge's approach to Article 8,  and
    in particular the alleged failure to  assess  the  appellant's  claimed
    inability to integrate in Botswana because  of  her  limited  mobility,
    memory and reduced  speech  and  her  medical  condition,  that  is  to
    misrepresent the judge's findings.

22. The judge was aware of, and set  out  (paragraphs  [28]  to  [31],  the
    appellant's limitations (including in communication and  in  self-care)
    following her strokes, as well as detailing the appellant's  abilities,
    including to  access  community  facilities,  have  phone  calls,  walk
    confidently and independently get the bus ad walk unaided in  Leicester
    city centre.  Those factual findings, which  were  not  disputed,  were
    relevant tot eh judge's ultimate conclusion that  there  were  no  very
    significant obstacles to her  integration  and  that  such  integration
    would be assisted by family members in Botswana.

23. The judge also took into consideration that the appellant had  been  in
    the UK for thirteen years, of which she only had leave for  six  months
    and that there was:

         "No information about her private life save that she is now  living
         in NASS supported accommodation.   She  sometimes  attends  church.
         She continues to have contact with a social  worker  and  with  the
         NHS.  There was no evidence from any friends in the UK".

24. There was nothing before me to suggest that  the  judge  was  factually
    incorrect in that assessment.  Whilst that may not specifically mention
    the fact that the appellant previously worked as a carer, the judge  at
    [34] refers to  the  appellant's  illegal  working  and  that  she  was
    financially independent at that point.




25. The judge cannot be properly  criticised  for  her  assessment  of  the
    appellant's limited private life, and that her  relationship  with  her
    partner did not amount to  family  life.   Although  Ms  Imamovic  drew
    attention  to  the  appellant's  vulnerability,  the  judge  took  into
    consideration,  including  at  [2]  that  the  appellant  suffers  from
    aphasia, which means that  the  appellant  claims  that  she  finds  it
    difficult to communicate orally and can no longer read or  write  as  a
    result of strokes in 2015  and  2016.   The  judge  clearly  had  those
    difficulties at the forefront of her mind in the consideration  of  the
    appellant's Article 3 and Article 8 claims and took into  consideration
    the appellant's needs and her abilities, including that  she  can  walk
    confidently and  that  she  can  prepare  her  breakfast  and  use  the
    microwave although she cannot  read  instructions,  and  that  she  has
    undertaken travel training and as already  noted  was  able  to  travel
    independently and get the bus with no difficulty.


26. The judge also took  into  consideration  the  appellant's  ability  to
    communicate to some extent in her own language.  In  assessing  all  of
    that evidence, the judge reached  the  conclusion  that  the  appellant
    would not be  able  to  live  entirely  independently  because  of  the
    difficulties she faces, but was  satisfied  that  her  close  relatives
    would be able to assist her.  That conclusion was evidence-based and  a
    finding that was available to the First-tier Tribunal.   There  are  no
    material errors identified in grounds 2 and 3.

Ground 4

27. In respect of the judge taking into consideration  that  the  appellant
    did not speak English and was not financially independent, Ms  Imamovic
    conceded that the judge was required to  do  so.   However,  the  judge
    clearly had in mind, in the wider proportionality balance,  the  reason
    for the appellant's difficulties and there was  no  error  in  her  not
    specifically stating that when considering Section 117B. I do not agree
    with the submission, which is not made out, that the  judge  'used  the
    appellant's  disability   against   her'   in   the   public   interest
    consideration.

28. Although it was submitted that, for example, it was unfair of the judge
    to take into account the appellant's  lack  of  financial  independence
    whilst apparently not considering why she could not work, as also noted
    by the judge, the appellant did not have permission to work in  the  UK
    in  any  event  which  would  be  a  relevant   factor   in   financial
    independence.  There was no error therefore in the  findings,  made  on
    the basis of the medical evidence, that there was 'no evidence to  show
    that she will be able to be financially independent in the future'.

29. It  is  not  the  case,  contrary  to  submissions,  that  the  judge's
    consideration  of  paragraph   276ADE(vi)   and   the   judge's   wider
    consideration of Article 8, was limited to the one  sentence  in  [35].
    This has to be considered in light of the judge's general  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's availability of relatives in Botswana,  her
    limited ability to communicate in her own  language,  the  capabilities
    that the appellant has together with her needs,  which  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude were not exceptional.

Notice of Decision

30. The First-tier Tribunal decision does not contain an error of  law  and
    shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction was sought or is made.




Signed                                  Date:  20 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed.  No fee award is made.




Signed                                  Date:  20 November 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
