


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/06960/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 August 2017                  |On 26 October 2017            |
|Prepared on 22 August 2017         |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    F. I.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Williams, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                       Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant claimed  asylum  on  14  January  2016,  and  that
           application was refused on 21 June 2016. The Appellant's  appeal
           to the Tribunal was heard on 12 December  2016  and  allowed  by
           decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Atkinson promulgated on 10
           January 2017.
        2. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal on 21 April 2017
           by First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Martins  on  the  basis  it  was
           arguable the Judge had erred in his approach  to  the  issue  of
           whether the Appellant was not simply a  citizen  of  Syria,  but
           also a citizen of Iraq. The Appellant filed no Rule 24 notice in
           response to that grant of  permission.  Thus  the  matter  comes
           before me.


      Error of Law?
        3. When the appeal was called on for hearing before me  Mr  McVeety
           conceded that the grounds had been drafted on  the  basis  of  a
           mistake. The Respondent had never placed  before  the  Judge  in
           evidence material relating to the Iraqi  Nationality  Law  2006.
           Thus the Judge could not in fairness be  criticised  for  having
           overlooked it.
        4. Absent that criticism it is plain that the grounds  identify  no
           arguable material error of law, and amount to  no  more  than  a
           disagreement with the Judge's findings set out in  paragraph  30
           of his decision. He accepted  that  the  Appellant  held  Syrian
           citizenship  at  birth  by  descent,  but  lost  it   upon   her
           naturalisation as a citizen of Iraq in 1990. When she moved from
           Iraq  to  Syria  she  applied  for,  and  was  granted,   Syrian
           citizenship once  more.  She  renounced  her  Iraqi  citizenship
           acquired through naturalisation as part of that process.
        5. Williams s Rogers (who had very recently been instructed to act)
           accepted quite candidly  that  the  challenge  advanced  in  the
           grounds had no merit. She accepted that the correct  burden  and
           standard of proof had been applied by the Judge to the  evidence
           before him, and that adequate reasons had  been  given  for  the
           conclusions that were reached. I  was  invited  to  dismiss  the
           appeal, since permission must have been given in error.
        6. In these circumstances, having considered the matter for myself,
           the  Appellant  should  never  have  made  the  application  for
           permission to appeal, and  permission  should  never  have  been
           granted. The Judge did not make any material error of law in his
           decision to allow the appeal, and that decision must stand.

   DECISION


      The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on  21
      October 2016 did not involve the making of an  error  of  law  in  the
      decision to dismiss the appeal that requires that decision to  be  set
      aside and remade. That decision is accordingly confirmed.





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017
