
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06583/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 May 2019                       |On 13 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     SAH
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr H Dieu instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan,
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the respondent (SAH).  A failure to comply  with
    this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 1 January 1989.   He
    is Kurdish and comes from Erbil in the IKR.

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  illegally  on  5  February
    2004 and claimed asylum.  That claim was refused by  the  Secretary  of
    State on 1 April 2004.  The appellant's subsequent appeal was dismissed
    on 30 June 2004 and he became appeal rights exhausted  on  12  November
    2004.  On 8 October 2004, the appellant was recorded as an absconder as
    he had failed to report correctly.  On 6 December 2007, he applied  for
    Assisted Voluntary Return through the Home Office and that  application
    was initially  accepted  but  on  3  April  2008  the  application  was
    withdrawn by the Home Office.

 5. On 9 October 2009, the appellant was  convicted  at  the  Wolverhampton
    Crown Court of two counts of making false representation and one  count
    of possession of an improperly obtained  identification  card.   On  30
    October  2009,  the  appellant  was   sentenced   to   twelve   months'
    imprisonment concurrently on each count.

 6. On 30 November 2009, the appellant was served with notice of  liability
    to be deported.  On 19 January 2010, the appellant made a further claim
    for asylum which was again refused on 27 July 2010.

 7. On 27 July 2010, a deportation order was signed against the  appellant.
    The appellant appealed against that decision on 5 August 2010 and on 10
    January 2011 his appeal was dismissed.

 8. On 4 April 2007, the appellant was detained with a view to facilitating
    his obtaining a travel document from  the  Iraqi  Government.   He  was
    subsequently issued with a laissez passer.

 9. On 19 April 2007, the appellant was served with a notice under s.120 of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act  2002").
    On 2 May 2017, further representations were made seeking to revoke  the
    deportation order on humanitarian protection grounds.  That application
    was refused on 30 May 2017  and  the  appellant's  human  rights  claim
    refused and certified under s.94B of the NIA Act 2002.

10. On 6 June 2017, further representations were made seeking to revoke the
    deportation order on humanitarian protection  and  asylum  grounds  and
    challenging the decision to certify the appellant's claims under s.94B.

11. In the light of that, the Secretary  of  State  withdrew  his  decision
    dated 30 May 2017 and made a new decision dated 26 June 2017.  In  that
    decision, the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  appellant's  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and human rights  claims.   As  a  result,  the
    application to revoke the  deportation  order  was  refused.   On  this
    occasion, the Secretary of State did not certify  under  s.94B.   As  a
    consequence, the appellant had an in-country right  of  appeal  against
    the decisions to refuse his asylum, humanitarian protection  and  human
    rights claims.



The Appeal

12. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Suffield-
    Thompson allowed  the  appellant's  appeal,  in  particular  on  asylum
    grounds and under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR.

13. Judge Suffield-Thompson found that the appellant would be unable safely
    to travel to the IKR.  She based that conclusion on a number of matters
    but, in particular,  that  the  appellant  did  not  have  the  correct
    documents.  First, his laissez passer wrongly identified his  place  of
    origin as Kirkuk and not Erbil.  Secondly, the appellant did not  have,
    and could not obtain, a Civil Status ID (CSID) card.  As a consequence,
    the judge found that the appellant would  have  to  remain  in  Baghdad
    where he would have no family support and  a  combination  of  factors,
    including that he is a Kurd and has been outside of Iraq  for  fourteen
    years so had become  westernised,  increased  his  risk  as  a  target.
    Without a CSID, and having regard to his circumstances  including  that
    he had no family to support him, he would face  destitution  so  as  to
    breach Art 3 of the ECHR.

14.  As  regards  Art  8,  the  judge  found  that  the  decision   was   a
    disproportionate interference with his  private  and  family  life,  in
    particular she found that it was "overwhelmingly in the best  interests
    of [his  son]  that  his  father  remain  in  the  UK  and  that  their
    relationship be allowed to continue and develop and for him to have his
    father with him to help him overcome any difficulties that lie ahead of
    him" (at [98]).

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The grounds challenge the judge's conclusion, based upon her
    findings in relation to the documents,  that  the  appellant  would  be
    unable to obtain a CSID with the help of family in Iraq.  Secondly, the
    judge's assessment of Art 8 was flawed as she had failed to  apply  the
    correct approach set out in s.117C of the NIA Act 2002,  in  particular
    whether the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  would  be  "unduly
    harsh" upon his son, L.

16. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    but on 7 February 2019, the Upper Tribunal (UTJ McWilliam) granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal.

17. On 19 March 2019, the appellant filed a short rule 24 response  seeking
    to uphold the judge's decision.

The Submissions

18. On behalf of the Secretary of  State,  Mr  Howells  made  a  number  of
    focused submissions.  First, he submitted that the judge's reliance  on
    the fact that the appellant had a laissez  passer  wrongly  identifying
    his home area as Kirkuk was not relevant.  He submitted that this was a
    "technical issue" to be resolved between the Secretary of State and the
    Iraqi  authorities.   He  submitted  that  the   feasibility   of   the
    appellant's return to Iraq could not give rise  to  a  claim.   In  any
    event, Mr Howells pointed out that the laissez passer  referred  to  by
    the judge (at pages A6-A9 of the appellant's bundle) had expired on  10
    June 2017 and so was not the laissez passer upon  which  the  appellant
    would, in fact, be returned to Iraq.

19. Secondly, Mr Howells submitted that the judge had been wrong in law  to
    conclude that the appellant would return to Iraq without  a  CSID.   He
    accepted that on the basis of the  country  guidance  decisions  in  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 and AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), it was  important  to  the
    appellant's claim to determine whether  he  would  have  a  valid  CSID
    before he returned to Iraq or  could  obtain  one  shortly  thereafter.
    That, Mr Howells submitted, required the judge to consider whether  the
    appellant's family (particularly his male family) in Iraq could  assist
    him in obtaining the relevant page of the family registration book  or,
    through using a power of attorney, themselves obtain a CSID in his home
    governorate.

20. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had failed to approach  this  issue
    correctly, not least because she had made two inconsistent findings  in
    paras [54] and [62] of her determination.  In  para  [54],  Mr  Howells
    submitted, the judge had rejected as  credible  the  appellant's  claim
    that he had no contact with his mother and siblings since he  had  left
    Iraq.  Mr Howells pointed out that the  appellant's  own  evidence  was
    that he had a brother and sister in Iraq (see his witness statement  at
    the second supplementary bundle, page  1  and  the  independent  social
    worker's report at the second supplementary bundle, page 36, para 3.1).
     Mr Howells submitted that, having identified the relevant issue as  to
    whether the appellant had  a  male  family  member  to  assist  him  in
    obtaining the CSID, the judge  at  para  [62]  had  reached  a  factual
    finding wholly inconsistent with her finding  in  para  [54]  when  she
    said: "I have already found that  the  appellant  has  no  male  family
    members who can assist him on his return".  Mr Howells  submitted  that
    if the appellant had male family members who could obtain the  relevant
    information in Iraq and provide it to him in the UK, he could obtain  a
    CSID from the Iraqi Embassy or, through a power of attorney, the family
    members could obtain the CSID in Iraq.  On the basis of  AAH,  if  that
    was the case, he could safely return from Baghdad to the IKR.

21. In relation to Art 8, Mr Howells submitted that it was plain  that  the
    judge failed to approach the issue  of  proportionality  in  accordance
    with s.117C of the NIA Act 2002.  Although she had considered the  best
    interests of the appellant's son L, she had not considered whether  the
    impact upon him would be  "unduly  harsh"  such  that  Exception  2  in
    s.117C(5) applied.  Mr Howells submitted that at paras [99] and  [100],
    the judge considered  s.117B  and  carried  out  a  balancing  exercise
    without reference to s.117C.

22. On behalf of the appellant, in relation  to  the  judge's  decision  in
    respect of the international protection claim, Mr Dieu  submitted  that
    the judge was entitled to have regard  to  the  difficulties  with  the
    appellant's laissez passer.  He accepted that no-one before  the  judge
    had noticed that the particular laissez passer with which the judge was
    concerned, in fact, was invalid by the date of the hearing.

23. Mr Dieu, however, accepted  that  there  was  a  "peculiarity"  in  the
    judge's decision at paras [54] and [62] where she had, on the  face  of
    it, made inconsistent factual findings.  Mr Dieu accepted that  if  the
    appellant had contact with his brother then, on the  basis  of  AA  and
    AAH, there were avenues through which the appellant might  be  able  to
    obtain a CSID.

24. In respect of the judge's decision  in  relation  to  Art  8,  Mr  Dieu
    acknowledged that although the decision to grant permission  to  appeal
    only referred to the ground relating to  the  international  protection
    claim, in the light of the decision in  Safi  and  Ors  (permission  to
    appeal decisions) [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC), as there had been no  specific
    refusal in relation to the Art 8 ground, the  Secretary  of  State  was
    entitled to rely upon those grounds.

25. Mr Dieu  submitted  that,  although  the  judge  had  not  specifically
    referred to s.117C and, in particular, the "undue harsh" requirement in
    s.117C(5) in reaching her findings, she  had  set  out  at  length  the
    relevant law, including s.117C at paras [73]-[75] and [77]-[79] and she
    must have had the correct approach in mind when reaching her subsequent
    findings.  The judge had not, therefore, erred in law in  finding  that
    the appellant's deportation breached Art 8 of the ECHR.

Discussion

26. I will deal  first  with  the  judge's  decision  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's international  protection  claim.   It  was  common  ground
    between the representatives that the effect  of  the  country  guidance
    decision in AA and AAH was that it was central to the issue of  whether
    the appellant would be able to safely return  to  the  IKR  whether  he
    would have a CSID.  That was also relevant if it was contended that  he
    could internally relocate by living in Baghdad.  The former is set  out
    in paras 3-5 of the head note in AAH as follows:

         "...

         3.            For an Iraqi national returnee (P) of  Kurdish origin
             in possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport,  the  journey
             from Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable
             and practical and can  be  made  without  a  real  risk  of  P
             suffering persecution, serious harm, Article  3  ill-treatment
             nor would any difficulties  on  the  journey  make  relocation
             unduly harsh.

         4.       P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and
             the IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.

         5.            P will face considerable difficulties  in  making the
             journey between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID  or
             valid passport.  There  are  numerous  checkpoints  en  route,
             including two checkpoints in the  immediate  vicinity  of  the
             airport.  If P has neither a CSID nor a valid  passport  there
             is a real risk of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such
             time  as  the  security  personnel  are  able  to  verify  P's
             identity.  It is not reasonable to require P to travel between
             Baghdad and IKR by land absent the ability of P to verify  his
             identity  at  a  checkpoint.   This  normally   requires   the
             attendance of a male  family  member  and  production  of  P's
             identity documents but may also be achieved  by  calling  upon
             'connections' higher up in the chain of command".

27. The relevance, and importance,  of  a  CSID  if  an  individual  is  to
    internally relocate to Baghdad is set out in the head note at paras  9-
    11 and 14-15.  Without possessing a CSID, or being able to  obtain  one
    reasonably soon after  arrival,  an  individual  would  be  faced  with
    problems  of  accessing  financial  assistance  from  the  authorities,
    employment, education, housing and medical  treatment.   Without  other
    family members to provide support, an individual is generally likely to
    face a real risk of destitution contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

28. In AAH at para 1 of the head note,  the  Upper  Tribunal  set  out  the
    position concerning obtaining a new CSID as follows:

         "1.  Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances.  Factors to be considered include:

             i)   Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register.  An INC, passport,  birth/marriage  certificates
                  or an expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance.
                   For someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents  the  process  should  be  straightforward.    A
                  laissez-passer should not be counted for  these  purposes:
                  these can be issued without any other  form  of  ID  being
                  available, are not of any assistance in 'tracing back'  to
                  the family record and  are  confiscated  upon  arrival  at
                  Baghdad;

             ii)  The location of the relevant civil registry  office.   If
                  it is in an area held, or formerly held, by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?

             iii) Are there male family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side.  A maternal uncle in possess  of  his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage.  It must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all".

29. The judge quoted, in part, from para 1(iii) of the head note in AAH  at
    [61] of  her  determination.   Having  done  so,  she  found  that  the
    appellant would not be able to obtain a CSID as, in para [62] she  went
    on to find: "I have already found that the appellant has no male family
    members who can assist him on return".

30. That finding is, as Mr Howells submitted, wholly inconsistent with  her
    finding in para [54] that she did not accept that the appellant had  no
    contact with his mother and siblings (a brother and  sister)  in  Iraq.
    The  inconsistency  is  plain  and  obvious.   Having  found  that  the
    appellant was in contact  with  his  family,  in  particular  with  his
    brother, the judge should have gone on to examine whether  his  brother
    would be able to assist him either in obtaining a CSID through a  power
    of attorney in his home governorate, namely in the IKR (Erbil) or could
    obtain the relevant page, etc., in  the  family  registration  book  in
    Erbil so that  the  appellant  could  be  provided  with  the  relevant
    information in order to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in the UK.

31. The judge's finding, therefore, that the appellant  would  not  have  a
    CSID on return to Iraq (or the ability to obtain one shortly thereafter
    in Iraq) is flawed and unsustainable.  That issue was  central  to  the
    judge's assessment of whether the appellant could safely return to  the
    IKR or could reasonably be expected to internally relocate  to  Baghdad
    where he might, otherwise, face destitution and a potential  breach  of
    Art 3 of the ECHR.

32. That, in itself, requires that the judge's findings in respect  of  the
    appellant's asylum claim and under Art 3 of the ECHR must be set  aside
    and the decision re-made.

33. The other issue concerned the  judge's  treatment  of  the  appellant's
    laissez passer.  As became clear at the hearing before  me,  the  judge
    approached this issue on the false premise that he would be returned on
    the laissez passer contained in the appellant's bundle at pages  A6-A9.
    That was a false premise because it is invalid, having  expired  on  10
    June 2017.  The appellant  would,  therefore,  require  a  new  laissez
    passer in order to be returned to Iraq.  That was a fundamental mistake
    of fact which, in my judgment, amounts to an error of law applying E  &
    R v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 49 at [38].

34. In any event, the relevance of a laissez passer was, in truth,  whether
    the  appellant's  return  at  present  was  feasible.    However,   the
    feasibility of the appellant's return to Iraq  could  not,  in  itself,
    give rise to a claim for international protection (see AA at para 7  of
    the head note).  It is difficult to see upon  what  basis  the  laissez
    passer referred to by the judge could put  the  appellant  at  risk  on
    return.  As paras [55]-[57], the judge appears to have  taken  it  into
    account on the basis that the misstatement of the appellant's home area
    as Kirkuk "complicates matters  as  Kirkuk  is  a  contested  area  and
    therefore there is an Article 15(c) risk".  Of  course,  the  appellant
    knows that he does not come from Kirkuk: he comes from the  IKR.   That
    is the place by reference to which any risk to him in his home area  is
    to be assessed and, whether  he  can  return  there.   The  absence  or
    otherwise of a laissez passer - accurately or not disclosing  his  home
    area - was not relevant to those issues.  The crucial issue was whether
    he would have on return, or shortly thereafter,  a  CSID.   As  I  have
    already concluded, the judge's finding on that issue cannot stand.

35. Consequently, the  judge  materially  erred  in  law  in  allowing  the
    appellant's asylum claim and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

36. I now turn to Art 8.  Whilst Mr Dieu was undoubtedly correct  to  point
    out that the judge had set out at length the relevant law  relating  to
    Art 8 and its application in a deportation case, it is clear on reading
    the judge's reasons and findings that she did not  apply  that  correct
    approach.  In this appeal, the appellant could only succeed under Art 8
    by establishing either Exception 1 or Exception 2 in s.117C(4) and  (5)
    respectively, or that there were "very  compelling  circumstances  over
    and above those described in Exception 1 and 2"  (see  s.117C(6)).   In
    essence, the appellant's claim was  focused  upon  the  impact  of  his
    deportation upon his son, L.  That was a  matter  which  properly  fell
    within Exception 2 on the basis that he had a "genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship" with his son who is a "qualifying  child"  and  that  the
    effect of the appellant's deportation on L would be "unduly harsh" (see
    s.117C(5)).   In  those  circumstances,  if  established,  the   public
    interest did not require the appellant's deportation (see s.117C(3)).

37. Having set out the relevant law and considered the  relevant  evidence,
    at paras [98]-[100] the judge reached her conclusion  that  the  appeal
    should be allowed on the basis that there would be a breach of Art 8 if
    the appellant were deported as follows:

         "98.  Looking  at  all  the  evidence  before  me  I  find  it   is
             overwhelmingly in the best interests of [L]  that  his  father
             remain in the UK and that their  relationship  be  allowed  to
             continue and develop and for him to have his father  with  him
             to help him overcome any difficulties that lie ahead of him.

         99.  Looking at this case through the lens  of  section  117B,  the
             Appellant speaks fluent English, he has worked  here  when  he
             was allowed to and is anxious to work again so he will not  be
             a burden to the UK economy and will pay tax.  He has  the  one
             conviction and has not reoffended in 9 years.  He has I accept
             and I do not to minimize this, been in the UK for  many  years
             without status and I give little weight to any private life he
             has built here.

         100. After careful consideration,  I  find  that  in  removing  the
             Appellant from the UK there would be a significant  breach  in
             the Family life rights of him, Miss Hill and primarily of [L].
              In this case, although I cannot and do not underestimate  the
             importance of Immigration control and the  protection  of  the
             UK's economic wealth, I find in his case the Article 8  rights
             of the Appellant and his family weigh more in the balance  and
             that it would be a disproportionate breach of those rights  if
             he were to be removed from the UK and made to return to  Iraq.
             The appeal is allowed".

38. Whilst, of course, L's best interests were  a  "primary  consideration"
    (see ZH (Tanzania) v SSHD [2011] UKSC 4), the crucial legal  issue  was
    whether, having regard to those best interests, the impact upon  L  was
    "unduly harsh" (see KO (Nigeria) and Ors v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53).   That
    requires a "degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily  be
    involved for any child faced with the deportation of a parent" (see  KO
    at [23]).

39. In KO, the Supreme Court approved the approach of the Upper Tribunal in
    MK [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC) at [46]:

         "By way of self-direction, we are mindful that 'unduly harsh'  does
         not equate with uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or  merely
         difficult. Rather, it poses  a  considerably  more  elevated  risk.
         'Harsh' in this context, denotes something severe, or bleak.  It is
         the  antithesis  of  pleasant  or  comfortable.   Furthermore,  the
         addition of the adverb 'unduly' raises an already elevated standard
         still higher".

40. Nowhere in paras [79]-[100] when reaching her findings does  the  judge
    seek to assess the evidence by reference to the need to show the impact
    upon L would be "unduly harsh" as understood in MK and as  approved  by
    the Supreme Court in KO.  Further, it is clear that in paras [99]-[100]
    the judge reached her conclusion, as the judge  put  it,  "through  the
    lens of section 117B".  In para [100], she carried  out  the  balancing
    exercise, without reference to s.117C and the relevant public  interest
    engaged in deportation  cases.   There,  instead,  she  refers  to  the
    "importance of Immigration control  and  the  protection  of  the  UK's
    economic wealth".  That is not reflective of  the  public  interest  in
    deporting foreign criminals with which s.117C is concerned.  I  do  not
    accept Mr Dieu's submission that the  judge  had  already  reached  her
    conclusion in relation to proportionality before paras [99] and  [100].
    It is plain that she did not.

41. For these reasons, the judge erred in law in allowing  the  appellant's
    appeal under Art 8 because she failed to  consider  the  correct  legal
    framework engaged in  a  deportation  case  by  virtue  of  s.117C,  in
    particular she failed to consider whether the appellant  could  succeed
    under Exception 2 on the basis that the impact upon L would be  "unduly
    harsh" or, if  it  was  not,  whether  there  were  nevertheless  "very
    compelling circumstances" over and above  that  such  that  the  public
    interest did not require his deportation.

Decision

42. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's decision to allow  the
    appellant's appeal involved the making of  a  material  error  of  law.
    That decision is, as a consequence, set aside.

43. The proper disposal of this appeal, having regard  to  the  nature  and
    scope of fact-finding required and para 7.2 of the  Senior  President's
    Practice Statement, is that the appeal be remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo  rehearing  before  a  judge  other  than  Judge
    Suffield-Thompson.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                                11 June 2019
