
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06795/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th January 2018                 |On 13th February 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                 Kozhin [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Peterson of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Greasley promulgated on 24 August 2017, in which the Appellant's appeal
    against the decision to refuse his protection and  human  rights  claim
    dated 4 July 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iraq, born on  [  ]  2000,  who  arrived
    clandestinely in the United Kingdom on  3  January  2017,  and  claimed
    asylum upon arrival.  The Appellant's claim was on the  basis  that  he
    was at risk on return to Iraq following  a  relationship  with  a  girl
    whose family members disapproved, further to which he  was  beaten  and
    stabbed by the girl's brother.  The Appellant claims to  have  reported
    the matter to the police with his father but was detained  for  several
    hours until the complaint  was  formally  withdrawn.   The  Appellant's
    brother and father received threatening phone  calls  from  the  girl's
    family, as did the Appellant who fled Iraq.

 3. Following an interview with the Respondent, the claim was refused on  4
    July 2017 on the basis that the Appellant's claimed fear was not for  a
    reason specified in the Refugee Convention; the factual  basis  of  his
    claim was not accepted; there was no risk to  him  from  indiscriminate
    violence in a situation of internal armed conflict in  Kurdistan  under
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive  and  in  any  event,  the
    Respondent considered that  the  Appellant  could  internally  relocate
    within Iraq.  The Respondent did not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was
    entitled to a grant of leave to remain in United Kingdom on  the  basis
    of private or family life but did grant limited leave him to remain  in
    accordance with her policy for Unaccompanied Asylum-Seeking Children.

 4. Prior to the appeal before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  Appellant's
    representatives wrote to the Tribunal on 31  July  2017  requesting  an
    adjournment of the hearing listed for  16  August  2017  to  obtain  an
    expert scarring report for evidence on whether  the  Appellant's  scars
    were consistent with  his  claim  that  he  had  been  stabbed  by  his
    girlfriend's family.  An appointment with an  identified  doctor  could
    only be offered at the earliest on 12 September 2017, after the current
    listing for the appeal hearing.  It is unclear from  the  file  whether
    there was a written response to that request for an adjournment, but in
    any event the application was made orally at the  commencement  of  the
    hearing before Judge Greasley.  This was made on the basis  that  there
    had been  funding  difficulties  in  instructing  an  expert  and  that
    adjournment was essential given the Respondent's reliance on the  issue
    of scarring in the reasons for refusal letter.  The Respondent  opposed
    the application  for  an  adjournment  on  the  basis  that  there  was
    sufficient information before the Tribunal, including a report from the
    Appellant's GP  referring  to  scarring,  to  enable  the  case  to  be
    determined fairly.  The application was refused for the reasons set out
    in full below.

 5. Judge Greasley proceeded to hear and  then  dismiss  the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 24 August 2017 on all grounds.  Judge  Greasley
    did not consider  that  the  Appellant's  claim  was  credible  due  to
    inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  and  lack  of  explanation   and/or
    supporting evidence about material parts of the claim.  In  particular,
    Judge Greasley noted the absence of any medical evidence from Iraq  and
    no credible explanation provided  as  to  the  non-production  of  such
    evidence, although it was noted that there was some  evidence  from  Dr
    Gonde in the form of  an  official  health  assessment  in  the  United
    Kingdom which was taken into account.

The appeal

 6. The Appellant sought permission to appeal on two  grounds,  first  that
    the First-tier Tribunal failed to adjourn the hearing when  it  was  in
    the interests of justice to do so, involving a  failure  to  apply  the
    guidance dealing with vulnerable witnesses and failing to  have  regard
    to material considerations.  Secondly,  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failed to engage with the Appellant's right to respect for private  and
    family life under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.



 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge McCarthy on 7  November  2017
    on the first ground of challenge only.

 8. At the hearing before  me,  Counsel  for  the  Appellant  set  out  the
    background to the claim and highlighted the relatively short  timetable
    between the Respondent's refusal letter and the listing of  the  appeal
    against it.  She also highlighted that there had been  both  a  written
    and oral request for an adjournment  and  the  matter  was  not  simply
    raised late on the day of the hearing.

 9. Counsel for the Appellant submitted that the  decision  to  refuse  the
    adjournment was made on the basis of the Appellant's solicitors conduct
    in preparing for the  appeal  and  in  seeking  an  appropriate  expert
    witness, rather than any  proper  consideration  of  the  interests  of
    fairness for the Appellant.  The  evidence  upon  which  the  Appellant
    sought to rely went directly to issues of  credibility  raised  in  the
    refusal which was material to consideration of his appeal in all of the
    circumstances.  It was submitted that a proper  scarring  report  could
    provide significantly more information than that  which  was  available
    before the First-tier Tribunal including an assessment  of  the  timing
    and causes of such scarring as well as the location of  scarring  which
    was in issue.

10. The process of obtaining an expert report on scarring was  in  progress
    at the time of  the  appeal  hearing  and  an  adjournment  would  have
    entailed any significant delay to the determination of the appeal.   It
    was admitted that it was clearly in the best interests of the Appellant
    to have such a report and for it to  be  available  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal when determining his appeal.

11. The Respondent opposed the appeal on  the  basis  that  Judge  Greasley
    directed himself appropriately when considering the application for  an
    adjournment and gave adequate reasons for refusing it.  He  found  that
    he had  sufficient  evidence  before  him,  including  from  a  medical
    assessment which recorded the existence of scarring and he was entitled
    to find that there was no need for a further report or  adjournment  to
    obtain such a report.  It was submitted that  the  adverse  credibility
    findings made by Judge Greasley  were  open  to  him  on  the  evidence
    available and it was  submitted  that  further  medical  evidence  from
    within the United Kingdom would not be material to the reasons for  the
    adverse credibility findings given that it  could  add  little  to  the
    evidence already available and  would  be  unable  to  corroborate  the
    Appellant's claim.

Findings and reasons

12.  Judge  Greasley's  reasons  for  refusing  the  application   for   an
    adjournment are contained in the following three paragraphs:
         "35. I indicated to the appellant and representatives  that  I  was
         not prepared to adjourn proceedings in the  circumstances.   I  had
         considered my overriding obligations  to  ensure  timely  and  just
         disposal of the appeal, together with  the  important  decision  of
         Nwaigwe of the Upper Tribunal.  I indicated that no information was
         available as to the specific date upon  which  an  application  had
         been made by solicitors  for  an  expert  report,  given  that  the
         refusal decision was issued in early July and there was  already  a
         medical report provided before the tribunal from Dr  Jennie  Gonde,
         which also dealt with the matter of scarring.  In addition,  I  was
         satisfied the appellant would be able  to  give  oral  evidence  in
         relation to the matter, and be assistant by experienced counsel.
         36.  Following a short adjournment so as to afford Miss Karbani  an
         opportunity to read the appeal bundle, Ms Peterson  explained  that
         she  has  sought  further  instructions  from  solicitors  who  had
         indicated that they could "self grant"  a  request  for  an  expert
         report and that this had been done on 31 July 2017.  The solicitors
         were only willing to contact an expert whom  they  regularly  dealt
         with, whilst also ensuring the professional fees  fell  within  the
         relevant financial limits.
         37.  I indicated that the additional information did not  cause  me
         to change my mind as I was not satisfied that all reasonable  steps
         had been undertaken to  ensure  that  an  expert  report  would  be
         available and to serve such evidence in  a  timely  manner  and  in
         compliance with the notice of  hearing  and  the  appeal  date.   I
         indicated that it was important in circumstances such as  this  not
         simply for solicitors to have a narrow selection pool of experts to
         whom to refer, but to ensure the wider pool was considered so as to
         ensure  service  of  relevant  evidence  upon  the   tribunal   and
         respondent by the time of the appeal date.  There was  no  evidence
         that only one specific expert would and  could  be  available,  and
         must be used.  There had been a failure to make  a  timely  written
         application for an adjournment some days before the appeal  hearing
         date, and the matter was only raised on  the  date  of  the  appeal
         hearing  itself.   I  indicated  this  was  wholly  unsatisfactory.
         Accordingly, the appeal would therefore proceed."

13. Although Judge Greasley referred to the Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in
    Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418, it is far  from  clear
    from the reasons he gave  refusing  adjournment  that  he  applied  the
    principles contained within it.  In Nwaigwe, the Upper Tribunal  found,
    in summary, as follows:
         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

14. In the present appeal, Judge Greasley's  reasons  for  refusal  of  the
    application for an adjournment were primarily focused on the conduct of
    the Appellant's solicitors and recorded, in error, that there had  been
    no written application for an adjournment, which had in  fact  be  made
    over two weeks in advance of the hearing on 31 July 2017.  That  was  a
    failure to take into account all material  considerations  (which  also
    included the relatively short timetable from refusal decision to appeal
    hearing) and placed too  great  an  emphasis  on  professional  conduct
    rather than on whether a fair hearing could still be  achieved  in  the
    absence of an adjournment.  The fact that the Appellant would  be  able
    to give oral evidence in relation to scarring  and  that  there  was  a
    medical report which referred to it, did not address the real  question
    of whether the refusal would involve any deprivation of the Appellant's
    right to a fair hearing.  It should be uncontroversial that  an  expert
    scarring report could provide material that went far beyond that  which
    was available from the medical report from Dr Gonde and would be  of  a
    different nature to any oral evidence  which  could  be  given  by  the
    Appellant in the course of the appeal.  For these reasons  the  refusal
    of an adjournment was unfair and there  was  a  failure  to  apply  the
    correct test for consideration of the application.

15. I do not accept the Respondent's submissions that an expert  report  on
    scarring would add little to the claim and would not make any  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.  The appeal was  dismissed  on
    credibility grounds, including in relation to the claimed stabbing  and
    in such circumstances, it is impossible  to  conclude  with  sufficient
    certainty that the appeal would inevitably have been dismissed even had
    the First-tier Tribunal had had  the  benefit  of  an  expert  scarring
    report.  This is so even in circumstances where Judge Greasley  gave  a
    wide variety of reasons for his adverse credibility findings, which did
    not include the absence of a scarring report.

16. In all of the circumstances, the First-tier Tribunal  made  a  material
    error of law in refusing the application for an adjournment and as such
    it is necessary to  set  aside  the  decision.   The  parties  were  in
    agreement that if an error of law  was  found,  this  case  would  most
    appropriately be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  de  novo
    hearing.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed        [pic]        Date:    8th February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

