
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06509/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 30 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  Gidaa [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Logan, instructed by Deane & Bolton, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Gidaa [M], born on 26 October 1989 is a  female  citizen
    of Sudan.  She had applied under Appendix FM of HC 395 (as amended) for
    settlement in the United Kingdom as a partner; the appellant's  husband
    ([MT] - hereafter the sponsor) is a  British  citizen.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge A  J  Parker)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  13  July  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Although it is not entirely clear from  the  grant  of  permission,  it
    seems that Judge Keane granted permission only  in  respect  of  ground
    [3].  His grant of permission [4] reads as follows:

         "However, it was also contended at paragraph 3 [of the  grounds  of
         appeal] that  the  judge  failed  to  address  the  matter  of  the
         certification of the appeal and did not engage  with  the  inherent
         unfairness in the certification which prevented the appellant  from
         being able to give evidence or to engage with the  appeal  at  all.
         The judge is deserving of sympathy.  The judge was  apparently  not
         referred to the decisions of the Upper Tribunal in AJ (Section  94B
         - Kiarie and Byndloss questions) Nigeria [2018] UKUT 115 (IAC)  and
         R (Watson v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department)  (Extant
         appeal Section 94B challenge: forum) [2018] UKUT 165  (IAC)  as  to
         the Tribunal's continuing duty to determine whether an  appeal  can
         lawfully be decided without the appellant being physically  present
         in the United Kingdom.  The judge merely remarked at  paragraph  43
         "I imagine the case was certified because the Home Office  regarded
         it as an open and shut case in that the income has not been met and
         that their claim could not succeed".  Arguably, the judge  did  not
         embark upon that consideration which the Upper Tribunal had in mind
         as the Tribunal's continuing duty in respect of appellants such  as
         the  appellant  in  the  instant  appeal.    The   judge   arguably
         perpetrated an irregularity capable of making a material difference
         to the outcome of the fairness of the proceedings.  The application
         for permission is granted."

 3. AJ (see above) has given guidance to the First-tier Tribunal in respect
    of the issues arising out of the Supreme Court decision in  Kiarie  and
    Byndloss:

         (1)  In the light of Kiarie and Byndloss v Secretary of State  for
         the Home Department [2017] UKSC 42, the First-tier Tribunal should
         adopt a step-by-step approach, in order  to  determine  whether  an
         appeal certified under section 94B of the Nationality,  Immigration
         and Asylum Act 2002 can be determined without the  appellant  being
         physically present in the United Kingdom.

         (2)   The  First-tier  Tribunal  should   address   the   following
         questions:

             1.   Has the appellant's removal pursuant  to  a  section  94B
             certificate deprived the appellant of the  ability  to  secure
             legal representation and/or to give instructions  and  receive
             advice from United Kingdom lawyers?

             2.   If not,  is  the  appellant's  absence  from  the  United
             Kingdom likely materially to impair the production  of  expert
             and other professional evidence in respect of  the  appellant,
             upon which the appellant would otherwise have relied?

             3.   If not, is it necessary to hear live  evidence  from  the
             appellant?

             4.   If so, can such evidence, in all  the  circumstances,  be
             given in a satisfactory manner by means of video-link?

         (3)  The  First-tier  Tribunal  should  not  lightly  come  to  the
         conclusion that none of the issues covered by the first and  second
         questions prevents the fair hearing of the appeal.

         (4)  Even if the first and second questions  are  answered  in  the
         negative, the need for live evidence from the appellant  is  likely
         to be present. A possible exception might be where the respondent's
         case is that, even taking a foreign offender  appellant's  case  at
         its highest, as regards family relationships, remorse and  risk  of
         re-offending,  the  public  interest  is  still  such  as  to  make
         deportation a proportionate interference with the Article 8  rights
         of all concerned.

         (5)  If the First-tier Tribunal concludes that the appeal cannot be
         lawfully determined unless the appellant is physically  present  in
         the United Kingdom, it should give a direction to that  effect  and
         adjourn the proceedings.

 4. Ms Logan, for the appellant, submitted that  the  appellant  had  acted
    properly by returning to  Sudan  following  the  certification  of  her
    appeal.  She told me that the sponsor had suffered injuries to his  leg
    which had affected his mobility and,  in  turn,  his  ability  to  earn
    sufficient money to enable the appellant to enter the  United  Kingdom.
    The appellant herself has a degree in dentistry  and  embarked  upon  a
    conversion course so that she might practise dentistry  in  the  United
    Kingdom prior to return to Sudan.  There  was  a  likelihood  that  she
    would make a positive contribution to life in the United Kingdom.   The
    impact of the appellant's separation from the sponsor had been serious.
     After she had left the United Kingdom, the appellant  had  suffered  a
    miscarriage and had by  reason  of  the  separation,  been  denied  the
    support of her husband following this event.

 5. I agree with Judge Keane that it was unfortunate that Judge Parker  was
    not referred to AJ at the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  I note from  AJ
    that "the need for live evidence from the appellant  is  likely  to  be
    present".  This was a relatively straightforward  case  which  did  not
    involve deportation.  Judge Parker was aware of the  sponsor's  medical
    condition and of the fact of the miscarriage.  The question is  whether
    the presence of the appellant  in  the  United  Kingdom  to  give  oral
    evidence before the  First-tier  Tribunal  may  have  made  a  material
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.   I  find  that  some  of  the
    matters referred to by Ms Logan add little to the appellant's case  and
    would not have been improved upon had the  appellant  been  present  to
    give oral evidence.  I refer, in particular, to the submission that the
    appellant would, as a qualified dentist, make a  material  contribution
    to life in the United Kingdom.  Whether or not the appellant  had  been
    present, the First-tier Tribunal would apply little, if any, weight  to
    such a consideration.  The other matters referred to by  Ms  Logan,  on
    the other hand, may  have  been  attracted  increased  weight  had  the
    appellant been able to give oral evidence and be cross-examined.   Into
    this category falls the reliance which the appellant  and  sponsor  may
    have upon each other in the light of the sponsor's injury and also  the
    appellant's pregnancy and subsequent miscarriage.  Whilst the appellant
    could not meet the requirements of  the  Rules  because  the  sponsor's
    income was insufficient, the true nature and depth of the  relationship
    between the sponsor and the appellant would arguably have  only  become
    apparent to the First-tier Tribunal had the appellant been able to give
    oral evidence.

 6. I find this was a delicately balanced case but, ultimately, I find that
    Judge Parker should, at the very least, have examined in greater detail
    whether a fair hearing could be delivered in the First-tier Tribunal if
    the appellant was denied the opportunity to give  evidence  in  person.
    For that reason I set aside the decision.

 7. Now that the appeal has reached the Upper Tribunal, I do  not  consider
    it would assist either party if I were to remit the appeal to the First-
    tier Tribunal to decide  whether  or  not  the  proceedings  should  be
    further adjourned pending the return of the appellant to give evidence.
     Such a course of action  will  only  cause  further  delay.   I  shall
    direct, therefore, that the  appellant  should  be  readmitted  to  the
    United  Kingdom  in  order  to  give  evidence  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Subject to that direction, I remit the appeal to the  First-
    tier Tribunal (not Judge A J Parker) for that Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision.  Clearly, the listing will have to take account of any  delay
    which may occur in returning the appellant to this jurisdiction.

Notice of Decision

 8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  13
    July 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.

DIRECTIONS

 A) I direct that the appellant shall  be  given  entry  clearance  to  the
    United Kingdom for the purpose of giving oral evidence before a  First-
    tier Tribunal which will  consider  de  novo  her  appeal  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State dated 25 April 2018.

 B) The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard on a date
    to be fixed having regard to (A) above.   The  hearing  should  not  be
    before Judge A J Parker.  The appellant's solicitors shall  notify  the
    First-tier Tribunal at least 21 days prior to the next hearing  if  any
    interpreter is required.

 C) The parties shall send to each other and  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    copies of any documentary evidence upon  which  they  may  respectively
    intend to rely no later than 10  days  prior  to  the  next  First-tier
    Tribunal hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed                              Date 26 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
