

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06054/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 January 2020                          |On 27 February 2020            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                 MORRIS [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr T Hussain instructed by Hussain Immigration Law Ltd.

For the Respondent: Mr Diwncyz Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. On 11 December 2019 the Upper Tribunal found a judge of the  First-
        Tier Tribunal had made an error  of  law,  such  that  the  earlier
        decision was set  aside,  because  the  Judge  failed  to  consider
        whether the deportation order  made  against  the  above  appellant
        should be revoked; which required consideration of paragraph 390 of
        the Immigration Rules.
     2. A specific direction was given that the findings  and  reasons  for
        dismissal of the appellant's protection appeal shall be  preserved.
        As the original appeal was on protection and human  rights  grounds
        it is only the human rights element that is now at large.



Discussion


     3. The appellant claimed to be a male citizen of Zimbabwe born  on  14
        September 1980 who faced a real risk of persecution  on  return  to
        that country. The First-tier Judge records at [42]:


             42.  The author of the Evidential  Report  took  into  account
                  that the Appellant had falsely  claimed  to  be  [STD],  a
                  Nigerian national, to the UK authorities in 2012, he had a
                  number of close friends in the UK  who  were  of  Nigerian
                  ethnicity and that the Zimbabwe authorities had  concluded
                  that the Appellant was not the Zimbabwe national  (HOB  at
                  V3). The report concluded that the Appellant is, in  fact,
                  a Nigerian national. I accept this finding.


     4. It is a preserved finding that the appellant is not  a  citizen  of
        Zimbabwe but a citizen of Nigeria.
     5. At [58] the First-Tier Tribunal wrote:


             58.  The Appellant accepts that he has no  valid  claim  under
                  the Refugee Convention and Articles 2 and 3 of  the  Human
                  Rights Convention stand or fall together.


     6. The First-Tier Tribunal also found the appellant had failed to show
        there are no adequate medical facilities available to him on return
        to Nigeria.
     7. The appellant is the  subject  of  an  order  for  his  deportation
        following his conviction on 15  October  2009  at  Glasgow  Sheriff
        Court of possessing a false identity  document  and  attempting  to
        pervert the course of justice for which  he  was  sentenced  to  12
        months  imprisonment.  The  appellant  did   not   appeal   against
        conviction or  sentence.  Over  10  years  have  passed  since  the
        appellant's conviction.
     8. In relation to representations made in support  of  revocation,  Mr
        Diwncyz on behalf of the Secretary of State relied upon the reasons
        for refusal letter and submitted that it  was  for  Mr  Hussain  to
        establish whether the  appellant  had  a  subsisting  relationship,
        accepting that if  such  a  relationship  was  made  out  that  the
        appellant's deportation would not be proportionate.
     9. The appellant's case is that if he were to be deported  to  Nigeria
        this would extinguish the family life he enjoys with his  wife  and
        child with whom he resides in a family unit.
    10. It is accepted the appellants British partner and British  national
        child will not leave the United Kingdom meaning this  is  a  family
        splitting case.
    11. Paragraph 399 of the Immigration Rules applies where paragraphs 389
        (b) or (c) applies  if  a  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
        parental relationship with a child who is under the age of 18 years
        and who is in the UK and the child is  a  British  citizen  or  has
        lived in the UK continuously for at least 7 years and  it  will  be
        unduly harsh for the child to live in  the  country  to  which  the
        person is to be deported or it will be unduly harsh for  the  child
        to remain in the UK without the  person  to  be  deported,  or  the
        person has a genuine and subsisting relationship with a partner who
        is in the UK and is a British citizen or settled in the UK and  the
        relationship was formed time when the person was in the UK lawfully
        and their immigration status was not  precarious  and  it  will  be
        unduly harsh for the partner to live in the country  to  which  the
        person was to be deported because of compelling circumstances  over
        and above those described in paragraph EX.2 of Appendix FM  and  it
        will be unduly harsh for the partner to remain in  the  UK  without
        the person to be deported.
    12. It was not disputed the appellant is the biological father  of  his
        son born on the 9 March 2019.
    13. The appellant's relationship with his partner began in  2017.  They
        had been friends from 2012. Both the partner and  their  child  are
        British nationals. The appellant states he  and  his  partner  have
        lived together since September 2019. He was  not  allowed  to  live
        with her during his initial appeal but has informed the authorities
        of his current position.  The  appellant  states  he  supports  his
        partner by looking after their son when she goes  to  work  and  on
        ordinary days and nights,  by  bathing,  feeding,  dressing,  nappy
        changing, playing, reading books  and  taking  their  son  out  for
        walks, which the appellant claims has formed  a  very  strong  bond
        between them. The  appellant  claims  that  when  his  partner  was
        recently ill he cared for both her and the child.
    14. The evidence from the appellant's partner is that they have a child
        together and that they share a very close bond  as  a  family.  The
        appellant's partner states the appellant is a dedicated family  man
        who has shown progress in trying to get his life back on track  and
        who would be more stable if he was given  freedom  to  be  able  to
        provide for his family like other family men. The witness  confirms
        she and the appellant have lived together since September 2019. The
        appellant's partner works early, late, and night  shifts  depending
        on what is available and receives support both for herself and  her
        son from the appellant who, in addition to  the  role  he  has  for
        their son, helps out with daily household chores as well as calming
        their son down at night.
    15. The appellant's partner states that if the appellant was not around
        she will struggle with childcare  and  their  quality-of-life,  and
        especially that of their son, will be affected and she will not  be
        able to go out to  work  as  she  normally  does.  The  appellant's
        partner claims that their son and the appellant have a very  strong
        bond and that he will be devastated if that bond is broken.
    16. The appellant's partner was subject to  cross-examination  and  re-
        examination particularly concerning the nature and availability  of
        shift work in response to which she confirmed she  takes  the  work
        that is available which can require  very  early  starts  and  late
        finishes. I find having assessed the appellant's partner's evidence
        that she is a credible witness.
    17. There is clear evidence  that  the  appellant  has  a  genuine  and
        subsisting parental relationship with his son who is under the  age
        of 18, in the UK, and who is a British citizen. It is not suggested
        it is appropriate for the child to  live  in  Nigeria  leaving  the
        issue of whether it be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the
        United Kingdom without the appellant.
    18. It is also accepted on the evidence the appellant has a genuine and
        subsisting relationship with his  partner  who  is  in  the  United
        Kingdom and who is a British citizen. The relationship  was  formed
        in 2017 during the time the appellant status in the United  Kingdom
        was precarious.
    19. When assessing whether the  consequences  the  appellant's  removal
        upon the child will be unduly harsh it is necessary  to  weigh  all
        relevant factors in the round. .  The Supreme Court in KO (Nigeria)
        v SSHD [2018] UKSC 53 held that when looking at  unduly  harsh  the
        focus was only on the position of the child.  To take into  account
        the conduct of the parent would be  in  direct  conflict  with  the
        Zoumbas principle that the child should not be held responsible for
        the conduct of the parent.
    20. In Hesham Ali (Iraq) v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60 it was found  the  Rules
        relating to revocation of a deportation order are  not  a  complete
        code.  In that case, on a deport appeal, a Lord Reed at  paragraphs
        47 to 50 endorsed the structured approach  to  proportionality  and
        said "what has now become the established method  of  analysis  can
        therefore continue to be followed in this context.....The  critical
        issue for the tribunal will generally be whether, giving due weight
        to the strength of the public interest in the  deportation  of  the
        offender in the case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently
        strong to outweigh it. In general,  only  a  claim  which  is  very
        strong indeed - very compelling, as it was put in  MF  (Nigeria)  -
        will succeed".
    21. It is accepted that there  was  no  presumption  in  favour  of  or
        against revoking a deportation order which depended on the  precise
        circumstances of the case.
    22. Whilst the appellant has not  yet  been  removed  from  the  United
        Kingdom there is no statutory bar to the order to  the  deportation
        being revoked.
    23. The order has been in force for a considerable period of  time  and
        the issue in this appeal is  the  proportionality  of  whether  the
        order should continue or not. The appellant has not offended  since
        the index offence and although there is a strong public interest in
        a robust and effective deportation system the  strongest  point  in
        the appellant's favour is the acceptance by Mr Diwncyz that if  the
        appellant established a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
        his child his removal will be disproportionate. This  can  only  be
        based upon assessment of the impact of the appellant's  deportation
        and conclusion that the same  will  be  unduly  harsh  in  all  the
        circumstances by a very experienced Senior Presenting  Officer.  In
        light of it being accepted the appellant has establish such genuine
        and subsisting relationship and in light of the  respondent's  view
        of the weight that should be given to  the  balancing  exercise  in
        light of this factor, I  find  this  appeal  shall  be  allowed  on
        Article  8  ECHR  grounds  and  the  order  for   the   appellant's
        deportation set aside.


Decision

    24. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed.




   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no  such  order  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.




Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 24 February 2020












