
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06470/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                             |
|On 4 December 2017                            |On 28 February 2018          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                     l c
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Parkin, Counsel, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
     (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant in this case is a national of Guinea whose claim  for
         asylum had been dismissed.   His  appeal  was  listed  for  hearing
         before First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian sitting at  Harmondsworth
         on 28 July 2017.  For the reasons which follow it is not  necessary
         for the purposes of this decision to  consider  the  merit  of  the
         appeal.

      2. The appellant appeared to be unrepresented and Judge  Andonian  has
         recorded that the appellant had told him "that he  thought  he  was
         before me for a bail application" (see paragraph  2  of  the  Judge
         Andonian's decision).  Judge Andonian recorded that  the  appellant
         had two witnesses who attended but not to  give  evidence  in  this
         appeal because they had according to Judge Andonian "said that they
         were present in case the appellant was released  on  bail  so  that
         they could take him home".  I understand that it is the appellant's
         case that they were there as sureties.  Whatever precisely occurred
         at the hearing the judge decided that he would  continue  with  the
         hearing anyway even though the appellant was  not  represented  and
         had said that he was not ready for a hearing.   Further, there  was
         no interpreter present even though I  am  told  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that his English was not  of  a  sufficient  standard  to
         enable him to represent himself without an interpreter.

      3. Before me today Mr Parkin, representing the appellant, also  relies
         on a letter from a solicitor of Duncan Lewis who has  informed  the
         court that the details were properly  given  through  the  Tribunal
         prior to the  hearing  that  Duncan  Lewis  were  representing  the
         appellant but that Duncan Lewis were  never  given  notice  of  the
         hearing.  So the position is that this appellant, who thought  that
         he would be represented at the hearing of his appeal and  that  the
         hearing on that particular day was to consider whether  or  not  he
         should be bailed, who lacked an interpreter and who  did  not  call
         any of the witnesses he may have been advised to call, was  obliged
         to represent himself as best as he could.  Judge Andonian  declined
         to adjourn the proceedings, even at the very least until  what  had
         actually transpired could be properly investigated.  On  behalf  of
         the respondent today Mr Lindsay accepted that "clearly, the matters
         pleaded are well capable of giving risk to  procedural  unfairness"
         and he further accepted that he would  have  an  "uphill  task"  to
         argue on these facts that the hearing  had  not  been  procedurally
         unfair.  Although he could not formally concede this,  he  did  not
         wish to mount any argument to the contrary.

      4. In my judgement the circumstances were unfair, although it may well
         be that Judge Andonian himself was  not  aware  of  the  fact  that
         Duncan Lewis had previously  notified  the  court  that  they  were
         instructed and nor can Judge Andonian be blamed for the regrettable
         mishap that Duncan Lewis  were  not  notified  in  advance  of  the
         hearing.

      5. Be that as it may, this appellant is entitled to a fair hearing  at
         which he is represented by the  solicitors  who  had  notified  the
         Tribunal that they had been instructed and in  those  circumstances
         this case must be remitted back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
         rehearing and I will so order.




    Decision

    I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian as being
    vitiated by procedural unfairness, and remit the  appeal  back  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal, sitting at either Hatton Cross or Harmondsworth or
    any other venue which is administratively  appropriate,  for  rehearing
    before any judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated:  22 February 2018

