
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06910/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2018                   |On 4 January 2019                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     G A
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr C Sultan, Counsel instructed by Legal Chambers
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent:  Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  As this  appeal  involves
protection issues, it is appropriate to continue  that  direction.  Until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

1.           The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Housego promulgated on 29 June 2018  ("the  Decision").
      The Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal  against  the  Respondent's
      decision dated 23 May 2018 refusing his protection  and  human  rights
      claim.

2.          The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He came to the  UK  as
      a student on 5 December 2008 with leave extended to 31 May 2014.   His
      leave was curtailed to expire on 7 February 2014.  Thereafter  he  has
      overstayed.  The Appellant made an application to remain based on  his
      family and private life on 17 August 2015 which was refused.  He  then
      left the UK to go to Ireland and re-entered illegally.  On 13 February
      2018, the Appellant was convicted following a guilty  plea  of  sexual
      assault and sentenced to 125 hours community service.   The  Appellant
      was detained thereafter, whereupon he claimed asylum.  His  claim  was
      dismissed by the Respondent's decision under appeal.

3.          The Appellant  is  in  a  relationship  with  another  Pakistani
      national, [R], who is his cousin.  There is a  dispute  about  whether
      they are married.  The Appellant  claims  that  he  is  at  risk  from
      another Pakistani man, [T], who remains in Pakistan and to who [R] was
      engaged before she came to the UK.  [R] refused to marry [T] and it is
      said that when [T] became aware of the Appellant's  relationship  with
      [R], he went to the home of the Appellant's brother, fired  shots  and
      threatened to kill the Appellant if  he  returned  to  Pakistan.   The
      Appellant also claims that he and [R] will be subject to an allegation
      of zina because they have a child born out of wedlock.  The child  was
      not born at the  date  of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Housego.   The
      Appellant latterly claimed that there was a  risk  of  honour  killing
      because he and [R] entered into a love marriage.

4.          I do not at this stage set out the  Appellant's  grounds  as  it
      became evident on  a  review  of  those  grounds  that  some  bear  no
      relevance to this case.  I will deal with the detail  of  the  grounds
      that  do  relate  to  the  case  in  the  discussion  which   follows.
      Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on  20  July
      2018 in the following terms:

           "The appellant applied in-time for permission to appeal  against
           the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  P  Housego
           promulgated on 29 June 2018 in which  the  judge  dismissed  the
           appeal on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
           (Articles 2, 3 and 8) grounds.  The grounds  disclosed  arguable
           errors of law but for which the outcome of the appeal might have
           been different.  The judge arguably did not arrive at any or any
           adequate findings in respect of the appellant's  claim  to  have
           established family life under Article 8 in the  United  Kingdom.
           The judge's consideration of the appellant's family life was  to
           be found at paragraph 72 of the decision.   The  judge  did  not
           explicitly  find  that  family   life   had   been   established
           notwithstanding that it was common ground between the parties to
           the appeal that the appellant is a member of a family unit which
           comprises himself, his partner, [R] and  in  time  their  unborn
           child.  The judge found that the appellant had given a less than
           credible account of events.  However, the judge did not refer to
           background evidence  placed  before  the  judge  which  included
           evidence comprised within the appellant's  bundle  of  documents
           and the respondent's country information and  guidance  document
           entitled "Pakistan: women fearing  gender-based  harm/violence."
           In failing to  refer  to  the  background  evidence,  the  judge
           arguably failed to carry out that global assessment which is the
           essence of  an  assessment  of  credibility.   It  was  arguably
           especially incumbent upon the judge to consider the evidence  in
           deciding whether the appellant's partner was at  risk  upon  her
           return to Pakistan given her relationship with the appellant and
           the prospect of her giving birth to a child  outside  matrimony.
           The judge, however, did not embark upon  such  a  consideration.
           The application for permission is granted."

5.          The matter comes  before  me  to  assess  whether  the  Decision
      discloses an error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to  the
      First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing. It  was  suggested  by  Mr  Sultan
      during his submissions that I was embarking upon a  re-making  of  the
      Decision.  As I made clear to him, that is not the case.  I am at this
      stage only deciding whether the Decision discloses errors of law.

Notice to Show Cause

6.          As is apparent  from  the  adjournment  decision  which  I  have
      appended to this decision, this is not the first time that this appeal
      has come before me.  It came before me on 4 October 2018 at  an  error
      of law hearing, on which occasion I was obliged to adjourn the hearing
      because it was clear that Counsel who appeared on  that  occasion  had
      not been adequately briefed  to  proceed  (see  [5]  to  [8]  of  that
      decision).  In light of those  matters,  I  directed  the  Appellant's
      solicitors to write explaining their conduct and  to  show  cause  why
      they should not have to pay the costs of that previous hearing.

7.           By  letter  dated  15  October  2018,  the   solicitors   wrote
      indicating that they had asked for the Respondent's  bundle  from  the
      Respondent on a few occasions at the time they were instructed and had
      contacted the previous solicitors also on two to three  occasions  but
      had been unable to obtain the Respondent's bundle.  They say that  the
      previous solicitors did not have that bundle either as  the  Appellant
      has changed representation on three occasions.  They do not  say  why,
      on receipt of their client's instructions, they did not formally write
      to the solicitors who  did  have  his  file  (presumably  those  first
      instructed) to seek release of their client's file nor,  if  they  did
      so, when they did so or why there was a delay in obtaining  that  file
      (or that this was the reason why they were unprepared).

8.          More concerning was the firm's explanation for  not  seeking  an
      adjournment of the hearing prior to the hearing date itself.  They say
      that they were instructed to continue to the hearing by their  client.
      It is not clear if they advised that this  would  be  unlikely  to  be
      beneficial to the Appellant if Counsel had not seen  relevant  papers.
      Be that as it may, they say they did not seek an adjournment prior  to
      the date of the hearing because, had they done  so  and  had  it  been
      refused on paper, this would have been prejudicial to the  outcome  of
      an application on the day; at least this is  how  I  understand  their
      explanation.  That is tantamount to an admission that they  wished  to
      place the Tribunal in the position in which I found myself at the last
      hearing of having no real option but to adjourn  because  of  lack  of
      preparedness.

9.          I do not make an  order  for  costs  of  the  last  hearing  not
      because I do not consider one appropriate in light of the  solicitor's
      conduct but because Mr Melvin indicated that he did not wish to pursue
      an application.  He made clear that he agreed that there  was  a  case
      for costs to be awarded but  the  procedures  for  the  Respondent  to
      recover costs did not make such  an  application  worthwhile  in  this
      case.  I confirm that, had that application been pursued, I would have
      made  the  order  as  I  consider  the  solicitor's  conduct   to   be
      unreasonable and to justify the order.  However, there is  no  purpose
      to be served in making an order in circumstances where the  Respondent
      does not pursue it.  I add that I was also surprised, given  what  was
      said in my previous decision, that the solicitors did not consider  it
      appropriate to attend with their Counsel to answer any questions which
      might arise regarding the content of their letter.

Discussion and conclusions

10.   I move on now to the substance of the appeal.   It  is  convenient  to
      separate the grounds out into their two parts, particularly  in  light
      of the way in which the permission grant is formulated.   Grounds  one
      and five relate to the human rights claim.   Grounds  two,  three  and
      four are concerned with the protection claim.   It  is  convenient  to
      take the protection claim grounds first since that claim  is  part  of
      the background  against  which  the  human  rights  claim  had  to  be
      assessed. I also begin by observing that, in addition to some  of  the
      grounds bearing little relation to the case (for reasons which follow)
      some paragraphs of the grounds clearly do not apply to this appeal  at
      all.  By way of example, at [32] of the grounds reference is made to a
      section 72 certificate (on the basis that the Appellant has  committed
      a serious crime and is a  danger  to  the  community).   Although  the
      Appellant has been convicted of sexual assault, he was sentenced  only
      to community service (and  he  says  that  the  crime  was  due  to  a
      misunderstanding).    There   is    no    section    72    certificate
      (unsurprisingly) and no reference to one in  the  Decision.   What  is
      said at [34] of the  grounds  about  the  approach  of  the  Judge  to
      consideration of the certificate  therefore  is  both  inaccurate  and
      misleading.

Protection Claim

11.   I can deal quite shortly with ground three.  It is asserted  that  the
      Judge misdirected himself as to the Refugee  Convention  reason  which
      applies.  Paragraph [17] asserts that evidence of past  ill  treatment
      of family members is a relevant  consideration  for  assessing  future
      risk.  That is right as a matter of law, but it is not said  how  that
      affects this case.  Paragraph [18] refers to the law about sufficiency
      of protection when that has  no  bearing  to  the  Judge's  reasoning.
      Paragraph [19] refers to the Judge's findings about political  opinion
      when there is no claim  based  on  political  opinion  (as  Mr  Sultan
      confirmed).  Paragraph [20] refers to the low standard of proof, again
      without indicating how the Judge erred  in  this  regard.   The  Judge
      refers to the lower standard at [14] of the Decision.

12.   Mr Sultan was also constrained  to  accept  that  ground  two  is  not
      relevant to this appeal.  That concerns assessment of  genuineness  of
      documents produced by an appellant and the  Respondent's  verification
      of such documents.  However, when I asked Mr Sultan what documents the
      Judge had to consider and which he said should have been verified,  he
      could point only to background evidence and photographs.  As Mr Sultan
      accepted, the Respondent could not be expected to  verify  photographs
      produced by the Appellant.  Those exist.  It  was  a  matter  for  the
      Judge what weight to give their contents and it is  not  suggested  in
      the grounds that he rejected them for any reason  of  non-authenticity
      (see [5] of the Decision for the  Judge's  reasoning  in  relation  to
      those  photographs).   Clearly,  there  is  no  obligation  to  verify
      background evidence; indeed, much  of  the  evidence  relied  upon  is
      produced by the Respondent himself - the remainder is available on the
      internet.  The weight to be given to such evidence is a matter for the
      Judge.

13.   That then brings me on to the focus of Mr Sultan's submissions on  the
      protection claim grounds and the ground which found  favour  with  the
      Judge granting permission  -  ground  four.   That  ground  is  headed
      "failure to resolve conflict of opinion on relevant  matter".   It  is
      pleaded as follows (so far as relevant):

           "[21] The FTT judge did not rely properly upon the  Home  Office
           country evidence in the Secretary of State's country  of  origin
           information service report, finds that the country evidence does
           not disclose any risk to the Appellant.  In so  doing  the  SSHD
           and FTT overlooks the evidence to the contrary as recited by the
           country report  of  Home  Office,  Asylum  Research  Consultancy
           (Country Report on Pakistan 20 Feb 2015 (published on June 2015)
           and Article  2  of  the  International  covenant  on  civil  and
           political rights Vol 12 No 3.  This is an error of  law  in  the
           sense described in R (Iran) v Secretary of State  for  the  Home
           Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982: a failure to  resolve  conflicts
           of fact or opinion on material matters.


           Credibility


           [22]  In finding the Appellant not credible, the SSHD view  that
           the Appellant was not telling the truth in his account  of  past
           events based on the  inherent  implausibility  of  the  account.
           This is an error of law: see Y v Secretary of State for the Home
           Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1223 para [25].


           [23]   The  FTT  did   not   proportionate   to   consider   the
           circumstances this  an  error  of  law  [sic]  and  was  a  mere
           disagreement with a factual finding.  He was wrong to take  this
           view: Y v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2006] EWCA
           Civ 1223 demonstrates that the approach to factual findings is a
           matter of principle."

14.   This ground goes on to assert  that  removal  of  the  Appellant  will
      breach Article 3 ECHR and the Refugee Convention and at [25]  to  [27]
      raises matters  which  do  not  appear  to  apply  (torture  of  "coup
      plotters", sufficiency of protection in that regard and risks from the
      security service at roadblocks against which there  is  no  sufficient
      protection).  Given the confusion in the grounds as to  the  basis  of
      the Appellant's claim, it may be helpful to summarise again the  basis
      of the Appellant's claim.  That claim is that he and his partner ([R])
      are at risk on return because they have borne a child out  of  wedlock
      and because R was promised to another man before  she  left  Pakistan.
      It is said that this man is powerful and has threatened the  Appellant
      through one visit to his brother's house. It is said that he would  be
      able to bribe the  police  to  bring  false  accusations  against  the
      Appellant.  I mention at this stage that R has made an asylum claim in
      her own right.  Mr Sultan was unable to tell me what  stage  that  has
      reached (as was the position also  before  Judge  Housego).   That  is
      relevant to part of Mr Sultan's submission as to the Judge's error  of
      law in this regard.

15.   The basis of the permission grant in this regard  is  that  the  Judge
      failed to consider relevant background evidence.  That  was  therefore
      naturally the focus of Mr Sultan's submissions.   Mr  Melvin  accepted
      that the Judge did not consider the background evidence but said  that
      it had no relevance  because  of  the  Judge's  factual  findings.   I
      therefore turn to consider what those were.

16.   I begin by noting that the Appellant  sought  an  adjournment  of  the
      hearing before Judge Housego because he said that [R] wished  to  give
      oral evidence but was unable to attend as she was heavily pregnant  at
      that time (see [26] to [29] of the Decision).  As  the  Judge  pointed
      out, [R] was due to give birth on 17 July 2018 (some three weeks after
      the hearing).  Mr Sultan informed me that she gave  birth  prematurely
      on 29 June 2018, some three days  after  the  hearing  but  the  Judge
      obviously could not be expected to know that this would be  the  case.
      It was not said for example that she had  gone  into  labour  or  been
      admitted to hospital.  As the Judge records at [28]  of  the  Decision
      the Appellant's representative said that "he had no  medical  evidence
      of any problem."  [R]'s statement says only that  she  is  "unable  to
      attend any hearings because my feet suddenly swell, and my lower aches
      considerably [sic]".  That statement is dated 13 June 2018 and yet  no
      prior application for an  adjournment  was  apparently  made  on  this
      basis. It cannot be said therefore, on the basis  of  the  information
      before him, that it was unfair for the Judge to refuse the adjournment
      (nor is that the basis of the pleaded grounds of appeal).

17.   The Judge heard oral evidence from the Appellant.   That  evidence  is
      set out at [30] to [50] of the Decision.  No criticism is made by  the
      Appellant of the Judge's record of his  evidence.   The  Appellant  is
      recorded as saying at [47] of the Decision that he had wanted  [R]  to
      give evidence for him but was unable to attend  for  medical  reasons.
      He had not asked her family members who are in the  UK  to  attend  to
      give evidence in his support.

18.   The Judge identified a  number  of  inconsistencies  in  the  evidence
      before him and other concerns about the credibility of the account  at
      [53] onwards.  Of particular relevance to the Appellant's ground, as I
      pointed out to Mr Sultan during his submissions, are the  findings  at
      [58] to [66] of the Decision as follows:

           "[58] Towards the end of his  cross  examination  the  appellant
           said that he feared return as there was a risk  of  an  "honour"
           killing as this was a love marriage.  There are 2 problems  with
           this assertion.   First  it  is  predicated  on  there  being  a
           marriage and the appellant says there is  none,  and  second  it
           requires the appellant to be in  fear  of  the  family  he  says
           approve of the  marriage.   There  is  the  asserted  risk  from
           someone said to be a fianc�, but this is  not  credible  either.
           If [R] was forced to give up work and look  after  [T]'s  family
           and do their housework that does not  sit  with  [R]  not  being
           married to him, nor with her ability to get a visa  to  come  to
           the UK and do so, according to the appellant without  opposition
           from her family.


           [59]  The appellant states that he regards [R] as his wife,  and
           he referred to her as such in his witness statement and  in  his
           oral evidence.  The Home Office  assertion  that  it  is  highly
           likely that they are in fact married by Islamic  law  is  sound.
           The family of the appellant and the brother of [R] in the UK all
           accept them as married.  It is culturally  unlikely  that  there
           would be sex outside marriage,  and  it  is  unlikely  that  the
           appellant and [R] would marry in secret, and unlikely  that  the
           family and [R]'s brother would accept  that  this  had  occurred
           without their knowledge until he told them  also  that  she  was
           pregnant by him.  It is not reasonably likely that there is  any
           other course of events than that [R] came to the UK to marry the
           appellant as the wish of the family for the  cousins  to  marry,
           that the appellant did marry her and that he brings  this  claim
           in furtherance of his ambition to remain in the UK.


           [60]  However it is not necessary to make a finding of  fact  to
           the effect that the  appellant  and  [R]  are  married,  as  the
           evidence of the appellant is that he has  told  his  family  and
           friends in Pakistan that they are  married.   He  has  told  her
           family in the UK (which includes  her  brother)  that  they  are
           married, and his evidence is that they all believe him.


           [61]  He asserts risk from an allegation of zina, proved by  the
           existence of their child, but  his  evidence  is  that  everyone
           (including [T]) believes that he and [R] are married.  There  is
           no risk.  The appellant then says that if they rent  a  property
           the landlord will demand sight of a niqah.  The  appellant  says
           that he intends to marry [R] and that she wants  to  marry  him.
           There is no evidence that there is any impediment to a religious
           marriage now, and those in Pakistan will not  be  concerned  one
           way or the other  whether  there  is  a  marriage  according  to
           English law.  Nor is there any  evidence  that  the  child's  UK
           birth certificate will be demanded and the  date  compared  with
           the date on a niqah.  There is no risk of the  Hudood  ordinance
           or  zina  being  a  genuine  subjective  or  objective  fear  of
           persecution.


           [62]  The appellant also asserted fear of [T].  The  appellant's
           evidence is that  [T]  has  not  troubled  the  brother  of  the
           appellant save on one occasion in late November 2017.   [T]  has
           never troubled anyone else in the family of the appellant.


           [63]  While this is not the appeal of [R] is  through  her  that
           the appellant claims to be at risk.  The account  is  inherently
           implausible.  [R] was educated to masters degree  level,  got  a
           job, and did that job, and got a visa to come to the  UK.   This
           is a woman  who  has  not  been  oppressed  and  made  to  leave
           education early and been forcibly married.   He  says  that  she
           bought time by getting the visa, but she was  able  to  get  it.
           Nor is there any obvious reason why her family should  agree  to
           her marrying an ill educated man with no real advantage.  He  is
           said to be powerful but there is no credible evidence  of  that.
           Her witness statement states that the family refused  permission
           subsequent to the engagement.


           [64]  I note that the appellant might have difficulty  with  the
           brother of [R] finding out that the basis of the claim was  that
           they were not married, when the brother had been told that  they
           were.  However the appellant did  not  say  that  this  was  the
           reason, even when offered the opportunity to explain why he  had
           not asked the brother to attend and give evidence.


           [65]  Nor have her family, including her brother  come  to  give
           evidence for the appellant.  This would be  explicable  if  they
           were not on good terms with the appellant.   But  the  appellant
           said that her brother accepted that they were married,  accepted
           that the marriage had occurred without him being there  and  was
           supportive of the relationship.  She lived with her brother, and
           the brother was also his cousin, as [R] was his cousin,  and  he
           had lived with her brother before she came to the UK.  This is a
           substantial TK (Burundi) point against the appellant.


           [66]  The appellant was asked why they  were  not  present.   He
           said he had not asked them to come.  When asked why note he said
           that he wanted [R] to give  evidence  but  she  had  high  blood
           pressure and high sugar levels and that was the reason.  He said
           "There are certain complexities I do not want to  disclose"  and
           that he wanted only [R] there. I said that this was entirely his
           right, but he could not expect  me  to  give  credence  to  that
           explanation without more.  He said he would tell me  whatever  I
           asked him: I said that that was not my role: it was a matter for
           him."

    19.    In short summary of those findings, the  Judge  did  not  accept
       that the Appellant and [R] were not in fact married.  Whether or not
       that was the case, the  Judge  found  on  the  evidence  that  their
       families believed they were.  As  such,  there  was  no  reason  for
       adultery to be alleged.  The families would not know  that  adultery
       had taken place.  The risk from [T] was not accepted in part because
       there had been one threat and  no  further  incidents  indicating  a
       continuing risk and in part because the Judge did  not  accept  that
       [R]'s family would have forced her into a marriage with [T] and  did
       not accept that there was any risk from this man.  The Judge did not
       accept the (late) claim  of  risk  of  honour  killing.   The  Judge
       pointed out that this was inconsistent  with  the  Appellant's  case
       that  the  couple  are  not  in  fact  married  and  second  it   is
       inconsistent with the evidence about the family's  approval  of  the
       marriage.


   20. Mr Sultan drew my attention to  some  of  the  background  evidence.
       That consisted in the main of passages from the  Home  Office's  own
       country information showing that adultery is an offence in  Pakistan
       and honour killings take place there.  I do not have any  difficulty
       with accepting that submission.   However,  the  relevance  of  such
       material depends on there being a factual claim underlying the  risk
       which the background evidence discloses may arise.

   21. There is no merit to [22] of the grounds  as  set  out  above.   The
       Judge did not find the Appellant's claim not to be credible  due  to
       its implausibility.  He determined that the evidence did not support
       the Appellant's account.  Had he found,  for  example,  that  honour
       crimes do not occur in Pakistan or that adultery is not  an  offence
       or even that the appeal failed due to sufficiency of protection,  it
       may well have been an error of law if the background  evidence  were
       not considered.  However, the Judge found that the facts  underlying
       the claimed risk were not true.


   22.  Mr  Sultan  also  directed  my  attention  to  an  article  in  the
       Respondent's bundle referring to the honour killing of a  woman  who
       he said was educated.  He said therefore that the Judge's assumption
       at [63] of the Decision that it was implausible that  [R]  would  be
       the subject of an honour killing because her family allowed  her  to
       be educated was an error.  He said that  the  articles  showed  that
       educated women can also be killed  for  this  reason.   He  drew  my
       attention to the final sentence of  paragraph  [63]  which  he  said
       constituted a finding by the  Judge  about  the  attitude  of  [R]'s
       family.  However, that sentence is if  anything  supportive  of  the
       Judge's view in the remainder of that paragraph.  At  [5]  of  [R]'s
       statement she herself says that she did not want to marry [T]  after
       she graduated because she wanted to work and "they refused  to  give
       me permission."  As the Judge says, that suggests that [R]'s  family
       refused to permit the marriage to go ahead.  If it is suggested that
       this is a reference to [R]'s family not permitting her to work, that
       is inconsistent with [7]  of  the  Appellant's  statement  that  she
       worked as a Study  Consultant.   The  ones  who  are  said  to  have
       prevented her working are  [T]'s  family  ([6]  of  the  Appellant's
       statement) and, as the Judge points out at  [58]  of  the  Decision,
       that is inconsistent with [R] not having married [T]  and  that  she
       was able to leave Pakistan without any opposition from  her  family.
       It is also worthy of note that [R] says  nothing  in  her  statement
       about her family forcing her to marry [T] (as the above suggests  if
       anything the opposite) and notably says nothing  about  her  parents
       being opposed to her marrying the Appellant.  Nor I  note  does  she
       say anything about she and the Appellant being at risk due  to  them
       having a child out of wedlock.


   23. That brings me on to the remainder of  Mr  Sultan's  submissions  on
       this ground.  I asked him a number of times if he was able to say in
       what way the Judge's findings about the facts of the claim  involved
       an error of law.  His answer was  consistently  only  that  (a)  the
       Judge should have allowed an  adjournment  to  permit  [R]  to  give
       evidence and  (b)  that  the  Judge  had  "cherry-picked"  from  the
       evidence and  failed  to  refer  to  evidence  which  supported  the
       Appellant's case.


   24. In relation to the first of those reasons, I have already  explained
       why the Judge was entitled to refuse the adjournment.  In any event,
       as I note above,  [R]'s  witness  statement  does  not  support  the
       Appellant's case in  various  material  respects  and  her  evidence
       therefore would be unlikely to add to rather than detract  from  the
       adverse credibility findings.


   25. Dealing with the second, Mr Sultan gave no examples  other  than  in
       relation to background material of the Judge failing to have  regard
       to evidence.  That is understandable given that  the  only  evidence
       particular  to  the  Appellant's  own  case  on  protection  is  his
       statement (which was explored in oral evidence  at  the  hearing  as
       recorded in the Decision), the statement of [R] (which I have  dealt
       with above and for the reasons given provides limited support to the
       Appellant's case and then only in relation  to  the  risk  from  [T]
       which the Judge rejected for other reasons) and  photographs  which,
       as the Judge observes at [5] of the Decision prove nothing about the
       risk said to come from [T].  As Mr Melvin pointed out, there was  no
       evidence from those in Pakistan said to have been threatened.

   26. Although the standard of proof which applies to appellants is a  low
       one, the burden still lies on an appellant  and  in  this  case  the
       Appellant failed to discharge it.  The Judge has not made any  error
       of law in  relation  to  his  findings  and  conclusions  about  the
       protection claim for the reasons he gives.


    Human Rights Claim


   27. That then brings me on to the Article  8  ECHR  claim.   Ground  one
       deals with the findings in relation to family life and ground  five,
       private life.


   28. In relation to ground one, paragraphs [5] and  [6]  of  the  grounds
       once again misrepresent the factual position.  First, there  was  no
       child in being at the time of  the  hearing  before  Judge  Housego.
       That child was not by then born and the Judge had  to  consider  the
       position as at date of hearing.  Second, paragraph  [6]  appears  to
       suggest that [R] (and now her child) have a right to remain  in  the
       UK.  True it is that if [R] does indeed have a pending asylum  claim
       or appeal still pending, she cannot be removed at present.  However,
       she does not have any right to remain in the UK for the purposes  of
       the Immigration Rules. She is not a British citizen and nor  is  she
       settled.


   29. The point which appears to have found favour with the Judge granting
       permission appears at [7] of the grounds as follows:

           "[7]  The First-tier  Judge  further  erred  in  law  in  simply
           referring to the fact that 'he has a private/family life in this
           country' of the First-tier Judge's determination dated  29  June
           2018  without  setting  out  the  individual  relationships  and
           determining the strength of each element of the family life.  By
           failing to do so the First-tier Judge deprives  the  parties  of
           being able to determine whether the interests of  the  Child  in
           this case were given appropriate weight  (in  particular,  their
           right to family life might have been viewed as a  'third  party'
           right in human rights terms, not apt for evaluation as  part  of
           an appeal, although they would have remained live considerations
           in the  evaluation  of  compassionate  circumstances  under  the
           Immigration Rules)."

   30. As I pointed out to Mr Sultan during his submissions, Article 8 ECHR
       has to be considered in the context  of  the  factual  matrix  which
       applies.  In this case that is that neither the Appellant nor, as  I
       understand it, [R] have any right to be in the UK beyond there being
       a barrier to removal whilst their  asylum  claims  and  appeals  are
       determined.  That is not, as Mr Sultan  appeared  to  understand,  a
       conclusion which I am reaching about the merits  of  the  claim  but
       merely my understanding of the factual position as it existed at the
       date of hearing.


   31. The Judge dealt with this aspect of the appeal as follows:

           "[72] There is an Article 8 claim.  If based on family  life  it
           must fail as the appellant and [R] (and their  baby  when  born)
           may return to Pakistan together.  If [R]s asylum claim  succeeds
           he  may  made  another  Article  8  claim   (although   as   the
           relationship was formed when the appellant had  no  status,  and
           the child will not be a British citizen, S117A, B and D  of  the
           Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 and Rajendran would
           seem to form a significant hurdle for such a claim).

   32. There is no error of law in that assessment; indeed, I  can  see  no
       other assessment which could have been made by the  Judge  on  these
       facts.   The  Appellant's  protection  claim  had  failed.   He  was
       therefore not entitled to stay.  The Judge had been told that  those
       representing the Appellant had no  information  about  [R]'s  asylum
       claim.  Certainly, the Judge was not told that this  had  succeeded.
       As such, she had no right to remain either.   The  family  would  be
       returning to Pakistan as a unit  (once  there  were  no  longer  any
       barriers to removal based on [R]'s claim/ appeal). The Judge did not
       find that there was no family life based on the  relationship.   His
       assessment is based on the fact that there would be no  interference
       with family life occasioned by removal.  There is also no  merit  to
       the suggestion that Section 117C Nationality, Immigration and Asylum
       Act 2002 ("Section 117") was improperly applied.  The  Appellant  is
       not a "foreign criminal" within the definition in Section  117D  and
       Section 117C has no application.   In  any  event,  neither  of  the
       exceptions in Section 117C could have any application to  this  case
       given the lack of any right to remain of the Appellant, [R] or their
       child.


   33. Insofar as the best interests of the couple's  child  is  concerned,
       there are two reasons why I consider that there was  no  requirement
       to refer to section 55 Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009
       ("Section 55").  The first is that the wording of  Section  55(1)(a)
       requires the Respondent to have regard to the "need to safeguard and
       promote the welfare of children who are in the  United  Kingdom...".
       As the Appellant's child was not born at date of hearing, there  was
       no requirement on the Respondent to consider the  child's  interests
       and equally no requirement for the Judge to do so.   The  child  was
       not "in" the United Kingdom at that time.  Second, it  is  difficult
       to see in any event how a Judge or any other decision maker  can  be
       required to have regard to the interests of a  child  about  who  he
       does not and  cannot  know  anything  relevant  to  such  interests.
       Suppose for example that a child were  later  born  with  a  serious
       medical problem not envisaged  in  the  course  of  pregnancy.   The
       interests of such a child might very well be different to those of a
       healthy child.  For those reasons, I reject Mr  Sultan's  submission
       in this regard.  He could not direct me to any authority in  support
       of his proposition that Section 55 applies in such a case.


   34. Further and in any event, the Judge has  considered  Section  55  at
       [75] of the Decision and the Appellant has not said in what way that
       paragraph involves legal error.


   35. I turn then to ground five which concerns  the  Appellant's  private
       life.  That ground contains a number of  paragraphs  which  are  not
       relevant to this case.  I have already  noted  the  reference  to  a
       section 72 certificate which does not  exist.   Paragraphs  [29]  to
       [31] of the grounds refer to a business which is not referred to  in
       any of the evidence.  That leaves only [35]  of  the  grounds  which
       repeats the matters pleaded in relation to  the  Appellant's  family
       life with which I have already dealt and  the  failure  to  consider
       background evidence in relation to the protection claim with which I
       have also already dealt.


   36. I have considered the Judge's assessment of  the  interference  with
       the Appellant's private life as appears at  [73]  and  [74]  of  the
       Decision.  Whilst the Judge's mention of "unduly harsh" at  [74]  of
       the Decision might suggest that the Judge has in mind  Section  117C
       which, for the reasons I have already set out does not  apply,  that
       error could not be material because neither exception as set out  in
       Section 117C could apply in any case (based on  the  definitions  in
       Section 117D), the Judge has not referred to Section 117C at [72] of
       the Decision, a private life claim would fail for reasons  given  at
       [73] of the Decision and, as the  Judge  observes  at  [74]  of  the
       Decision "[t]he  proportionality  assessment's  Hesham  Ali  balance
       sheet is on one side replete with arguments  for  the  Secretary  of
       State and on the other devoid of any for the appellant." That  is  a
       conclusion which is inevitable on the evidence and  facts  as  found
       without any reference to Section 117C.


   37. For the above reasons, the grounds disclose no error of law  in  the
       Decision.   I  therefore  uphold  the  Decision  of  Judge   Housego
       promulgated  on  29  June  2018  with  the  consequence   that   the
       Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.


    DECISION


    I am satisfied that the Decision does  not  involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  I uphold the Decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Housego promulgated on 29 June 2018 with the consequence
    that the Appellant's appeal remains dismissed.
    Signed             [pic]           Dated:  17 December 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


ANNEX: ADJOURNMENT DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06910/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London                  |Determination Promulgated    |
|On Thursday 4 October 2018                    |                             |
|                                              |.............................|
|                                              |..........                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     G A
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Ramzan, Counsel instructed by Legal Chambers
                 Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted by the First-tier Tribunal.  As this  appeal  involves
protection issues, it is appropriate to continue  that  direction.  Until  a
tribunal or court directs otherwise, the Appellant is granted anonymity.  No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family. This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


                     ADJOURNMENT DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

    1. This appeal comes before me to decide whether there  is  a  material
       error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Housego
       promulgated on 29 June 2018 ("the Decision").  Permission to  appeal
       was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 20 July 2018.


    2. On 2 October 2018, Legal Chambers Solicitors informed  the  Tribunal
       that they had taken over conduct  of  the  Appellant's  case.   They
       filed a notice of change of solicitors.  It was clear from  their  e
       mail that they were aware of  the  hearing  on  4  October  as  they
       expressly referred to it.  They did not enquire as to the nature  of
       the hearing nor make an application for an  adjournment.   Prior  to
       their involvement, the Appellant was represented in  the  making  of
       his application for permission to appeal by FR Solicitors and before
       that,  at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing,   by   Duncan   Lewis
       solicitors.


    3. At the start of the hearing, Ms Ramzan made an  application  for  an
       adjournment.  She did so for essentially three reasons.  First,  she
       said that this was a substantive hearing but that her client and his
       partner were not there to give evidence.  Second, she said that  she
       did not have all the documents necessary to proceed.  She said  that
       those instructing her did not have the Respondent's  bundle  and  in
       spite of attempts to obtain it, did not yet have a copy.  Third, she
       said  that  the  Appellant's   partner's   asylum   claim   remained
       outstanding and the Appellant's claim depended in large part on that
       of his partner who claimed she would be at risk of honour killing on
       return as she had been engaged to another  man  before  leaving  her
       home country.


    4. In relation to the first reason, I pointed out  to  Ms  Ramzan  that
       this was primarily an error of law hearing and therefore  there  was
       no immediate reason why her client should need to give evidence.  If
       I were to find an error of law in the Decision, I would consider  an
       adjournment for a resumed hearing to take that evidence if such  was
       required.  Ms Ramzan pointed out that permission to appeal had  been
       granted but that muddles two concepts.   Permission  to  appeal  the
       Decision is only a finding  that  the  grounds  are  arguable.   The
       Appellant then has to establish that the error of law is  made  out.
       Her solicitors should be well aware of the distinction.


    5. When I enquired about the documents which Ms Ramzan had  been  given
       by her Instructing Solicitors, I became very concerned.  She had the
       Appellant's bundle which was before the First-tier Tribunal but  had
       neither the permission grant nor indeed the Decision  under  appeal.
       She submitted that this was because, as she  said,  the  Appellant's
       new solicitors did not have the Respondent's bundle in  which  those
       would be found.  I am very surprised to be told that the Appellant's
       new solicitors have taken on  a  case  and  presumably  advised  the
       Appellant that they would send Counsel along to the hearing  without
       any knowledge of the basis on which they were doing so.  They  could
       not possibly instruct Counsel consistently with  their  professional
       obligations without sight of the crucial documents.


    6. I enquired what steps had been taken to obtain those documents prior
       to the hearing by those instructing Ms Ramzan.   She  said  she  was
       told that requests had been made for the documents, but she did  not
       know whether those were requests made to  the  Respondent  or,  more
       appropriately, to the previous solicitors for their file of  papers.
       She had not been made aware of any problem in  the  release  of  the
       previous solicitor's file, for example, because fees  had  not  been
       paid.  She could not contact the caseworker as he  was  on  a  plane
       bound for Saudi Arabia and the person with whom she spoke  had  told
       her only that he had left instructions that he had tried to get  the
       bundle.


    7. I appreciate that if the new solicitors do  not  have  the  file  of
       papers from a previous  firm,  then  they  may  be  in  difficulties
       preparing for the hearing if their client does not himself have  the
       papers (although he ought at least to have the Decision  since  that
       was apparently sent to him and his solicitors).   However,  if  that
       was the position, then an application should have been made  for  an
       adjournment prior to the hearing.  The solicitors  should  not  have
       placed Ms Ramzan in the unenviable position of attending  a  hearing
       with insufficient instructions or papers.  Such is also inconsistent
       with the solicitor's professional duties to  this  Tribunal  and  to
       their client.


    8. Whilst Mr Melvin was reluctant  to  agree  to  the  adjournment,  he
       accepted my reasoning that an adjournment ought to be given because,
       although Ms Ramzan was given  my  spare  copy  of  the  Respondent's
       bundle at the hearing, she had no caseworker or client from whom  to
       take  instructions  at  that  time.   I  also  considered  that  the
       Appellant ought not to be prejudiced by the professional failings of
       his solicitors.


    9.  For  those  reasons,  I  agreed  to  the  adjournment  sought  (see
       directions below for re-listing).  A copy of the Respondent's bundle
       was provided to Ms Ramzan and the current solicitors therefore  have
       no excuse not to be properly prepared for the next hearing.


   10. I also indicated that I was  giving  a  notice  to  the  Appellant's
       solicitors to show cause why they should not pay the costs  of  this
       hearing, pursuant to  rule  10(3)(c)  and/or  (d)  of  the  Tribunal
       Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 on the basis of their  conduct
       in failing to make an application for an adjournment  prior  to  the
       hearing when they knew or ought to have known that  they  could  not
       properly prepare for or proceed with the  hearing  due  to  lack  of
       papers (if that  is  the  case)  and  in  instructing  Counsel  with
       insufficient material on which to base those instructions.




    DIRECTIONS


    1. The error of law hearing of  this  appeal  (with  re-making  of  the
       decision thereafter  if  appropriate)  is  adjourned  to  the  first
       available date after Monday 22  October  2018.   Time  estimate  1.5
       hours.
    2. Within 7 days  from  the  date  when  this  decision  is  sent,  the
       Appellant's solicitors,  Legal  Chambers  solicitors  shall  provide
       written representations in response to the matters raised at [5]  to
       [7] above and shall provide reasons in response  to  the  notice  at
       [10] above, stating why  they  should  not  be  liable  to  pay  the
       Respondent's costs of the hearing on 4 October 2018.


    Signed             [pic]           Dated:  4 October 2018
      Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

