
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06509/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28 February 2018                          |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                     I S
                       (anonymity direction CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Capel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the appeal of Ms S against the decision of  Judge  Herlihy  who
    heard her appeal on 4 October 2017 against a decision of the  Secretary
    of State of 22 June 2017 refusing to grant asylum and making directions
    for her removal from the United Kingdom.

2.   The appellant's claim is essentially one  of  having  been  trafficked.
    She is an Albanian national who had lived in Italy for some  years  and
    was trafficked within  Italy.   She  managed  to  escape,  returned  to
    Albania where she had not lived for some years, and when she  was  with
    the boyfriend  she  met  there  they  were  attacked  by  her  original
    trafficker and managed to get away.   They  then  went  to  Greece  for
    several years and then went to Belgium after her boyfriend lost his job
    in Greece and  were  again  seen  by  the  trafficker  in  Belgium  who
    threatened her, and they decided to travel to the United Kingdom.

3.   The judge heard evidence from both the appellant and her boyfriend  and
    made findings of credibility from paragraph 44 of the decision  onwards
    relating  to  a  number  of  matters  concerning  inconsistencies   and
    implausibilities as they were identified in the judge's  decision.  She
    also, having set out  a  number  of  points  on  which  she  found  the
    appellant to lack credibility, referred to a Rule 35 report which talks
    about part of a front tooth missing and ongoing  low  mood,  flashbacks
    and feeling alone, and the doctor finding  her  account  coherent,  and
    also read a report of Dr Kareem, accepted Dr Kareem's diagnosis of PTSD
    and mild moderate depressive episodes, but did not attach weight to his
    conclusions as to the cause of the appellant's  conditions.  She  found
    that the report did not indicate that the very many inconsistencies  in
    the appellant's account could be attributed to her mental condition, so
    the judge made adverse credibility findings and  dismissed  the  appeal
    under the Refugee  Convention  and  also  in  respect  of  humanitarian
    protection and Article 8.  The  appellant  through  Ms  Capel  who  had
    represented her below  and  does  so  today,  sought  and  was  granted
    permission to challenge the judge's decision  on  the  basis  that  the
    approach to the medical evidence  was  unlawful,  the  judge  erred  in
    assessing credibility and there  was  also  procedural  unfairness  and
    permission was granted  on  all  grounds.  Today  I  have  had  helpful
    submissions both from Ms Capel developing the points she  made  in  the
    grounds, and also from Mr Tarlow who relies on the Rule 24 response and
    argues that the challenge is a matter of disagreement only.   I  should
    say a little about the Rule 24 response.  It is noted  there  that  the
    judge found the appellant did not  present  a  suicide  risk  and  gave
    weight to Dr Kareem's report, noted that  the  appellant  had  made  no
    attempts to go to the police in Italy, Albania or Belgium,  so  it  was
    open to the judge not to find the appellant credible and  gave  reasons
    from paragraph 64 onwards why the appellant's account was not found  to
    be credible, and as Mr Tarlow in his submissions argued, it was no more
    than an attempt to re-argue matters.

4.   I turn then to the grounds of appeal as developed,  as  I  say,  by  Ms
    Capel today.  As I say, the judge accepted the diagnosis by  Dr  Kareem
    of post-traumatic stress disorder and depression and the judge reminded
    herself  that  the  doctor's  function  is  to  examine   whether   the
    appellant's symptoms are consistent with PTSD and depression,  but  the
    judge expressed concern that Dr Kareem had not considered  whether  the
    mental health issues suffered by the appellant could have  arisen  from
    other problems or causes, for example, being abandoned by  her  father,
    her mother leaving her to live in Albania with her  grandparents  until
    she was aged 12 and her mother's remarriage and move to Tunisia.   With
    regard to that , the point is made on the appellant's  behalf  that  Dr
    Kareem makes it clear that post-traumatic stress disorder arises  as  a
    delayed or protracted response to a stressful event or situation and Ms
    Capel rightly says the matters identified by the judge could be said to
    come within that definition, but Dr Kareem goes on  to  say,  which  is
    likely  to  cause  a  situation  of  an  exceptionally  threatening  or
    catastrophic nature which is likely  to  cause  pervasive  distress  in
    almost anyone and argues that one could not describe the abandonment by
    her  father  or  her  mother  leaving  to  live  in  Italy   as   being
    exceptionally threatening or catastrophic matters, and therefore  these
    alternative explanations  as  to  why  the  appellant  might  have  the
    symptoms she has could not be said to be a possible basis for that.

5.   A further point is made that the symptoms described  by  the  appellant
    and considered by Dr Kareem related specifically to her experiences  of
    trafficking for the purposes  of  sexual  exploitation  and  there  are
    various points from his report quoted there about the distress and  the
    insomnia and nightmares that she experienced which were all related  by
    her to her previous experiences at the hands of the trafficker.  It was
    not suggested, as the grounds say, that the appellant was not genuinely
    traumatised or that she had feigned the symptoms and it is argued  that
    Dr Kareem carried out the proper  analysis  of  the  symptoms  and  was
    consistent with the guidance in JL.

6.   There is a further comment on the  conclusion  by  the  judge  that  Dr
    Kareem was criticised for failing to consider why this  was  the  first
    occasion the appellant had sought psychiatric referral,  and  the  fact
    that Dr Kareem  recorded  that  the  appellant  had  previously  sought
    assistance from the IRC doctor who referred her to  the  mental  health
    team and Dr Kareem specifically addressed the reasons why the appellant
    did not seek the assistance of the medical professionals in relation to
    medical health prior to coming to the United Kingdom  and  records  her
    explanation for that.

7.   The third point in relation to this ground  is  the  challenge  to  the
    judge's conclusion that Dr Kareem stepped outside his role as a medical
    expert in commenting on the consistency of the appellant's  psychiatric
    presentation and the point is made there that in accordance  with  what
    was said in AN (the detention action case) that a medical expert is not
    only entitled to undertake such an analysis, but is required to  do  so
    if the report is to be relied on as independent evidence supporting the
    credibility of an account. The final  point  made  in  respect  of  the
    medical evidence is that although the judge noted the  Rule  35  report
    she did not say what weight, if any, should be attached to it,  bearing
    in mind that it talked about  a  consistency  between  the  appellant's
    psychological presentation and that seen in victims of trauma  and  the
    chipped tooth was likely to be a consequence of  being  beaten  by  the
    trafficker.  Of course again the issue of findings on  credibility  are
    matters that have to be made by the judge rather than  by  professional
    witnesses, but equally the point I think is  rightly  made  that  if  a
    medical expert's report is going  to  be  relied  upon  as  independent
    evidence supportive of an individual's credibility, then they are going
    to have to say something about their own view of that credibility.

8.   I might make a further point  in  relation  to  this  as  I  have  some
    concern about it, and that is the fact that the judge only came  on  to
    the medical evidence having assessed the evidence in some detail  prior
    to that and came to adverse credibility findings, and it does  seem  to
    me it would have been preferable  if  the  medical  evidence  had  come
    earlier on in the judge's consideration, but I think there is force  in
    the points that Ms Capel  makes  about  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    medical evidence in any event for the reasons set out  in  the  grounds
    and as developed  today.  It  seems  to  me  that  although  there  are
    undoubtedly problems with the  appellant's  credibility  taken  in  the
    abstract of the appellant's case, I have not set those out as the judge
    sets them out in some detail.  They  are  matters  that  needed  to  be
    assessed in my view together with the medical evidence in order for the
    judge to say more clearly and more properly, and  I  think  the  points
    that I say made in the grounds about the challenge to the  approach  to
    the medical evidence are matters that are well-taken.

9.   In the circumstances I do not think it is necessary to say a lot  about
    the other grounds.  I see  the  force  of  the  point  made  about  the
    assumptions as they may be described as being by the judge as  set  out
    at paragraph 11 of the  grounds  and  the  reference  to  the  Albanian
    country guidance, bearing in mind the points set out  at  paragraph  15
    somewhat go against some of what the judge said about this.

10.  As regards procedural unfairness, it is unclear  how  much  weight  the
    judge attached to the matters set out at paragraph 48.  Certainly, they
    were regarded as going  to  the  appellant's  credibility,  but  it  is
    unclear.  Of course, weight is a matter for the judge,  but  there  are
    issues raised there which I think on balance probably should have  been
    put to the appellant, so bringing these matters together I  think  that
    although, as I say, there are real  difficulties  with  credibility  in
    this case, I am not happy  that  the  judge  properly  dealt  with  the
    medical  evidence  in  coming  to  conclusions   on   the   appellant's
    credibility and on the weight to be attached to the  medical  evidence,
    and so for that reason in  particular  but  without  ruling  the  other
    matters out it seems to me that there are material  errors  of  law  in
    this decision.

Directions

11.  The matter is to be reheard at Taylor House.

12.  Time estimate: three hours.

13.  Albanian interpreter required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date 15 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
