

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06358/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 October 2019                      |On 4 November 2019                 |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN


                                   Between


                                     A A
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity should have been granted at an earlier stage  of  the  proceedings
because the case involves protection issues. I find that it  is  appropriate
to make an order. Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.

Representation:

For the appellant:           Ms S. Akinbolu, instructed by Seddons
For the respondent:          Ms S. Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The appellant appealed the respondent's decision dated  13  June  2019
    to refuse a fresh protection and human rights claim.

2.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Andonian ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal
    in a decision promulgated on 20 August 2019.

3.    It is not necessary to  give  detailed  reasons  because  the  parties
    agree that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  involved  the  making  of
    errors  of  law:  see  rule  40(3)(a)  The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.

4.     In  summary,  (i)  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to  apply   the
    Devaseelan principles properly; (ii)  failed  to  make  clear  findings
    relating to events that happened since the previous First-tier Tribunal
    decision (2017); (iii) failed to take into account  relevant  evidence;
    (iv) failed to take into account expert medical  evidence  relating  to
    the appellant's mother which was relevant to a proper assessment of her
    credibility; and (v) made adverse credibility findings on the basis  of
    an expert country report only selectively  referred  to  in  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lawrence's decision, which was not before the  judge  in
    this case to consider in full context.

5.    Although there was some discussion with Ms Cunha as  to  whether  some
    parts of the findings relating to the appellant's ability to  obtain  a
    CSID could be preserved, since the judge also failed to  consider  what
    was said in recent country guidance, it was decided that those findings
    were also unsafe. Given that a protection  claim  requires  a  holistic
    assessment it is appropriate for the  case  to  be  considered  afresh.
    Since the whole decision will need to be remade with extensive findings
    of fact it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.

6.    The First-tier Tribunal decision involved  the  making  of  errors  of
    law. It is set aside and will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh hearing.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error on a  point
of law

The decision is set aside and will be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
for a fresh hearing

Signed   [pic]   Date   30 October 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan





