
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06521/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 November 2017                      |On 28 December 2017               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                              MRS HIEN THI TRAN
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a citizen of  Vietnam  born  in  1960.   She  appeals
      against a decision of the respondent made on 9 June 2016 to refuse her
      protection  claim.   The  claim  was  also  refused  on   humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.

   2. The basis of her protection claim is that she is at  risk  because  of
      imputed political opinion, in particular, she had been an opponent  of
      state corruption.

   3. The respondent  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  had  organised
      protests in Vietnam and had been arrested for such by the authorities.

   4. She appealed.

      First tier hearing

   5. Following a hearing at Taylor House on 15 February 2017 Judge  of  the
      First-Tier NM  Paul  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,  humanitarian
      protection and human rights grounds.

   6. His findings on the protection claim are found at paragraphs [34-38].

   7. In summary, a document verification report indicated  that  an  arrest
      warrant was a forgery [34]; she  made  no  mention  in  her  screening
      interview that she had been arrested  due  to  her  imputed  political
      opposition to the government, her position there being  that  she  did
      not want to return because she had nothing there and she  was  fed  up
      with the regime [34].  Also, the judge did not believe her account  of
      having been able to escape from custody, a guard  having  been  bribed
      [36].  The judge went on to place 'little weight' on  two  psychiatric
      reports as the writers  'have to base their conclusions solely on what
      the appellant has said' [37].  Further, the production of  photographs
      purporting to show her protesting in the UK, several years  after  she
      arrived here, were considered to be an attempt to bolster her case.

   8. As for brief consideration of a claim to family life  with  a  British
      citizen partner, the judge found there to be a  lack  of  evidence  of
      cohabitation and even if there was, a  lack  of  evidence  as  to  its
      durability or extent.

   9. She sought permission to appeal which  was  refused.   Permission  was
      granted on 20 September 2017 on reapplication to the Upper Tribunal.

      Error of law hearing

  10. The grounds, which Mr Malik repeated  at  the  error  of  law  hearing
      before me, concentrated on one point. In  respect  of  the  protection
      claim the judge made  no  reference  to  an  expert's  report  in  his
      findings. It was an error of  law  not  to  have  regard  to  material
      evidence.

  11. Mr Nath had nothing to add to the rule 24  response.   The  judge  had
      regard to all the evidence presented and considered the report as part
      of his findings.   Further,  the  report  writer  gave  views  on  the
      appellant's credibility.  The credibility assessment was a matter  for
      the Tribunal alone and not the expert providing an opinion.

      Consideration

  12. In considering this matter the report by Dr Tran  Thi  Lan  Anh,  (who
      states he has a Ph.D  in  international  law  and  his  main  research
      interest is international human  rights  law  in  socialist  political
      country systems including Vietnam)  is  dated  18  November  2016  and
      headed 'Report on the Socialist Republic of Vietnam and  the  risk  of
      being returned as a failed political asylum seeker'. It is some twenty
      three pages long. He comments on a  number  of  issues  including  the
      plausibility of the appellant's account,  the  household  registration
      and healthcare systems and other matters.

  13. It is clear that the report was before the judge and that he was aware
      of it.  He refers to it at paragraph [5].  Unfortunately, he makes  no
      reference whatsoever to it thereafter. He simply fails to engage  with
      it in his analysis.

  14. Whether or not Dr Tran exceeded his remit in some of his comments, the
      judge's failure to make any reference to the report  in  his  analysis
      was a material error.  An expert report is a material matter.  He  had
      a duty to consider that evidence (along with the other evidence), when
      reaching a decision in  an  even  handed  and  impartial  manner.   In
      assessing the evidence before him  he  was  required  to  attach  such
      weight as he considered appropriate to that evidence.  Whilst  it  may
      on occasions be appropriate to reject the conclusions  reached  by  an
      expert what is crucial is that a reasoned  explanation  is  given  for
      doing so.

  15. I would add that the judge made no reference at all to the  background
      material before him  (which  included  material  referred  to  in  the
      refusal letter and, more recently, a Home Office  Country  Policy  and
      Information note). Credibility findings can only really be made on the
      basis of a complete understanding of  the  entire  picture  placing  a
      claim into the context of the  background  information  regarding  the
      country of origin.

  16. In failing to have regard to material evidence  the  judge  materially
      erred such that the decision must be set aside to be heard again.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law.  It is set aside.  None of its  findings  are
to stand.

In terms of section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and  of  Practice  Statement
7.2 the case is remitted to the First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

The member(s) of the First-Tier Tribunal chosen to  consider  the  case  are
not to include Judge NM Paul.

No anonymity order made.


Signed                                             Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

