
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06346/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 June 2020                       |On 9 June 2020                       |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     ZI
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS




    Representation by way of written submissions:
    For the Appellant:     Lawrence and Associates; no submissions received
    For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
    Officer



    Background

      1. This appeal comes before me following the grant  of  permission  to
         appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Gill on 19 January 2020  in  respect
         the  determination   of   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   Greasley,
         promulgated on 11 November 2019 following a hearing at Hatton Cross
         on 6 December 2019.

      2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 4 February  1996.  He
         entered the UK as a businessman in  2005  and  claimed  asylum  the
         following year. This was refused but the appellant did  not  embark
         and after he was encountered by the  authorities  he  made  further
         representations. He failed to attend all the asylum interviews that
         had been scheduled and maintained that he only knew of the last one
         and that he had medical problems preventing him from attending.  He
         did not give oral evidence to the First-tier Tribunal for the  same
         reason. His claim is that is bisexual and cannot return home to his
         wife and family because they had disowned him and because he  would
         be persecuted.

      3. A pre-hearing review on the papers was scheduled for 19  July  2019
         at Hatton Cross with a substantive hearing date set  for  2  August
         2019. The appellant's  representatives  sought  an  adjournment  to
         obtain the appellant's papers from his previous representatives and
         to access his medical records. The  request  was  granted  and  the
         appeal was adjourned for just over three months to 6 November 2019.
         On 4 November 2019, an application  was  made  for  a  seven  month
         adjournment "to see if  our  client's  condition  improves  to  the
         extent that he may be able to give evidence". A psychiatric  report
         had been obtained which  suggested  that  the  appellant  might  be
         suffering from pre-senile dementia and would  be  reviewed  in  six
         months  when  a  confirmatory  diagnosis  could   be   given.   The
         application was refused on 5 November 2019.

      4. The application for an adjournment, this time for six  months,  was
         renewed  at the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It  was
         refused  and  the   appellant's   representative   then   made   no
         submissions. The matter proceeded on the basis of submissions  from
         the respondent and the appeal was later dismissed.

      5. Although  the  appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  on  three
         grounds, the first two pertaining to the judge's refusal  to  grant
         an adjournment, permission was only granted  on  the  third  ground
         which  was  the  judge's  consideration  of  an  unsigned   witness
         statement.

      6. The matter came before me at Field House  on  16  March  2020.  The
         appellant attended the hearing but there was no appearance  by  the
         appellant's representative. An email was received by  the  Tribunal
         to say that the representative's wife was unwell and he had to stay
         at home with their child. There was  no  objection  raised  by  the
         Presenting  Officer  to  an  adjournment  on  that  basis  and  the
         appellant was  informed  that  he  need  not  attend  on  the  next
         occasion.

    Covid-19 crisis

      7. Before the matter could be re-listed, the UK went into lockdown due
         to the coronavirus pandemic. On 30 April 2020 directions were  sent
         to the parties in the light of the need to take precautions against
         the  spread  of  Covid-19.  The  parties  were  invited   to   make
         submissions on the error of  law  issue  and  to  put  forward  any
         reasons for why they considered the matter  could  not  be  decided
         without a hearing.

      8. The respondent replied to the directions on 19 May 2020  confirming
         that she did not oppose the  appellant's  challenge.  To  date  the
         Tribunal  has  not  received  any  response  from  the  appellant's
         representatives. As the deadline for compliance with directions  by
         the appellant expired on 14 May 2020, and as no application for  an
         extension of time has been  made  by  his  representatives,  I  now
         proceed to determine the matter.

    Discussion and Conclusions

      9. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.

     10. There has been no further challenge to Upper Tribunal Judge  Gill's
         decision to refuse permission to appeal on the grounds put  forward
         in respect of the refusal of  the  adjournment  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal. By virtue of these  proceedings  the  appellant  has  now
         achieved the six month delay he sought and so the point is academic
         in any event.

     11. The ground considered arguable  by  Judge  Gill  related  to  Judge
         Greasley's consideration  of  the  appellant's  witness  statement.
         Although contained in the appellant's bundle, it  is  unsigned  and
         undated and, according to the grounds for  permission,  the  First-
         tier Tribunal  Judge  was  informed  that  the  appellant  had  not
         appeared to understand the contents when it was completed.  Indeed,
         the  representative's  email  of  4  November  2019   (seeking   an
         adjournment) confirms this. It states: "We have tried to prepare  a
         witness statement with him which was submitted in the  bundle,  but
         in the end we could not have our client sign it as  he  seemed  too
         confused to sign it at the end of the process so that we could  not
         even be sure he still agreed with  its  contents".  Quite  why  the
         statement was included in the bundle of documents is  difficult  to
         comprehend in those circumstances but  as  the  position  was  made
         clear to the judge (he had plainly seen the email of 5 November: at
         19-20, and was aware the statement was unsigned: at 21) and as  the
         appellant did not give oral evidence and adopt the contents of  the
         statement at the hearing, the document should not have formed  part
         of the evidence that was assessed.

     12. At paragraph 28, the judge confirms  that  he  had  considered  the
         unsigned witness statement and he sets out difficulties with it  in
         paragraph 29. At no point was there any acknowledgment by the judge
         of the appellant's alleged  confusion  over  the  contents  of  the
         statement and the fact that he had not signed it  because  of  that
         confusion. Given that there was a psychiatric report which set  out
         a medical professional's view  of  the  appellant's  mental  health
         problems and the unlikelihood of him giving  reliable  evidence  at
         that point in time, the judge  erred  in  taking  the  most  recent
         unsigned statement into account and then using its contents to find
         contradictions with the other  evidence  (at  29).  That  error  is
         material to the outcome of the decision as it infects the  findings
         that were made in respect of the appellant's claim.

     13. I have had regard to Ms Isherwood's helpful and fair acceptance  of
         this error in her letter of 19 May 2020.

     14.  For  all  the  above  reasons,  I  therefore  conclude  that   the
         determination cannot stand and it is  set  aside  in  its  entirety
         except as a Record of Proceedings.  The  respondent  requests  that
         the matter be determined afresh by the First-tier Tribunal  and  as
         the appellant has not had a fair determination of his appeal and as
         fresh findings of fact will be required on all issues, I agree that
         is the most appropriate avenue.

    Decision

     15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an  error  of  law
         which requires that it be set aside. The appeal is allowed  to  the
         extent that it is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  fresh
         decision to be made on all matters. The matter shall  be  heard  by
         any First-tier Tribunal Judge except Judge Greasley.

     16. Directions shall be  issued  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  due
         course.

    Anonymity

     17. I make an order for anonymity.




    Signed


         R. Keki?


    Upper Tribunal Judge


    Date: 3 June 2020
