
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06370/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 November 2019                  |On 4 December 2019                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MNB
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Maqsood instructed by Syeds Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

    1. The appellant  appeals  with  permission  a  decision  of  First-tier
       Tribunal Judge Howarth who in a  decision  dated  13  September  2019
       dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human  rights
       grounds.

Background


    2. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 1 April 1981.

    3. The Judge notes the appellant's case between [3 - 10]  summarised  in
       the following terms:

         "3.  The  Appellant  has  visited  the  UK  on  numerous  occasions
             previously. The Appellant claims to have a  well-founded  fear
             of persecution for reason of his political opinion, namely his
             membership of the Kolti Kashmir Liberation Front (KKLF).

         4.   The Appellant also claims that members of  the  Inter-Services
             Intelligence Agency (ISI)  or  'land  mafia'  have  taken  the
             Appellant's house and made  threats  against  the  Appellant's
             life and the lives of his children.

         5.   The Appellant states that he last entered the UK with his wife
             and children on 3 August 2018.

         6.   The Appellant's father faced problems with ISI from 1998.  ISI
             threatening to take over the property.

         7.   The Appellant formerly lived at a house  in  Kotli;  his  twin
             brother, [MN], lived next door. When the Appellant came to the
             UK the ISI took possession of the Appellant's house and left a
             letter in a shop for the shopkeeper to give to the Appellant's
             brother.

         8.   At the end of August 2018 the Appellant's  brother  also  left
             Kotli and  fled  to  another  village  as  he  had  also  been
             threatened. The Appellant has not reported any  wrongdoing  to
             the police as the police would not listen to him.

         9.   The  Appellant  started  his  own  electrical  shop  in  2005,
             however, this was closed down in August 2018  and  the  person
             that the Appellant had left in charge of  the  shop  abandoned
             it.

         10.  The Appellant's political party believes  in  independence  of
             Kashmir from Pakistan, India  and  China.  The  Appellant  has
             previously attended rallies. In February  or  March  2018  the
             Appellant was detained in a bazaar. The Appellant was detained
             as on 11 February 2018, the Appellant was at a rally  when  an
             army car was stopped by himself and other party members as  it
             was driving towards the rally. The army  would  not  agree  to
             divert the vehicle. The ensuing altercation  resulted  in  the
             Appellant being arrested some time afterwards."

    4. The Judge had the benefit of the documentary evidence noted at [22  -
       23], noted as being:

         "22.     I have before  me  the  Appellant's  bundle  containing  a
             skeleton argument,  witness  statement,  an  envelope  showing
             shipping  by  DHL,  newspaper  clippings   and   translations,
             warrants for arrest, a membership card, letter from a  lawyer,
             police crime report, documents  relating  to  the  Appellant's
             children and their schooling in the UK and objective evidence.

         23.  I also have the Respondent's bundle containing the reasons for
             refusal letter dated 27 June 2019, letter from Read Foundation
             School dated 16 April 2019, letters from  Khadija-Tul-Kubra  x
             4, letters from JKLF, letter purportedly from  ISI,  interview
             record,  screening  interview  and   preliminary   information
             questionnaire."

    5. In addition the Judge had the benefit  of  hearing  and  seeing  oral
       evidence being given.

    6. The Judge's findings are set out between  [42  -  71]  which  can  be
       summarised in the following terms:

          a) The Judge found inconsistencies in the  appellant's  evidence.
             The explanation for inconsistencies as to when  the  appellant
             first started facing problems from ISI  was  accepted  by  the
             Judge as plausible [42].

          b)  The  appellant's  explanation  regarding  a  discrepancy   in
             relation to who was currently living in his house was accepted
             [44].

          c) The handwritten document at Annex F of the respondent's bundle
             was of little evidential value with no distinguishing features
             and,  despite  the  respondent  highlighting   the   lack   of
             appropriate translation, no translation had been provided  and
             with there being no envelope or details of who the  letter  is
             from, resulting  in  little  weight  being  attached  to  this
             evidence [45].

          d) The letter from the children's  school  referring  to  threats
             from ISL was of concern as it is said the  appellant  had  not
             mentioned  any  threats  to  his  children  in  the  screening
             interview, PIQ or main  asylum  interview  which  damaged  the
             appellant's credibility [46].

          e) The letter from Read Foundation School states the  child  [AN]
             is a regular student of the school and 10th in his class  with
             roll number 16. The letter is dated 16  April  2019  but  adds
             nothing to the appellant's claim as there were no  details  of
             the threats received and it was considered  "odd"  the  school
             record [AM] as a regular student when the child  had  been  in
             the United Kingdom since August 2018, some 8 months before the
             letter was signed which gives rise to concern that the letters
             from the schools could be fraudulent [47].

          f) A number of documents provided  from  Khadija-Tul-Kubra  Girls
             Science College were noted and  the  respondent's  submissions
             regarding handwritten amendments in  relation  to  child  [AB]
             rejected by the Judge as more likely to be amendments made  by
             hand to correct mistakes in the letter.

          g) The Judge noted the letter is signed by  the  'Principal'  but
             did not find that lessened the legitimacy of the document.  Of
             more concern to the Judge was that the  appellant's  son  [UN]
             has a letter written to him in spite of the college purporting
             to be a Girls Science College.  The Judge finds  this  unusual
             and secondly that the template used by Read Foundation  School
             and Khadija-Tul-Kubra appear the same despite there  being  no
             similarities in  the  header  or  footer  indicating  the  two
             institutions  are  in  any  way  related.  The   Judge   finds
             similarities in the letters between two  apparently  unrelated
             institutions called into  question  the  content  stating  the
             schools had received threats from the land mafia and that they
             were therefore issuing the school leaving certificates [49].

          h) The Judge finds the letters from the schools have been drafted
             at the request most likely of the appellant's brother in order
             to bolster the appellant's claim in the UK [51].

          i) The failure of the appellant to seek legal advice  in  respect
             of  his  property  dispute  was  not  found  to   damage   the
             appellant's credibility [52 - 53].

          j) Having considered the claim in respect of ISI in the round the
             Judge finds  documents  on  which  the  appellant  is  relying
             seriously undermined his claim as did his failure  to  mention
             earlier in the asylum process threats to his family. The Judge
             finds the appellant could not succeed with this aspect of  his
             claim [54].

          k) The Judge accepted  the  appellant's  explanation  for  giving
             apparently different names when referring to the Kotli Kashmir
             Liberation Front which was not found to damage the appellant's
             credibility. [55].

          l) The Judge refused to admit the appellant's membership card  of
             the above group as it was only tendered for  admission  during
             submissions by the respondent who claimed there was  an  error
             with the state flag on the document [55].

          m) In respect of a  letter  from  Kashmir  Law  Consultants,  the
             respondent was unable to identify  this  organisation  on  the
             Internet and the content of the letter from this  organisation
             makes reference to activities which the appellant himself made
             no mention of at any point in his claim. The Judge notes  that
             in re-examination the appellant stated he did not know who the
             Kashmir Law Consultants were despite  them  purporting  to  be
             instructed by the appellant. The Judge  found  this  extremely
             damaging to  the  appellant's  claim  and  that  his  lack  of
             knowledge of this body indicates strongly that the document is
             fraudulent which called into question all of the documents  on
             which the appellant sought to rely [57].

          n) The  Judge  finds  having  found  serious  concerns  with  the
             legitimacy of some of the appellants  documents  on  which  he
             seeks to rely that all the documents tendered by the appellant
             are fraudulent and/or truthfully produced [58].

          o) The Judge notes the appellant was asked whether  he  had  ever
             been arrested in the screening interview  but  stated  he  had
             not. The appellant's explanation for  such  inconsistency  was
             not accepted by the Judge as being reasonable. The Judge found
             arrest  and  detention  will  be  at  the  forefront  of   the
             appellant's mind and his failure to mention his arrest earlier
             damaged his credibility [59].

          p) The Judge finds the appellant's explanation as to why  he  did
             not previously disclose the arrest warrant against him in  his
             visit Visa application was wholly implausible, finding it  was
             most  likely  it  was  not  mentioned  either  to  ensure  the
             appellant was granted a visa or  alternatively  because  these
             documents were fabricated at  a  later  date  to  bolster  the
             appellant's claim [60].

          q) The appellant was able  to  leave  through  Islamabad  airport
             despite purportedly having an extant  arrest  warrant  against
             him. The Judge accepts the CPIN report  makes  no  mention  of
             whether the appellant would  or  would  not  be  stopped  when
             exiting but finds it is probable the authorities  in  Pakistan
             have means of stopping people exiting Pakistan where they  are
             wanted   for   crimes,   particularly   against   the   state,
             particularly if the state were going  to  lengths  of  issuing
             newspaper wanted ads as claimed by the  appellant.  The  Judge
             finds the Refworld article referred  to  in  the  reasons  for
             refusal letter at page 12 of 21 details sophisticated measures
             for identifying wanted persons on exit from Pakistan [61].

          r) The Judge noted the country information regarding the  "wealth
             of fraudulent documents available from Pakistan  "and  due  to
             the inconsistencies in documents found  it  is  highly  likely
             that all the appellants documents are fraudulent [62].

          s) The Judge finds the appellant  lacks  knowledge  of  documents
             submitted which should support his claim and failed to mention
             key aspects of his claim at appropriate junctures [63].

          t) The Judge finds the appellant is not a credible witness [64].

          u) The Judge does not find the appellant has  a  future  fear  on
             return to Pakistan [65].

          v) The Judge finds there were no very  significant  obstacles  to
             reintegration [68].

          w) In relation to article 8 ECHR the Judge  notes  the  appellant
             and his family came to the UK in August  2018  and  have  only
             lived UK for over one year, that  the  children's  removal  to
             Pakistan was unlikely to cause serious disruption to them, and
             that the best interests of the children will be to return with
             their parents to Pakistan [70].

          x) The  Judge  finds  threats  made  against  the  children  lack
             credibility and the documents from the school and college  are
             fraudulent and/or untruthfully produced such that it  was  not
             found that it would  impact  on  the  best  interests  of  the
             children to return  to  Pakistan  and  that  contrary  to  the
             letters from the school and college, the children could rejoin
             their schools there.

    7. The appellant sought permission to appeal asserting  the  Judge  made
       perverse or irrational findings on a number of  matters  material  to
       the outcome, failed to give  reasons  or  any  adequate  reasons  for
       findings on material matters, gave weight to immaterial matters,  and
       made a misdirection of law on material matters.

    8. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal on 9 October 2019 on the basis  that  although  the  grounds
       lacked clarity it was arguable that the Judge failed  to  make  clear
       findings regarding whether the appellant was a member of the JKRF and
       that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  best  interests  of  the
       appellant's children when considering article 8.

Error of law


    9. On behalf of the appellant Mr Maqsood attempted a forensic dissection
       of the Judge's decision in support of  his  argument  the  Judge  has
       materially erred in law.

   10. It was submitted the credibility assessment is flawed  as  the  Judge
       was required to take into account all relevant  evidence,  both  from
       the appellant and the documents  provided.  The  grounds  assert  the
       Judge was wrong to reject all the documentary  evidence  provided  by
       the appellant at [58] without undertaking a full and proper  analysis
       of all such documents.

   11. Mr Maqsood referred to the letter from the  JKLF  considered  in  the
       reasons for refusal letter in which it is  claimed  two  points  were
       raised but that it is not clear from reading the determination  under
       challenge whether the Judge actually looked at this letter, what  the
       Judge made of the letter, and why the Judge found it to be forged  as
       per [58].

   12. The Secretary of State considered  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  a
       member  of  the  Kotli  Kashmir  Liberation  Front  and  any  adverse
       attention he may experience between [40 -  56]  of  the  reasons  for
       refusal letter which was clearly considered by the Judge. In relation
       to the letter from the Liberation Front it is written:

         "40.     The claim that you are  a  member  of  the  Kolti  Kashmir
             Liberation  Front  (AIR  39).   You  were  arrested  for  your
             political activities in February 2018 and there is  an  active
             warrant for your  arrest  in  Pakistan  (AIR  132-144).   This
             aspect of your claim is considered to be inconsistent.

         41.   You are asked during the interview what the specific name  of
             the organisation you are a member of is. You replied, Mohammed
             Maqbool Butt Liberation  Front  (AIR  105).   You  provided  a
             membership card (Document G) and a supporting letter (Document
             H) from the Jammu Kashmir Liberation Front (JKLF) stating that
             you joined in 2005. It is  reasonable  to  expect  you  to  be
             consistent with the specific name of the organisation that you
             have been a member of for 14  years.  As  you  have  not  been
             consistent it is considered that your credibility is damaged.

         42.      You provided a membership card and  supporting  letter  in
             connection with your claim (Document  G,  H).  This  has  been
             considered in line with Tanveer Ahmed  IAT  2002  UKIAT  00439
             STARRED. The card is made of plastic and is  printed  in  full
             colour, has a date of 10 - 09 - 2005 and card reference number
             0832. The state flag of Azad Kashmir in  the  top  right  hand
             corner of the card is incorrect. The JKLF flag in the top left
             corner  has  a  red  line  on  the  left-hand  side.  This  is
             internally inconsistent with the supporting letter  where  the
             line is black. The card is entirely in English  including  the
             information on the back for if the card is lost. It is further
             noted that the card is in pristine  condition.  There  are  no
             scratches to the surface or damage to any of the corners  that
             you would expect as signs of wear on a  document  that  is  14
             years old.

         43.  The supporting letter has a JKLF header  and  footer  section.
             These appear to be of different print quality to the main text
             of the letter with a noticeable level of discolouration in the
             top left-hand corner where the handwritten  reference  numbers
             and dates are located. The documents handwritten sections  are
             completed in 3 different pen types. The main body of the  text
             appears  to  be  in  2  different  formats  with  the  last  3
             paragraphs having narrower  spacing  between  words  and  also
             formatted  for  narrower  line  spacing.  In   assessing   the
             information  in  the  footer  of  the  letter,   the   website
             http://www.jklfworld.org/cannot   be   accessed.   The    JKLF
             Diplomatic Chapter UK address  of  44  Westbourne  Rd,  Luton,
             Beds, England has been checked. This is a residential property
             and no link to the JKLF could be found. Furthermore, it is not
             an address listed on  the  contact  section  of  the  JKLF  UK
             website  and  as  such  is   considered   to   be   externally
             inconsistent with available information. In  consideration  of
             the content of the letter, it is noted  that  the  information
             provided is generic noting  no  specific  involvement  in  any
             events."

   13. The respondent in light  of  inconsistencies  considered  there  were
       serious concerns as to  the  validity  of  the  membership  card  and
       supporting letter such that no weight could be afforded to them.

   14. The above has not been shown by evidence provided to the Judge not to
       be genuine concerns in relation to the weight that could be given  to
       this material. The Judge found no weight could  be  placed  upon  the
       documentary evidence and that the appellant lacks  credibility  which
       is a finding relating to all the material provided. It has  not  been
       shown to be arguably irrational for the Judge to conclude in light of
       all the available evidence that these documents could not be found to
       be genuine or warranted the type of weight  being  attached  to  them
       that the appellant maintains should have been given.

   15. It is not legal error for a Judge not to refer to specific aspects of
       the evidence provided the key points have been taken into account and
       adequate reasons given for the findings  made.  In  this  appeal  the
       Judge has clearly considered all the available evidence in the  round
       and set out reasons why little or no  weight  could  be  attached  to
       either the documentary or oral evidence.

   16. The assertion there are no clear findings regarding  the  appellant's
       claim to be a member of the JKFL is arguably incorrect as  his  claim
       to be a member of this group was part of the evidence that was  found
       to lack credibility.

   17. The weight to be given to the evidence was a matter for the Judge and
       it has not been shown that the weight that was given is  in  any  way
       arguably irrational. The submission that the Judge  compartmentalised
       key aspects has no arguable merit as it is clear  that  the  evidence
       was considered as a whole.

   18.  Mr  Maqsood  challenged   the   Judge's   findings   regarding   the
       correspondence from the  school  to  be  found  in  Annex  H  of  the
       respondent's evidence bundle. It was  submitted  that  the  documents
       provided, which include two leaving certificates,  should  have  been
       addressed which it is submitted is relevant.

   19. It  is  not  disputed  are  documents  described  as  school  leaving
       certificates including for the child [KN]  headed  'Khadija-Tul-Kubra
       Girls Science College & Iqra Rauza-Tul-Aftaal Academy' but this  does
       not clearly confirm that the Academy teaches both boys and  girls  in
       an education system in which there is separation of boys  and  girls.
       The first certificate dated 10 October 2018 refers to KN said to have
       been born on 15 November 2001 who was admitted to Class 5th  but  who
       was studying the first year and who was withdrawn on 10 October  2018
       which the Judge questions on the basis the appellant, his  wife,  and
       their 3 children entered the United Kingdom in August 2018.  This  is
       not an arguably irrational conclusion.

   20. The correspondence appearing at Annex I of  the  respondent's  bundle
       refers, as noted by the Judge, to a  male  child  which  is  arguably
       irrational in relation to a Girls School and which  appears  to  have
       the same signature as the person who signed the leaving certificates.

   21. The Judge clearly considered the best interests of the  children  and
       the proportionality of the decision albeit briefly.  The  grounds  do
       not establish that the conclusion the best interests  are  to  remain
       with their family and return to Pakistan is  a  finding  outside  the
       range of those available to the Judge on the evidence. It is also the
       case that in light of the dismissal of the protection  claim  and  in
       light of the absence of any contra reason being  established  on  the
       evidence the finding  the  decision  is  proportionate  is  the  only
       possible outcome available to the Judge. The best interests  are  not
       determinative.

   22. Whilst the appellant disagrees with the  conclusions  and  feels  the
       Judge should have made a number  of  alternative  or  other  findings
       regarding specific aspects  of  the  evidence  the  grounds  fail  to
       establish the Judge did not consider the evidence with  the  required
       degree of anxious scrutiny, that the Judge  has  not  given  adequate
       reasons in  support  of  the  findings  made,  or  that  the  Judge's
       conclusions are not within the range of those reasonably available to
       the Judge on the evidence.

   23. The appellant has been found to be  no  more  than  a  failed  asylum
       seeker with no adverse profile preventing his return with his  family
       and their reestablishment within Pakistan.

Decision

   24. There is  no  material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
       decision. The determination shall stand.




  Anonymity.

   25. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to  rule  45(4)(i)  of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 27 November 2019

