
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06406/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd October 2018                          |On 17th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                                 MAA (IRAQ)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, Counsel instructed by Davjunnel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    dismissing his appeal against the decision to refuse his protection and
    human rights claims which he had brought on the basis that  he  was  an
    ethnic Kurd from the city of Kirkuk who had fled persecution  by  ISIL,
    and who could not return to Kirkuk because it remained a contested area
    and an internal location to the IKR was not a reasonable option  having
    regard to the case law of AA  (Iraq)  -v-  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944
    ("AA").  The Judge  rejected  his  account  of  past  persecution,  but
    accepted that he could not return to Kirkuk as it remained a  contested
    area. However, the Judge found that he could internally relocate to the
    IKR.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 8 August 2018 First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission  to
    appeal as it was arguable that the  Judge  had  made  unreasonable  and
    contradictory findings on credibility and had failed properly to  apply
    Country Guidance case law, and that these amounted to  material  errors
    capable of affecting the outcome.

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant's accepted date of birth is 4 July 1999.   He  claims  to
    have arrived in the UK clandestinely on 1  February  2016,  and  he  is
    recorded as having claimed asylum on 12 April 2016.   The  Home  Office
    records show that he was fingerprinted in Greece on 19 November 2015.

 4. He said that he had been born and  brought  up  in  Kirkuk  City.   His
    father used to be an ambulance driver, but in January 2013 he had  been
    injured in an explosion.  This  had  left  him  unable  to  work.   The
    appellant had attended school from the age of 6  to  13  years.   After
    that, he had taken  up  employment  to  help  his  family  financially,
    working as a car mechanic.

 5. In July 2015, two men came into the workshop and asked about his boss's
    whereabouts.  They left three boxes  for  him.   After  they  left,  he
    looked inside the boxes and saw that there were bombs inside.  When  he
    got home, he told his family that he had seen bombs in the  boxes  that
    were left in the  workshop.   He  then  went  to  the  authorities  and
    reported this.  A week later, his boss and the  group  associated  with
    his boss were arrested.  It was later broadcast on television that  his
    boss and the two men who had visited the workshop were part of a  group
    that had been arrested due to them having links with  ISIL.   Following
    their arrest, he said that he had received a letter which  stated  that
    "they" would deal with him as the result of his  actions.   He  claimed
    that his father had also received a threatening phone call.

 6. Approximately two months after receiving the threatening letter, in  or
    around September 2015, he was passed by two men  on  motorcycles.  They
    shot at him, and he had to be taken to hospital.  As a result of  this,
    he moved to his uncle's chicken farm which was outside Kirkuk  City  in
    an area called Perde.  He was in  hiding  at  the  chicken  farm  until
    November 2015, helping his uncle on the chicken farm.  On  10  November
    2015 his uncle arranged for him to leave Iraq.

 7. On 5 May  2018  the  respondent  gave  his  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's protection claim.  His account of his alleged problems with
    ISIL was rejected as it  was  internally  inconsistent.   In  addition,
    while he claimed that he had received a threatening letter on  Facebook
    in April 2016, he had not  provided  a  screenshot  of  the  letter  on
    Facebook to substantiate this aspect of his claim.  Since  his  arrival
    in the UK, he had been in contact with his family until November  2016.
    His family, on his account, had not experienced  any  further  problems
    living in Kirkuk after he had left.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 8. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Row sitting at  Birmingham  in
    the First-tier Tribunal on 18 June 2018.   Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.

 9. In his subsequent decision promulgated on 26 June 2018, the  Judge  set
    out the appellant's case at paragraphs [11]-[19]; and the  respondent's
    case at paragraphs [20]-[22].

10. The Judge made findings on the evidence at  paragraphs  [25]-[48].   At
    paragraphs [27]-[32], the Judge gave his reasons for rejecting  various
    respects in which the respondent had asserted  in  the  refusal  letter
    that the appellant's account was either inconsistent or not  plausible.
    At paragraphs [33]-[40], the Judge  gave  particulars  of  the  finding
    which he had made at paragraph [27], which was that there were  however
    some aspects of the appellant's account which were not  plausible;  and
    that there were certain aspects of his  case  where  not  all  material
    factors  at  his  disposal  had  been  submitted  or   a   satisfactory
    explanation given for the lack of relevant material.

11. The Judge reached the following conclusion at paragraph [42]: "Even  at
    the low standard of proof required, it is for the  appellant  to  prove
    his case.  I find that the appellant is an Iraqi of Kurdish  ethnicity.
    I find that he came from the Kirkuk area.   I  find  this  because  the
    respondent accepted this at the  hearing.   I  do  not  find  that  the
    appellant discovered bombs sent to his employer.  I do  not  find  that
    the appellant reported this to the police in Iraq.  I do not find  that
    his  employer  was  arrested.   I  do  not  find  that  the   appellant
    subsequently received threats from terrorists.  I do not find  that  he
    left Iraq to escape those threats.  I do not  find  that  he  has  lost
    contact with his family in Iraq.  I find that his family  arranged  the
    appellant's travel to the United Kingdom not for his safety, but as  an
    economic migrant.  I do not find that the appellant has  lost  all  his
    identification documents or that he could not obtain them.  I find that
    he either still retains them or would be  capable  of  recovering  them
    from his family or acquiring replacements with their assistance."

12. On the topic of internal relocation, the Judge said at  paragraph  [46]
    there remained the question of whether the appellant was in  possession
    of a CSID or could obtain one.  He did not accept that  the  agent  had
    taken his documents from him.  It was for the  appellant  to  establish
    this, and he had found him to be an unreliable witness.  His family had
    arranged for him to be sent to the UK.   Presumably,  there  were  some
    considerable expenses involved.  He did not accept that  the  appellant
    was not in touch with his family.  It was for him  to  establish  that,
    and he had not done so.  There was no reason why the  appellant  should
    not be able to obtain his CSID from his family  members  or  use  their
    assistance to obtain one.

13. At paragraph [47], the Judge held that the appellant was a  powerfully-
    built young man who was  articulate  and  confident.   He  looked  more
    mature than his 19 years.  He had  previously  worked.   There  was  no
    reason why he should not be able to obtain employment in the  IKR.   He
    was not at risk of destitution there.  The IKR was virtually  violence-
    free.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

14. At the hearing before me to determine whether and error of law was made
    out, Mr Mukherjee,  who  did  not  appear  below,  developed  the  case
    advanced in the grounds of appeal.  He also raised a new  point,  which
    was that the Judge had not applied the Country Guidance of AAH  (Iraq).
    However, after enquiry, it emerged that AAH had not been  published  on
    the Upper Tribunal website until 28 June 2018 - two  days  after  Judge
    Row's decision was promulgated.

15. In reply, Mr Whitwell submitted that the  Judge  had  directed  himself
    appropriately, and that he had made findings that were reasonably  open
    to him on the evidence.

Discussion

16. Ground 1 relates to the appellant's account of  past  persecution,  and
    Ground 2 relates to  the  issue  of  the  viability  of  the  appellant
    relocating to the IKR.

17. Ground 1 is that the Judge made unreasonable and contradictory findings
    on credibility and/or plausibility.  Mr Mukherjee  has  identified  the
    following findings as being perverse or contradictory: (a) the  finding
    at paragraph [38] that it would be relatively easy to  obtain  evidence
    that he had been taken to hospital in September  2015  after  allegedly
    being knocked unconscious in a gun attack; (b) the finding at paragraph
    [33] that it was implausible that the  appellant  had  waited  for  his
    employer to return after discovering the  bombs;  (c)  the  finding  at
    paragraph [34] that if someone at ISIL was intent on killing him,  they
    would not have phoned up first to warn his uncle of this fact.

18. Given that Kirkuk was a contested area in  2015,  and  given  that  the
    Judge did not accept the respondent's case that Kirkuk City itself  was
    no longer a contested area, there is some force in the argument that it
    was  unreasonable  to  expect  the  appellant's  solicitors  to  obtain
    documentary confirmation from the named hospital that they had  treated
    the appellant in September 2015.  On the other  hand,  when  presenting
    his asylum claim, the appellant represented that he was in  touch  with
    his family, and that they had not had any problems in Kirkuk  since  he
    left.  The Judge also rejected the appellant's evidence that he was  no
    longer in contact with  his  family.   Therefore  the  family  were  an
    alternative  potential  source  for   documentary   evidence   of   the
    appellant's attendance at the hospital pursuant to an attack on him  in
    September 2015.

19. In paragraph [33], the Judge set out a number of respects in  which  he
    considered the appellant's case with regard to bombs (plural)  was  not
    plausible.  I consider that it was  open  to  the  Judge  to  find  the
    appellant's evidence about what happened  implausible,  and  hence  not
    credible, for the reasons which he gave.  From the appellant's account,
    the incident in question did not take place at a  time  when  ISIL  had
    control over the city.  On the face of it, it was at a stage when  ISIL
    terrorists were attempting to infiltrate the city, and  were  operating
    under conditions of secrecy.  Against this background, it was  open  to
    the Judge to find that it would be "an odd  thing"  for  terrorists  to
    leave boxes containing bombs with someone who was not a part  of  their
    group (i.e. the appellant),  in  circumstances  where  the  boxes  were
    easily opened; and, absent a warning, the employee was likely  to  make
    the  innocent  assumption  that  the  boxes  were  connected  with  his
    employer's business as the operator  of  a  car  repair  workshop,  and
    therefore there was no good reason not to open them.

20. It was open to the Judge to find incredible the proposition that,  upon
    discovering a number of bombs in the boxes, the appellant did not alert
    the police, or telephone his father for advice, or leave the  building,
    or seek to alert bystanders of the danger.

21. Mr Mukherjee submits that the Judge was being  inconsistent  in  taking
    this line, as at paragraph [36] he reminded himself that the  appellant
    was only 16 years old and that he would have gone where he was told to.
    However, as submitted by Mr Whitwell, there is no real inconsistency.

22. The appellant was not employed by the men who left the  boxes,  and  he
    was not a co-conspirator.  The appellant's evidence  was  that  he  had
    informed his family later, and after consulting his father  and  uncle,
    he had reported the matter to the police.  It was open to the Judge  to
    find not credible the proposition that he did not inform his family  of
    the situation immediately, rather than  waiting  for  his  employer  to
    return, and then pretending to his employer that he did not  know  that
    there were bombs in the boxes.

23. At paragraph [36], the Judge was  addressing  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant fleeing to the UK, rather than fleeing to  the  IKR.  It  was
    open to the Judge to hold that relocation to the IKR  (which  was  very
    close by) would have been  a  more  credible  response  by  the  adults
    looking after him than an overland and  overseas  journey  to  the  UK,
    which would have  involved  much  greater  expense  and  more  physical
    danger.

24. It was also open to the Judge to find that it was  not  plausible,  and
    hence not credible, that if ISIL had found the appellant at his uncle's
    farm in Perde, and wanted to kill him, they would  have  contacted  his
    uncle to inform him that this was what they proposed to  do  -  thereby
    giving the appellant the opportunity to escape.

25. The Judge began his analysis by identifying various respects  in  which
    he did not agree that  the  appellant's  account  was  inconsistent  or
    implausible. This demonstrates that the Judge approached  his  task  of
    assessing credibility fairly  and  conscientiously.   He  gave  anxious
    scrutiny to the appellant's claim, and he  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    accepting some aspects of  it,  but  rejecting  other  aspects  of  it.
    Since the upshot of his analysis was that overall the appellant was not
    a reliable witness, it was open to the Judge to find that the appellant
    was an economic migrant who had been sent by his family to the West  to
    improve his life chances,  rather  than  to  escape  persecution  or  a
    situation of internal armed conflict.

26. Ground 2 is that the Judge failed to apply the Country  Guidance  given
    in AA.  Mr Mukherjee pleads that in determining whether  the  appellant
    could relocate to the IKR, the Judge failed  to  consider  whether  the
    appellant could obtain assistance from family and friends in  the  IKR,
    because he made no finding that the appellant's family were in the IKR.
     He points out that there is no evidence that  the  appellant's  family
    have relocated to the IKR.  Therefore, he submits that  the  Judge  has
    not given adequate reasons for finding that the appellant would be able
    to obtain the CSID that he requires to be able to live in the IKR.

27. However, as was explored  in  oral  argument,  the  Judge  specifically
    rejected  the  appellant's  evidence  that  he   had   lost   all   his
    identification documents (paragraph 42) and he  rejected  his  evidence
    that he was not in possession of his CSID because the agent  had  taken
    it from him (paragraph 46).  Under the Country Guidance authority  that
    was applicable at the date of promulgation, it was not  necessary  that
    his family should be residing in the IKR.  All that  was  required  was
    that the appellant had a CSID or that he could obtain one.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 4 October 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

