
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06520/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                             |                                   |
|On 6 February 2019                 |On 28 February 2019                |
|                                          |


                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                                   LOT [H]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Holmes instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent: Mr C Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction. No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on 8 June 1989 and is a national of Namibia.

3. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge Tobin promulgated on 31 October 2018, which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal against a refusal of a refugee claim dated 4 May 2018
   on all grounds.

Grounds of Appeal

4. Mr Holmes relied upon 4 grounds of appeal in relation  to  which  First-
   tier Tribunal Judge Blundell had granted permission.

    a) Ground 1 that the Judge had gone behind  a  concession  made  by  the
       Respondent (paragraph 44-50 of the refusal letter) that the Appellant
       was a gay man  and  had  been  attacked  by  family  members  on  two
       occasions because of his sexuality in August 2016 and April 2017.


    b) Ground 2 that the Judge fled to apply the Refugee Convention that  he
       repeatedly referred to the Appellant only being persecuted by  family
       members as if to suggest that this  was  therefore  not  persecution.
       Thus the Judge failed to adequately  consider  state  protection  and
       internal relocation.


    c) Ground 3 that the Judge failed to adequately engage with  the  expert
       report in particular in relation to the likely attitude of the  state
       and internal relocation.


    d) Ground 4 that the Judge made adverse findings about  the  actions  of
       the Appellants family at paragraphs 23  and  28  and  the  police  at
       paragraph 19 while providing no basis for these findings.


5. Mr Holmes and Mr Bates had an opportunity to discuss the case before  it
   was called on. Mr Bates made clear that he conceded that errors  of  law
   were made out on all of the grounds.

Finding on Material Error

6. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made material errors of law.

7. The refusal letter explicitly  conceded  that  the  Appellant  had  been
   'attacked in Namibia because of your sexual orientation' as a gay man by
   family members on two occasions.  The Judge however while recoding  this
   concession at paragraph 5 of the decision went on at paragraphs 19-23 of
   the findings to consider these incidents and rejected his claim that  he
   was attacked by family members in the way he describes. While the  Judge
   states at paragraph 26 that he rejected only one of  the  two  incidents
   that is far from clear in the findings as both appear  to  be  rejected.
   There is nothing to suggest that  the  Respondent  indicated  that  this
   concession was withdrawn at the hearing and while the  Tribunal  is  not
   obliged to accept the concession, it must indicate to the  parties  that
   it regards the concession as  wrongly  made  and  give  the  parties  an
   opportunity to address the matter and there is no indication  that  this
   was  done.  The  failure  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  follow  the
   concession without alerting the  parties  of  his  intention  to  do  so
   constitutes a clear error of law. This error I consider to  be  material
   since had the Tribunal conducted this exercise the  outcome  could  have
   been different. That in my view is the correct test to apply.

8. Mr Bates properly conceded that having accepted that the Appellant was a
   victim of persecution at the hands of his family  the  key  issues  were
   sufficiency of protection and internal relocation neither of  which  are
   not addressed by the Judge and in particular he fails to engage with the
   expert report in so far as it addresses those issues.

9. I therefore found that errors of law have been established and that  the
   Judge's determination  cannot  stand  and  must  be  set  aside  in  its
   entirety. All matters to be redetermined afresh.

10. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
   of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be remitted to the First Tier
   Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:
       (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
       First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
       party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal;
       or

       (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
       necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
       such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is
       appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

11. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
   the Appellant did not have a fair hearing due to the failure  to  follow
   concessions. In this case none of the findings of fact are to stand  and
   the matter will be a complete re hearing.

12. I consequently remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting
   at Manchester to be heard on a date to be fixed, before me.




   Signed                                                              Date
   6.2.2019
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell





















