
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/06290/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 30 April 2018                          |On 1 May 2018                      |
|                                          |                                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Ms Pickering, Counsel
For the respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.


Introduction

   1. I have anonymised the appellant's name because this decision refers to
      his international protection claim.


   2. This is an appeal by the appellant, a citizen of  Somalia,  against  a
      decision of the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') dated 11 September 2017 in
      which it dismissed his asylum appeal.
   3. The appellant fears that upon return to Somalia he will  be  subjected
      to ill-treatment by Al-Shabab given his claimed  history:  his  father
      was killed by the group and the appellant escaped from them.  The  FTT
      did not accept the appellant's credibility and gave comprehensive  and
      detailed reasons for this when dismissing his appeal.

   4. In a decision dated 11 January 2018 the Upper Tribunal ('UT')  granted
      permission to appeal observing  it  to  be  arguable  that  the  FTT's
      findings did not take account  of  the  background  material  and  the
      conclusions reached in respect of the screening  interview  and  entry
      clearance application were inadequately  reasoned.   The  UT  made  it
      clear that permission to appeal was granted in  relation  to  all  the
      grounds of appeal.  In a rule  24  notice  dated  5  March  2018,  the
      respondent opposed the appeal.


   5. The matter now comes before me to determine whether the  FTT  decision
      contains an error of law, and if so whether it should be set aside.


Hearing

   6. At the beginning of the hearing, upon  my  indication  of  provisional
      views, Ms Petterson distanced herself from  the  rule  24  notice  and
      agreed that the decision needs to be remade in its entirety.  She  was
      entirely correct to do so for the reasons I set out below.    That  is
      sufficient to dispose of issue.


   7. Both representatives agreed that the error of law  is  such  that  the
      decision needs to be remade completely.  I had regard to para  7.2  of
      the relevant Senior President's Practice Statement and the nature  and
      extent of the factual findings required in remaking the decision,  and
      I decided that this is an appropriate case to remit to the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


Error of law discussion

   8. There are three broad strands  to  the  grounds  of  appeal,  which  I
      address in turn.

Approach to evidence on the appellant's clan

   9. The FTT rejected the appellant's claim to be  a  member  of  the  Arab
      Salah clan for mainly two reasons.  Each of the  reasons  provided  is
      problematic and impugns the overall finding on the appellant's claimed
      clan membership.


  10. First, the  observation  that  the  very  limited  country  background
      evidence available on this clan "militates  against"  the  appellant's
      claim to be a member is irrational and  fails  to  take  into  account
      relevant matters. The FTT appears to conclude that the clan are mostly
      to be found in Galkayo.  This is based upon research undertaken by the
      Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada ('IRB')  dated  October  2001.
      The FTT has failed to take into account  the  huge  changes  in  every
      aspect of Somalian society since that time as a result  of  the  civil
      war and its consequences and no acknowledgment has been given  to  the
      general  movement  of  people  to  the  capital  city  Mogadishu.   In
      addition, it is very difficult to see how it could be  said  that  the
      appellant's claim to come from Mogadishu and not the area that most of
      his clan are to be found can be said  to  not  be  reasonably  likely,
      given the limited information in  the  public  domain  concerning  the
      clan.


  11. Second, the FTT appears to assume that because there is an absence  of
      evidence that the Arab Salah is a minority clan, it must  follow  that
      it is not.  This misapplies the relevant standard of proof.  There was
      no evidence before the FTT that the clan was a  minority  or  majority
      clan.  The appellant's own consistent evidence  is  that  he  and  his
      family members are from a minority clan.  Given how small and scarcely
      known the clan is from the  country  information  available,  and  the
      absence of any evidence to support the  possibility  that  this  small
      mostly unheard of clan could be a majority clan, it  is  difficult  to
      see how it could be anything other than a  minority  clan,  given  the
      applicable low standard of proof.

Screening interview

  12. The FTT has drawn adverse inferences from the appellant's responses at
      the screening interview ('SI'), which took place on  the  day  of  his
      arrival in the UK on 19 December 2016.  The reasons provided for these
      are inadequate, inaccurate and fail  to  take  relevant  matters  into
      account.  More generally, the FTT has completely failed to  take  into
      account the likely difficulties faced by the appellant at an interview
      held almost immediately upon arrival after a long and arduous  journey
      - see the helpful observations in YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004]  UKIAT
      00145.  At 3.3 of the SI the appellant clearly described  having  left
      Somalia by road two weeks ago before flying from Ethiopia via  another
      country and arriving in the UK on the morning of the SI.


  13. More specifically, the FTT has identified and drawn adverse inferences
      from three issues in which the appellant is said to have  contradicted
      himself at the SI.  A careful scrutiny of the SI and later substantive
      asylum interview ('AI'), which took place on 21 April 2017,  makes  it
      clear that these cannot rationally be described as  contradictions  or
      discrepancies.  First, the FTT has found that the appellant  at  first
      "said" that his father died on 4 September 2015 but then changed  this
      to 4 December 2015, before saying again that it  was  the  first  date
      provided.  However, when the different dates were put to the appellant
      at part 7 of the SI he said this "I kept saying September 4th.  It was
      4th September".  In effect the appellant was explaining that he  never
      said "December".  This is supported by his answers at Qs 72 and 73  of
      the AI in which he explained clearly that he knew the  date  and  time
      his father was killed "very well".   After  all,  he  claimed  he  was
      present when his father was murdered in front of  him.   In  addition,
      the appellant explained that he maintained it was the  9th  month  and
      that the interpreter must  have  misheard  him  given  the  background
      noise.  Such interviews often take place with an interpreter over  the
      phone and it is difficult to see  why  the  FTT  did  not  accept  the
      appellant's apparently credible explanation that there was  a  mistake
      due to a misunderstanding, which was very soon corrected.


  14. Second, the FTT considered that the appellant  "originally  gave"  the
      immigration officer a  different  name  and  date  of  birth  and  "no
      explanation has been given by him for this discrepancy".   As  pointed
      out in the grounds of appeal,  this  finding  is  unsupported  by  any
      evidence.  Rather, when the SI is read as a  whole,  it  appears  that
      certain sections were completed  prior  to  the  SI  itself  and  this
      information was  typed  in.   The  appellant  explained  that  he  had
      previously used the name that was typed but his true name and date  of
      birth was provided immediately,  hence  at  1.1  the  typed  name  was
      crossed out and replaced with his true name.  It  is  noteworthy  that
      this point was not taken against the appellant's in  the  respondent's
      decision letter or apparently put at the hearing.

  15. The appellant clearly explained right at the beginning of the AI  that
      the SI inaccurately stated that he did not have a wife  and  children.
      The FTT  considered  the  appellant's  explanations  for  this  to  be
      different, yet the appellant  has  consistently  said  that  when  his
      solicitor read the SI back to him, he realised there  was  a  mistake,
      and corrected this promptly.

Plausibility

  16. The FTT appears to have considered the following  to  be  implausible:
      the appellant's father would be known to and recognised  by  Al-Shabab
      when they were outside his home area; the appellant's father  did  not
      request assistance from the international forces when threatened by Al-
      Shabab; the appellant's  escape  from  a  moving  vehicle  when  being
      transported  by  Al-Shabab.   The   FTT   predicated   these   adverse
      credibility findings on a conclusion that the described  behaviour  in
      the context of Somalia is implausible.  No reasons  are  provided  for
      this.  No attempt has been made to reconcile  this  finding  with  the
      country background evidence regarding the power held by  Al-Shabab  at
      the time.


  17. In KB & AH (credibility-structured approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT  491
      (IAC)  the  Tribunal  recently  considered   the   approach   to   the
      'credibility indicators' in the  respondent's  policy  and  said  this
      regarding the 'plausibility indicator':


                 "28. Second, Mr Wilding's concession rests the respondent's
                 case on [lack of] plausibility, an indicator or factor that
                 has been seen by the Tribunal and the courts - as is indeed
                 reflected in this same Instruction - as one that,  although
                 in itself valid, requires a certain degree  of  caution  in
                 its application. Thus in HK v Secretary of  State  for  the
                 Home Department [2006] EWCA  Civ  1037  case  at  [28]-[30]
                 Neuberger LJ stated:


                       "28. Further, in many asylum cases, some, even  most,
                       of the appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely
                       but that  does  not  mean  that  it  is  untrue.  The
                       ingredients of the story, and the story as  a  whole,
                       have to be considered against the  available  country
                       evidence and  reliable  expert  evidence,  and  other
                       familiar factors, such as consistency with  what  the
                       appellant has said before,  and  with  other  factual
                       evidence (where there is any).


                       29.  Inherent probability, which may  be  helpful  in
                       many domestic cases,  can  be  a  dangerous,  even  a
                       wholly inappropriate,  factor  to  rely  on  in  some
                       asylum cases. Much of the evidence will be  referable
                       to societies with customs and circumstances which are
                       very different from those of which the members of the
                       fact-finding tribunal  have  any  (even  second-hand)
                       experience. Indeed, it is  likely  that  the  country
                       which an asylum-seeker has  left  will  be  suffering
                       from the sort of problems and dislocations with which
                       the  overwhelming  majority  of  residents  of   this
                       country will be wholly  unfamiliar. The point is well
                       made in Hathaway on Law of Refugee Status  (1991)  at
                       page 81:


                       'In assessing the general human  rights  information,
                       decision-makers must constantly be on guard to  avoid
                       implicitly recharacterizing the nature  of  the  risk
                       based on their own perceptions of reasonability."


                       30. Inherent improbability in the context  of  asylum
                       cases was discussed at some length by Lord Brodie  in
                       Awala -v- Secretary  of  State  [2005]  CSOH  73.  At
                       paragraph 22, he pointed out that it was "not  proper
                       to reject an applicant's account merely on the  basis
                       that it is not credible or not plausible. To say that
                       an applicant's account is not credible is to state  a
                       conclusion" (emphasis added).  At  paragraph  24,  he
                       said  that  rejection  of  a  story  on  grounds   of
                       implausibility must  be  done  "on  reasonably  drawn
                       inferences  and   not   simply   on   conjecture   or
                       speculation". He went on to emphasise, as did Pill LJ
                       in Ghaisari, the entitlement of  the  fact-finder  to
                       rely "on his common  sense  and  his  ability,  as  a
                       practical and informed person, to identify what is or
                       is not plausible". However, he accepted  that  "there
                       will  be  cases  where  actions  which   may   appear
                       implausible if judged by...Scottish standards,  might
                       be plausible when considered within  the  context  of
                       the applicant's social and cultural background".


                 29. Reflecting much the same caution,  paragraph  5.6.4  of
                 this Home Office Instruction invokes, inter alia, what  was
                 said in Y v Secretary of State [2006] EWCA Civ 1223:


                       "[I]n  [Y]  the  Court  of  Appeal  stated  that   in
                       regarding an account as incredible the decision-maker
                       must take care not to do so merely because  it  would
                       not be plausible if it had happened in the UK. Again,
                       underlying factors may well  lead  to  behaviour  and
                       responses on the  part  of  the  claimant  which  run
                       counter to what would be expected."


                 30. The reference by Neuberger LJ at [28] of HK to the need
                 to consider factors  related  to  plausibility  along  with
                 "other familiar factors... such  as  consistency"  is  also
                 illustrative  of  the  need  to  avoid  basing  credibility
                 assessment on just one indicator. We would  add  that  even
                 when focusing just on plausibility, it  is  not  a  concept
                 with  clear  edges.  Not  only  may  there  be  degrees  of
                 (im)plausibility, but sometimes an  aspect  of  an  account
                 that may be implausible in one respect may be plausible  in
                 another.


                 31. It seems to us that the indicators  identified  in  the
                 Home  Office  Instruction  (which  can  be  summarised   as
                 comprising sufficiency  of  detail;  internal  consistency;
                 external consistency; and plausibility) provide  a  helpful
                 framework within which to conduct a credibility assessment.
                 They facilitate a more  structured  approach  apt  to  help
                 judges avoid the temptation to look at the  evidence  in  a
                 one-dimensional way or to focus in an ad hoc way solely  on
                 whichever  indicator  or   factor   appears   foremost   or
                 opportune."


  18. When the decision is read as a whole, the FTT impermissibly speculated
      in order to reach the conclusion that there was a "very high degree of
      implausibility" in the appellant's claims.  In addition, the  FTT  has
      failed to take into account  the  detail  provided  by  the  appellant
      regarding his escape.  He believed he was being  taken  to  his  death
      (see Q84 of the AI) and for that reason was able to take the  risk  of
      jumping from the moving vehicle and running 'for his life'.


  19. The above errors of law have infected the credibility  findings  made,
      such it is agreed that the decision needs to be remade de novo.



Decision

  20. The First-tier Tribunal  decision  contains  an  error  of  law.   Its
      decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      21. The appeal shall be  remade  by  a  judge  other  than  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Cope in the First-tier Tribunal de novo.


Signed:
Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
30 April 2018
