
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06567/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House by Skype for Business    |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 6 October 2020                             |On 29 October 2020           |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT
                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     AA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Smyth, Kesar & Co Solicitors (Bromley)


                            DECISION AND REASONS






A. INTRODUCTION

 1. This is another case that illustrates what can go wrong when a  judge's
    decision records the opposite result to that which she plainly reached,
    in the light of the reasoning set out in the body of that decision.

 2. Having heard the protection and human rights appeal of the appellant, a
    citizen  of  Afghanistan  born  on  1  January  2001,   Judge   Herlihy
    promulgated a decision in  January  2019,  dismissing  the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum and humanitarian protection  grounds.   Judge  Herlihy
    did not find the appellant's account of his experiences in  Afghanistan
    to be credible.  She concluded that he would not face a  real  risk  of
    serious harm, if returned to Afghanistan.  He would not be at real risk
    of violation of Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.  So far as Article 8  was
    concerned, Judge Herlihy saw "no reason why  his  private  life  cannot
    continue in all its essential elements in Afghanistan".   At  paragraph
    33 of her decision, she concluded that removing the appellant would  be
    "proportionate under Article 8(2) of the ECHR.

 3. In her "Summary of Decisions", Judge Herlihy wrote as follows:-

         "34. I dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

         35.  I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

         36.  I allow the appeal on human rights grounds."

 4. Almost immediately after promulgating her  decision,  it  appears  that
    Judge Herlihy realised that she had written "allow"  in  paragraph  36,
    when she meant to write "dismiss".  Another decision was,  accordingly,
    quickly promulgated, identical in all respects save for that change.

 5. The first of Judge Herlihy's decisions  appears  to  have  reached  the
    Secretary of State some time before the second one.  The  Secretary  of
    State filed  an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  against  the
    decision allowing the appeal on human rights grounds.  Upon receipt  of
    the second determination, however, the Secretary of State applied on 13
    February 2019 to withdraw her application for permission in respect  of
    the first of the decisions.



B.  THE REVIEW AND SET ASIDE DECISIONS OF RESIDENT JUDGE APPLEYARD

 6. The matter came before Resident Judge Appleyard on 26 February 2019. He
    refused to allow the Secretary of State to withdraw her application for
    permission to appeal in respect of  the  first  decision.   Relying  on
    Katsonga v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  ("Slip  Rule":
    FtT's general powers: Zimbabwe) [2016] UKUT 228 (IAC),  Resident  Judge
    Appleyard considered that Judge Herlihy was functus officio, as soon as
    she had sent out the first  decision,  allowing  the  appeal  on  human
    rights grounds but otherwise dismissing it.  Accordingly, Judge Herlihy
    "had no  jurisdiction  to  make  a  second  determination.   The  first
    determination is the only valid determination".

 7. What, then, to do about the first decision?   At  paragraph  5  of  his
    notice, Resident Judge Appleyard noted that, pursuant to rule 34(1)  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, he had first to consider  whether  to  review  the
    decision in accordance with rule 35.

 8. Rule 34(1) provides as follows:-

         "(1) On receiving an  application  for  permission  to  appeal  the
             Tribunal must first consider whether to review the decision in
             accordance with rule 35."

 9. Rule 35 reads as follows-:

         "Review of a decision

         (1)  The Tribunal may only undertake a review of a decision-

             (a)  pursuant  to  rule  34  (review  on  an  application  for
                  permission to appeal); and

             (b)  if it is satisfied that there was an error of law in  the
                  decision.

         (2)  The Tribunal must notify the parties in writing of the outcome
             of any review, and of any right of appeal in relation  to  the
             outcome.

         (3)  If the Tribunal takes any action in  relation  to  a  decision
             following  a  review  without  first  giving  every  party  an
             opportunity to make representations-

             (a)  the notice under paragraph (2) must state that any  party
                  that did not have an opportunity to  make  representations
                  may apply for such action to be set aside; and

             (b)  the Tribunal may regard the review as incomplete and  act
                  accordingly."

10. At paragraph 7 of his notice, Resident Judge Appleyard stated  that  he
    had reviewed the decision and reasons of Judge Herlihy, promulgated  by
    post on 28 January 2019.  Subject to consultation with the parties,  he
    proposed "to set aside that determination under Rule 35 and  order  the
    relevant proceedings to be dealt with  again  by  that  Tribunal".   At
    paragraph 8, Resident Judge Appleyard said that  "I  do  so  because  I
    consider that the First-tier Tribunal's Decision and Reasons contains a
    material error of law in  that  the  reasons  clearly  show  the  Judge
    intended to dismiss the appeal on all grounds, but the decision allowed
    the appeal under human rights grounds".

11. At paragraph 9 of the notice, Resident Judge  Appleyard  observed  that
    "Katsonga is clear that the Tribunal cannot use Rule 31 to reverse  the
    effect of the decision".   Rule  31  of  the  2014  Rules  enables  the
    Tribunal  at  any  time  to  correct  any  clerical  mistake  or  other
    accidental slip or omission in a decision, direction  or  any  document
    produced by it.  In Katsonga, the Upper Tribunal concluded that, in the
    case of an error of the kind with which we are here concerned, rule  31
    could not be employed to substitute (in our case) "dismiss" for "allow"
    in paragraph 36 of Judge Herlihy's decision.  That would be  to  change
    the effect of her decision, rather than correcting a  clerical  mistake
    or slip.

12.  As  matters  stood  in  February  2019,  Resident  Judge   Appleyard's
    conclusion on that issue is readily understandable.  Later  that  year,
    however, doubt was thrown upon Katsonga by the Court of  Appeal  in  AS
    (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 208.  In  the  light  of  AS,  the
    Upper Tribunal, in MH (review; slip rule; church witnesses) Iran [2020]
    UKUT 00125 held that a decision which contains a  clerical  mistake  or
    other accidental slip or omission may be corrected  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal under rule 31; and that this  included  situations  where  the
    decision stated an outcome which was clearly at odds with the intention
    of the judge.  Shortly thereafter, the Court of Appeal reached the same
    conclusion in Devani v SSHD [2020] EWCA Civ 612.

13. On 1 April 2019, Resident Judge Appleyard issued the following-:

         "DECISION TO SET ASIDE

          1. Neither party has made  representations  following  my  Notice
             dated 26 February 2019 and issued on 11 March 2019.

          2. For the reasons set out in that Notice and pursuant to rule 35
             of the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration
             and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014 I hereby set  aside  the  first
             determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Herlihy  issued  on
             28 January 2019 of the First-tier  Tribunal,  that  being  the
             only valid determination in this appeal, and direct  that  the
             relevant proceedings be dealt with again by that Tribunal.

          3. The appeal is to be listed for a fresh hearing at Taylor House
             before any Judge other than Judge Herlihy."




C.  THE DECISION OF JUDGE HERBERT OBE

14. On 19 September 2019, the appellant's  appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herbert  OBE.   Ms  White  of  Counsel  represented  the
    appellant.  Mr Symes was the Presenting Officer.   The  appellant  gave
    evidence through an interpreter.

15. Judge Herbert noted the appellant's claim to be the son  of  a  Taliban
    fighter, who had been killed, following which the Taliban  began  using
    the family home as a safe house for their weapons.  The  Afghan  police
    believed the appellant also was a Taliban fighter and he therefore left
    Afghanistan in order to seek international protection.   The  appellant
    made his way to the  United  Kingdom  via  Turkey,  Bulgaria,  Hungary,
    Austria and France.  He told Judge Herbert he was no  longer  in  touch
    with his family in Afghanistan.

16. At paragraph 22 of Judge Herbert's decision we find the following:-

         "22. The HOPO relied upon the finding of facts made by the previous
             immigration Judge and therefore didn't challenge  any  of  the
             appellant's evidence as  that  was  found  to  be  lacking  in
             credibility."

17. Judge Herbert recorded that the appellant told him he had never learned
    to read or write and only attended school in a mosque in order to learn
    the Quran in Arabic.  He described living conditions in his  household,
    including that a "cow lived indoors during the winter  months  and  was
    fed with  hay  which  was  also  stored  there"  (paragraph  26).   The
    appellant gave evidence to Judge Herbert about the storing of  arms  by
    the Taliban.

18. At paragraphs 33 to 35, Judge Herbert considered the witness  statement
    of Julia Fagg, the appellant's social worker.  She noted  that  it  had
    taken a long time for an asylum decision to be made and this had been a
    stressful period for the appellant, who was otherwise progressing  well
    with his studies.  The closer he got to his appeal  hearing,  the  more
    anxious and worried the appellant was becoming, according to Ms Fagg.

19. Beginning at paragraph 36, Judge Herbert  set  out  the  case  for  the
    respondent, as recorded in the letter of decision.

20. So far as  the  Secretary  of  State's  position  at  the  hearing  was
    concerned, Judge Herbert recorded the Presenting Officer's  submissions
    were "that a lengthy decision by Judge Halhy (sic) ought to be followed
    on the principles of Devaseelam (sic) whereby the  starting  point  for
    any factual findings subsequently is the initial starting point for  an
    immigration Judges (sic) finding of facts".

21. Beginning at paragraph 58, Judge Herbert (in a decision that -  as  can
    already be seen - would not appear to have  been  carefully  proofread)
    observed that Judge Herlihy had made  only  passing  reference  to  the
    appellant's vulnerability, given that he was a child  at  the  date  he
    sought asylum.  Judge Herbert considered that Judge Herlihy  had  given
    little consideration to the fact that the appellant was a child when he
    made his claim to the Secretary of  State.   Judge  Herbert  considered
    that  regard  to  the  appellant's  age  must  be  had  in  determining
    credibility (paragraph 39).

22. At paragraph 60, it appears Judge  Herbert  also  considered  that  the
    appellant's illiteracy may have  had  some  effect  upon  the  latter's
    ability to give a coherent or consistent account  of  his  experiences.
    Judge Herbert also thought that the appellant's "very  basic  level  of
    education ... must have had a significant influence on his  ability  to
    recount events accurately" (paragraph 61).

23. At paragraph 65, Judge Herbert noted that  "various  Immigration  Judge
    training  courses  I  have  attended  have  had  several  psychologists
    emphasize that inconsistencies in the evidence can be the hallmark of a
    truthful account for many asylum seekers who have experienced traumatic
    events.  I bear that advice in mind in this decision" (paragraph 65).

24. At paragraph 66,  Judge  Herbert  took  into  account  Judge  Herlihy's
    adverse credibility findings but found that the  inconsistencies  which
    she had identified in the appellant's evidence (such as the  number  of
    times the appellant had attended bomb  making  observations)  were  not
    such as to undermine the appellant's credibility, bearing in  mind  the
    factors that Judge Herbert had earlier identified.

25. At paragraph 76, Judge Herbert set out the reasons why he was unable to
    adopt the conclusions  of  Judge  Herlihy.   Judge  Herbert  took  into
    account  the  appellant's  social  worker's  evidence,  regarding   the
    appellant's anxiety.  Judge Herbert also took account of the fact  that
    the appellant's experiences in Afghanistan would have been those  of  a
    child below the age of 14.  Witnessing his  father's  involvement  with
    the Taliban and the storing and use of weapons "must have been a  cause
    of anxiety".  The appellant's lack of  education  was  of  significance
    when assessing his credibility.

26. Having reminded himself at paragraph 78 of the burden and  standard  of
    proof, beginning at paragraph 79 under the heading "My Finding of Facts
    [and] Law Relating to this Appeal", Judge Herbert set out  his  reasons
    for differing from the credibility assessment  of  Judge  Herlihy.   He
    found the central core of  the  appellant's  account  to  be  credible.
    Judge Herbert had adopted a child-sensitive approach to  the  evidence.
    He had regard  to  the  Secretary  of  State's  Policy  Instruction  on
    Assessing Credibility and Refugee Status,  which  stated  that  a  true
    account was not always detailed and consistent in every detail.

27. At paragraph 85, Judge Herbert found that "this 16 year old  boy  would
    not be able to provide the details of his father's political activities
    as  an  illiterate  farm   worker's   son".    On   the   other   hand,
    notwithstanding his age, Judge Herbert found at paragraph 86  that  the
    appellant had given a detailed account of  his  father,  including  the
    father taking the appellant to a Taliban base to view bombs being made,
    as well as of the events following his father's death.

28. At paragraph 87, Judge Herbert noted that although  the  appellant  had
    mentioned for the first time in evidence before him that  weapons  were
    wrapped in plastic and hidden in the store where  the  cow  shared  the
    compound, nevertheless "this has a ring of truth about it.  This was an
    indirect answer to a  detailed  question  I  asked  and  there  was  no
    hesitation in the answers being given".  Given that family shared their
    house with a cow during the winter months and kept hay there  for  that
    purpose, Judge Herbert considered that it was "entirely plausible  that
    both his father and the Taliban  may  have  stored  weapons  there  and
    covered them in plastic".

29. At paragraphs 89  and  90,  Judge  Herbert  found  that  there  was  no
    inconsistency as to whether the appellant's father made bombs  for  the
    Taliban and fought for them; nor that the appellant had lost his mobile
    phone in Iran.

30. At paragraph 91, Judge Herbert found that there was objective  evidence
    that one of the commanders in the appellant's district  in  Afghanistan
    was well-known "and the appellant did correctly name this individual as
    [ML]".

31. At paragraph 92, Judge Herbert gave his reasons why  he  placed  little
    weight on the statement of November 2017, as it was unclear whether  an
    interpreter had been used and the form in question had not been  signed
    by  the  appellant.   Accordingly,  it   was   wrong   to   rely   upon
    inconsistencies in that aspect of the appellant's evidence.

32. At paragraph 95, Judge Herbert explained why  he  differed  from  Judge
    Herlihy as to whether it was implausible that boys of  the  appellant's
    age were being recruited as Taliban fighters.  At paragraph  96,  Judge
    Herbert considered that the "detailed level of evidence" given  by  the
    appellant  was  "impressive".   He  had  clearly  been  a  child   when
    interviewed and was "seeking to recall events which  occurred  when  he
    was less than 14 years of age and sometimes considerably before that".

33. Having made those findings of fact, Judge Herbert considered that there
    would be a well-founded fear of persecution or  serious  harm,  if  the
    appellant were to return to his home area in Afghanistan.  It would not
    be reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate to  Kabul  "where  he
    has no direct  family  connection  waiting  to  collect  him  from  the
    airport",  with the result that he would be "subject to exploitation of
    one [sort] or another" (paragraph 108).

34. Judge Herbert  therefore  allowed  the  appeal  on  Refugee  Convention
    grounds.  He dismissed the appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds.
    He allowed it on human rights grounds (Articles 2, 3 and 8).



D.  THE SECRETARY OF STATE'S APPEAL

35. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  the  decision.
    Paragraphs 1 and 2 of the grounds say the following:-

         "1.  It is respectfully submitted that this Tribunal  exceeded  its
             remit.  The appeal had previously  been  decided  upon  in  an
             earlier Tribunal decision of 28/1/19.  That determination  had
             dismissed the asylum and HP claim,  and  erroneously,  allowed
             the appeal on human rights grounds.   The  challenge  to  this
             decision greed [sic] that the decision to allow the appeal  on
             human rights grounds had been a "slip  of  the  pen"  and  the
             determination was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with the
             findings preserved.  However,  this  newly  convened  Tribunal
             decided to open up the appeal for a complete  re-hearing.   It
             is respectfully submitted that it had no authority to do this.

         2.   The Tribunal relied upon Devaseelan.  However, it is submitted
             that the reasons for doing so, set out at paragraph 76 of  the
             determination, are flawed.  In effect the  Tribunal  has  used
             new evidence in the shape of a social worker  report,  to  re-
             open the  case.   However,  this  report  cannot  provide  any
             evidence on the relevant country conditions, the facts of  the
             appellant's claim and appeal or anything that was  not  before
             the previous Tribunal; it simply sets out an  account  of  the
             appellant's anxieties based on observation and the appellant's
             account.  The Social Worker could not, of  course,  have  made
             findings on credibility.  Instead,  this  Tribunal  has  taken
             upon itself the task of  re-investigating  the  same  evidence
             considered by  the  previous  Tribunal  and  reached  contrary
             findings.  It is submitted that this  is  not  an  appropriate
             approach."

36. The grounds also made reference to the fact that Eurodac matches showed
    the appellant had claimed asylum in Hungary and Austria.  Before us, Mr
    Lindsay did not seek to pursue this particular ground.



E.  DISCUSSION

37. Before we examine in detail what Resident Judge Appleyard  did,  it  is
    worth considering what he might have done.  As we have  seen,  Resident
    Judge Appleyard reviewed the decision under rule 35 of the 2014  Rules.
    Section 9(4) to (6) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007
    explains what the First-tier Tribunal may do in the  light  of  such  a
    review:-

         "9.  Review of decision of First-tier Tribunal

             ...

             (4)  Where the First-tier Tribunal has  under  subsection  (1)
                  reviewed a decision, the First-tier Tribunal  may  in  the
                  light of the review do any of the following-

                     (a)   correct accidental errors in the decision or  in
                           a record of the decision;

                     (b)   amend reasons given for the decision;

                     (c)   set the decision aside.

             (5)  Where under subsection  (4)(c)  the  First-tier  Tribunal
                  sets a decision aside, the First-tier Tribunal must either-



                      (a)  re-decide the matter concerned, or

                      (b)  refer that matter to the Upper Tribunal.

             (6)  Where a matter is referred to the  Upper  Tribunal  under
                  subsection (5)(b), the Upper Tribunal must  re-decide  the
                  matter."

38. In the present context, it is worth highlighting section 9(4)(a), which
    gives the power to correct accidental errors in the decision  or  in  a
    record of the decision.  As we have seen, at the time that he  reviewed
    and set aside Judge Herlihy's decision, Resident Judge Appleyard was of
    the view that the "slip rule" in rule 31 of  the  2014  Rules  was  not
    available to enable him (or any other Judge of the First-tier Tribunal)
    to substitute "dismiss" for "allow" in paragraph 36 of Judge  Herlihy's
    decision.  It is, however, moot whether section 9(4)(a) of the 2007 Act
    has a wider ambit  than  rule  31  and  comparable  provisions  of  the
    procedure rules of other tribunal Chambers.   Since  we  did  not  hear
    argument on this issue, we prefer not to express a concluded view.

39. Given that rule 35 of the 2014 Rules permits a review to be  undertaken
    only when the First-tier Tribunal is satisfied that there was an  error
    of law in the decision, not merely that there was  an  arguable  error,
    one can understand why Resident Judge Appleyard felt compelled  to  set
    Judge Herlihy's decision aside.  On the basis of Katsonga, it  was  not
    possible to amend paragraph 37 under the powers of rule  31.   Resident
    Judge Appleyard may well have concluded that the  power  of  correction
    under section 9(4)(a) could not be construed more widely than rule  31.
    He was, therefore, left with no option but to set  the  decision  aside
    under section 9(4)(c).

40. What, though, did Resident Judge Appleyard mean when he proposed in his
    notice of 26 February 2019 that  the  determination  of  Judge  Herlihy
    should be "set aside" and "the  relevant  proceedings  ...  dealt  with
    again by [the First-tier] Tribunal"; and in his decision to  set  aside
    of 1 April 2019, where he directed "that the  relevant  proceedings  be
    dealt with again by that Tribunal" by means  of  "a  fresh  hearing  at
    Taylor House before any Judge other than Judge Herlihy"?

41. As we have seen, the Secretary of State considers that  Resident  Judge
    Appleyard was merely requiring the First-tier Tribunal, at or following
    the fresh hearing, to substitute a decision dismissing the  appellant's
    appeal on human rights grounds, by reference to the findings  of  Judge
    Herlihy, as set out in her  decision.   For  the  appellant,  Mr  Smyth
    submits that Resident  Judge  Appleyard's  meaning  was  clear:   Judge
    Herlihy's decision was being set aside in its entirety.  The  "relevant
    proceedings" were the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights
    grounds.  They needed to be "dealt with again".   That,  she  says,  is
    precisely what Judge Herbert proceeded to do.

42. We have no hesitation in concluding that Mr Smyth's  interpretation  is
    correct.  If Resident Judge Appleyard had intended what  the  Secretary
    of State submits, it is inconceivable that he would not have made  that
    position plain.  This is particularly so, given that  the  task  facing
    Judge Herbert, on the Secretary of  State's  construction,  would  have
    been a wholly unusual one.  On that construction, there would have been
    no justification for hearing any evidence.   Judge  Herbert  would,  in
    effect, have had to adopt the entirety of Judge Herlihy's reasoning  as
    his own and make a decision by reference only to  that  reasoning.   If
    this was what Resident Judge Appleyard intended,  it  is,  to  say  the
    least, hard to understand why he did not undertake that task himself.

43. On the face of his documents, Resident Judge Appleyard was,  therefore,
    setting aside Judge Herlihy's decision in its entirety.  His  direction
    that Judge Herlihy should not be the  judge  to  hear  the  appellant's
    appeal underscores this conclusion.

44. What this means is that the only  substantive  criticism  that  can  be
    levelled against Judge Herbert's decision is that he  had  no  need  to
    apply Devaseelan and justify  his  reasons  for  departing  from  Judge
    Herlihy's adverse credibility findings.   Her  decision  had  been  set
    aside and counted for nothing, other than  as  a  record  of  what  the
    appellant said in evidence on that occasion.

45. The fact that Judge  Herbert  considered  Devaseelan  required  him  to
    undertake the exercise he performed is not, however, a  material  error
    on his part.  Mr  Lindsay  criticised  paragraph  76,  in  which  Judge
    Herbert encapsulated his  reasons  for  not  adopting  Judge  Herlihy's
    conclusions.  That part of Judge Herbert's  decision,  however,  occurs
    before the part in which, beginning at paragraph 79, Judge Herbert  set
    out his findings of fact.  It is with those only that we are concerned.



46. As we have seen, Judge Herbert considered that significant weight  fell
    to be attached to the fact that the appellant was a minor, when he  had
    been interviewed by the Secretary of State; and that he was  only  some
    14 years old at the time of the alleged events in  Afghanistan.   Judge
    Herbert examined the evidence regarding  the  wrapping  of  weapons  in
    plastic and their being hidden in the hay kept for  the  family's  cow,
    concluding that this had the "ring of truth about it".  The appellant's
    account  was  not  incompatible  with  the  background  evidence.   The
    appellant was able to name a particular individual as one of the  local
    commanders of his district.  The inconsistencies regarding  the  number
    of times the appellant may have witnessed demonstrations of bomb making
    was not, in the event, significant, in Judge Herbert's view.

47. These were all findings that were open to Judge Herbert on the evidence
    before him.  The fact that another judge might have  reached  different
    conclusions is not an error of law on Judge Herbert's part.

48. Happily, there is no reason why a case of this kind should  ever  again
    reach the Upper Tribunal.  In the light of MH and Devani, the slip rule
    in rule 31 should be applied.  If Resident Judge Appleyard  were  today
    considering the Secretary of  State's  application  for  permission  to
    appeal against the decision of Judge Herlihy, he would invoke  rule  36
    of the 2014 Rules, so as to treat that application  as  an  application
    for correction under rule 31.  Resident  Judge  Appleyard  would  amend
    "allow" in paragraph 37 to  read  "dismiss".   The  corrected  decision
    would then be promulgated, giving rise to a right of the  appellant  to
    seek permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

49. Given the thrust of MH and Devani is that Judge Herlihy did not make an
    error of law by writing "allow" instead of "dismiss", it would now  not
    be possible for rule 35 to be employed.   As  we  have  seen,  rule  35
    depends upon there being an error of law,  in  order  to  activate  the
    process of review in section 9 of the 2007 Act.

50. If, for some other reason, section 9 were to be invoked, it is  in  our
    view plain that the power of correction in section 9(4)(a)  can  be  no
    narrower than the "slip rule" power in rule 31 of the  2014  Rules  (or
    other  comparable  rules  in  the  other  chambers  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  As we have already said, we must  leave  undecided  whether
    the scope of section 9(4)(a) is wider than such a "slip rule" power.



F.  DECISION

51. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of a point of law, such as to require that decision to be  set
    aside.  The Secretary of State's appeal is, accordingly, dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



                      Signed   Mr Justice Lane        Date: 26 October 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber

