
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06539/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 August 2019                    |On 3 September 2019                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                 Sofaine [Z]
                                     aka
                                   Ali [K]
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Alex Burrett of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Esen Tufan, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a foreign criminal who appeals with permission against
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal  against
    the respondent's decision to deport him to his country of origin.

 2. The appellant has been in the United Kingdom for about 19 years, on his
    account, but has never had leave to enter or remain. He is a citizen of
    Algeria.

Background

 3. The appellant's challenge to the respondent's decision  to  deport  him
    was made on Article 3 and Article 8  ECHR  grounds.   He  was  born  in
    Algeria in 1971 and is now 38 years old.  He carried out  his  military
    service in the 1990s and took  part  in,  and  saw,  'very  distressing
    actions'.  The appellant is a military deserter.

 4. He fled Algeria to Spain, where he worked on a farm  for  a  time.   He
    says he arrived in the United Kingdom in mid-January 2000 by ferry,  on
    a coach, on a false identity card.  He stayed at first with friends  in
    London, and later with friends in Lancing in Sussex.  He did not  claim
    asylum immediately:  his  friends  told  him  that  he  would  be  sent
    straight back to Algeria and he was afraid.   When  the  appellant  did
    claim asylum, in the false identity, he was moved from  London  to  bed
    and breakfast NASS accommodation in West Sussex, away from his  friends
    in Lancing.  The appellant was appeal rights exhausted in that name  on
    6 June 2001.

 5. The appellant made a further asylum claim in the name of  Sofiane  [Z],
    but the respondent did not accept that this  was  his  identity.    The
    respondent refused to treat the asylum claim in the [Z] identity  as  a
    paragraph 353 fresh claim.

 6. The appellant began to commit criminal offences. On 12 March  2000,  he
    was cautioned for shoplifting; on 29 June 2000,  he  was  convicted  of
    attempted theft from a person and received a community service order of
    120 hours.  On 30 July 2002 the appellant was convicted of robbery  and
    sentenced to 15  months'  imprisonment.   On  2  October  2002  he  was
    notified  of   liability   to   deportation   and   invited   to   make
    representations on human rights  grounds,  which  he  did,  citing  his
    mental health and medical issues under Article 3 ECHR.

 7. On 6 September 2003 he was cautioned for possession of cannabis,  which
    was then a Class B drug.  On 27 May 2003, he was  cautioned  again  for
    possession of cannabis, which was now a class C drug.  On 5 July  2008,
    the appellant  was  again  convicted  of  shoplifting  and  received  a
    conditional discharge of 12 months.

 8. On 18 December 2013, a deportation and refusal decision  was  made  but
    not served, as the respondent later accepted.  On 10  March  2016,  the
    respondent reviewed the file in the light of  all  information  in  the
    respondent's records. On 28 April 2016, a decision to deport was  made.
    It was served on 3 May 2016 and reserved at the appellant's request  on
    19 May 2016.  Further representations were received on 1 June 2017.

 9. By a letter dated 28 June 2017, the respondent refused  to  revoke  the
    deportation  order   and   decided   that   the   appellant's   medical
    circumstances did not reach the N v United Kingdom level and  that  his
    private life (no family  life  being  asserted)  was  not  such  as  to
    outweigh the public interest in removing him.  The respondent  was  not
    satisfied that there  were  any  very  compelling  circumstances  which
    outweighed the significant public interest in deporting him.

10. The respondent's decision carried an in-country right of appeal and  it
    is against this decision that the appellant appeals today.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11. It was accepted on behalf of the appellant that although he retained  a
    subjective fear of  persecution  or  serious  harm  by  reason  of  his
    desertion from the Algerian army, that risk was  not  objectively  well
    founded.

12. Ms Short, who appeared for the appellant, relied principally on Article
    3 ECHR and the harm which return to Algeria would cause  the  appellant
    by reason of his mental and physical health problems.

13. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard oral evidence from  the  appellant,
    taking into account  his  accepted  mental  health  difficulties.   The
    appellant's evidence was that he had no memory of the  details  of  the
    robbery for which he went to prison and that he  thought  that  at  the
    time, he was probably living on the streets.

14. Since being moved to Lancing in 2000/2001, he  had  begun  experiencing
    flashbacks and during  his  time  in  prison,  he  received  medication
    because he was suicidal and hearing voices.  When he left hospital, the
    appellant no longer had access to the medication  and  began  to  self-
    harm.  He thought (but could not be sure) that he had been hospitalised
    on at least four occasions by reason of his behaviour  and  his  mental
    health difficulties.  He told the First-tier Tribunal Judge that he had
    over 200 stitches on his body from self-harm injuries.

15. The appellant had not committed any criminal offences since  2008.   He
    lived a fairly isolated life, with very few friends.  He had learned  a
    little English but had acquired no vocational skills, nor had  he  been
    able to attend any classes or develop his education.  He  still  speaks
    Arabic, the language spoken in Algeria.

16. The appellant was receiving  significant  medication  (Olanzapine)  and
    support, which had been provided for some time.  He continued to have a
    subjective fear of return to Algeria, because he was  a  deserter.   He
    maintained that he would be detained and tortured.

17. The appellant had asked a friend to check the cost of Olanzapine on the
    internet.  He found that it was very expensive, about Dinar 3000 a box,
    and said that his brother, a security guard  in  Algeria,  only  earned
    Dinar 5000.   He had 5 brothers and 5 sisters in Algeria but said  that
    none of them could assist him financially or house him on return and he
    would be destitute.  There were statements from two of the  appellant's
    friends in the  United  Kingdom,  both  Algerian  nationals.  One  gave
    evidence.  There was also psychiatric evidence from Dr  Michael  Shortt
    and a country report from Ms Alison Pargeter.

18. In his conclusions, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  acknowledged  that
    this was in effect a  human  rights  appeal.  He  directed  himself  to
    consider the proportionality of any interference with  the  appellant's
    Article 3 ECHR rights  and  that  he  should  consider  the  difference
    between the appellant's circumstances in  the  United  Kingdom  and  in
    Algeria.  He found that it was 'probably not true' that  the  appellant
    had no contact with his vast extended family in Algeria.

19. The psychiatric report contained nothing which would be likely to cause
    the appellant to be estranged from his family.  There was no reason why
    the appellant could not receive the same medication, olanzapine, as  it
    was available in  Algeria.   His  post-traumatic  stress  disorder  was
    effectively controlled by  that  medication.   Although  mental  health
    provision in Algeria was less good, the Judge was  not  satisfied  that
    the appellant would be destitute on return.  He was not satisfied  that
    the Article 3 ECHR threshold was reached.

20. The Judge applied section 117B(6) of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 (as amended) and dismissed the  appeal.   No  anonymity
    direction was made or has been sought.

21. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

22. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford granted  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    basis that the First-tier Tribunal  had  arguably  failed  to  approach
    Article 3 ECHR correctly and that the self-direction at [33] was wrong;
    and that the Tribunal had failed properly to  engage  with  the  expert
    report  and  with  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  mental   health
    difficulties overall; and finally, that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    erred in the proportionality assessment made.

Rule 24 Reply

23. There was no Rule 24 Reply.

24. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Upper Tribunal hearing

25. For the respondent, Mr Tufan relied on KH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 1354 and PH  (Nigeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2019] EWCA Civ  1139.    On
    any view, the standard of 'no treatment' in N and D  was  not  reached.
    Even if Paposhvili were applicable (which it is not), the evidence  was
    not sufficient to establish a real risk of 'serious rapid  irreversible
    decline'.

26. For the appellant, Mr Burrett relied on his  grounds  of  appeal.   The
    grounds state that the medical  evidence  is  that  the  appellant  has
    'major cognitive deficits' and needs a full  community  care  services.
    He 'presents  with  a  very  psychotic  depression  and  symptomatology
    indicative of a  current  partial  syndrome  of  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder' and with an  'increased  risk  of  suicide'.   The  appellant
    contended that because of his poor mental health, he  was  at  risk  of
    destitution if returned to Algeria.   The  stigma  attached  to  mental
    illness there would mean that his family members would be unwilling  to
    support  him.   Mental  health  services  in  Algeria  were   'woefully
    inadequate' and the mentally ill were stigmatised.

27. The appellant challenged the First-tier  Tribunal's  self-direction  at
    [31] that it was for the respondent to show that interference with  his
    Article 3 ECHR rights was proportionate: while he  also  claimed  under
    Article 8, to  which  proportionality  did  apply,  Article  3  was  an
    unqualified right and  proportionality  was  not  relevant  if  it  was
    engaged. At [33], the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erroneously  directed
    himself to compare 'whether or not the appellant is better off in  this
    country' with what would be available from his large extended family in
    Algeria. Article 3 did not require a comparative approach and that  had
    expressly been rejected in N v the United Kingdom [2008] ECHR 453.

28. The Judge had also erred in the standard of proof applied to Article 3,
    finding that it was 'probably not  true'  that  the  appellant  had  no
    family ties, and that 'it is more likely than not that support would be
    found for the oldest sibling within the family'.

29. The grounds of appeal contend that no findings at  all  appear  in  the
    decision on the risk of stigmatisation and discrimination  in  Algeria,
    which the appellant contends reaches the persecutory threshold and that
    more weight should have been given to Ms Pargeter's conclusions in this
    respect.  The appellant also argues that his history of torture has not
    been taken into  account  and  that  there  are  no  findings  on  this
    question. He says that his evidence that  he  had  not  spoken  to  his
    family for a year and a half before the First-tier Tribunal hearing has
    been overlooked.

30. Finally, the grounds argue  that  Article  8  has  not  been  correctly
    approached and in particular,  that  the  appellant's  contention  that
    there would be serious obstacles to his reintegration  on  return  have
    not been considered.

31. In oral submissions Mr Burrett observed that KH  was  now  a  very  old
    decision.  The appellant was not an ordinary adult with  mental  health
    difficulties and exceptionality was pleaded.  There was a real risk  of
    degrading treatment and of stigma, as set out in Ms Pargeter's  report.
    There were no findings of fact regarding the risk on return to  Algeria
    in the decision.  He accepted  that  this  element  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision was not challenged in the grounds of appeal.

32. The appellant received support in the United  Kingdom  and  the  appeal
    should be allowed.

Analysis

33. It is plain from  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  that  the  Judge
    misdirected himself in  a  number  of  important  ways.   There  is  no
    question of proportionality in the assessment of  an  Article  3  risk:
    Article 3 is  unqualified,  unlike  Article  8  ECHR.   In  approaching
    Article 8 ECHR, the Judge was required to look not at section  117B(6),
    but at section 117C, because this appellant is a foreign criminal.

34. In addition, in finding that the appellant was 'probably'  not  telling
    the truth about contact with his family in Algeria, it is arguable that
    he applied the wrong standard  of  proof,  but  having  regard  to  the
    appellant's own evidence about his brother's job and pay, and the  lack
    of any evidence of estrangement, it seems likely that even applying the
    lower standard, and directing himself correctly, the Judge  would  have
    reached a similar conclusion.

35. Ms Pargeter's country evidence is not disputed to the extent  that  she
    finds there to be no real risk of persecutory treatment or serious harm
    arising from the appellant's desertion (see 3.12  on  page  16  of  the
    bundle).  As regards mental  health  services,  at  section  4  of  her
    report, Ms Pargeter says that  Algeria  has  a  serious  mental  health
    population, with 1.5 million affected in the population of  just  under
    40 million people.  There are two principal  causes,  the  'devastating
    effects of the brutal civil war' and  deteriorating  social  condition,
    including 'rising poverty, unemployment and a severe  housing  crisis'.
    However,  mental  health  provision  is  improving  and  there  are  19
    specialised psychiatric hospitals in the country, as well as 27 general
    hospitals and 6 university hospitals which offer psychiatric services.

36. The provision is not adequate in Ms Pargeter's opinion, but it  exists.
    Indeed, patients remain in mental hospitals for years, further blocking
    beds, with family regarding the hospital as 'a home for the patient  to
    settle in for life'.  About 10% of those who recover are  brought  back
    to hospital because their  families  give  up  on  them.   At  4.24  Ms
    Pargeter records that many families refuse to accept  their  relative's
    illness and patients may not be able to access specialist care at home.
     At 4.25 she says there is almost no community  support  to  assist  in
    rehabilitation when patients are discharged.  In section 5, Ms Pargeter
    deals with the social stigma of mental illness.  At 5.6, she notes that
    'many families simply abandon their relatives who  are  suffering  from
    psychiatric problems once they have been admitted to  a  mental  health
    facility' and at 5.7 she says that:

         "5.7 It is clear therefore that despite efforts to raise  awareness
         about mental health by the government, including through its latest
         mental health plan, mental illness remains  a  taboo  subject  that
         often brings shame and social disgrace, with families preferring to
         conceal mental health problems or deal with them religiously rather
         than seek professional help. ..."

37. Ms Pargeter considers the availability  of  the  medication  which  the
    appellant  takes  (Olanzapine  and  Citalopram).   Another  version  of
    Citalopram, Escitalopram, is available in Algeria.   Ms  Pargeter  says
    frankly that she does not know  whether  it  would  be  an  appropriate
    substitute if Citalopram were not available. The rest of her opinion is
    tainted by her assumption, on instructions, that  the  appellant  would
    receive no support from any of his 10 brothers and sisters still living
    in Algeria.

38. The respondent's Country Policy and Information Note entitled  Algeria:
    Background information, including actors  of  protection  and  internal
    relocation, on which Mr Tufan relied, has not been updated since August
    2017.  In relation to mental health issues in Algeria, it says this:

         "18.2.1 The UN Special Rapporteur on  physical  and  mental  health
         noted:

         'Mental health conditions account for 6 per cent of the  causes  of
         disabilities in  Algeria.  For  the  population  as  a  whole,  the
         incidence of mental health conditions has been estimated at 0.5 per
         cent for both sexes... An epidemiological study carried out by  the
         Ministry of Health in 2004 showed  that  chronic  mental  disorders
         were diagnosed in 0.7 per cent to  1.9  per  cent  of  subjects  in
         different age groups. Those below 40 years of age  and  women  were
         particularly affected.

         'In 2011, public expenditure on mental health accounted for 7.3 per
         cent of the total health budget, of which expenditure on  inpatient
         hospitalization represented 81.44 per  cent  of  the  total  mental
         health budget. Algeria has  an  urgent  need  for  qualified  human
         resources in the mental health sector. For a number of  years  now,
         different programmes have been set up to strengthen the training of
         mental health professionals (psychiatrists, nurses,  psychologists)
         and increase the number of mental-health positions.'

         18.2.2 The same source stated:

         'The updated Mental  Health  Policy  2016-2020  covers  prevention,
         treatment and rehabilitation  with  an  intersectoral  and  a  life
         course approach, in line with WHO Mental Health Action Plan  (2013-
         2020)  [...]  Previous  mental  health  policies  reportedly  faced
         challenges in their implementation [...]

         'The mental health sector in  Algeria  is  excessively  reliant  on
         psychiatric hospitals and inpatient care. Instead of  building  new
         psychiatric  hospitals,  each  general  hospital  should  have   an
         inpatient  psychiatric  unit  to  make  mental  health  care   more
         accessible  to  all  and   avoid   stigmatization.   Although   the
         availability of mental health services in primary-care centres  has
         increased  in  recent  years,  with  129  centres  providing   such
         services, additional steps should be taken to reinforce  outpatient
         services within general hospitals and reduce dependency on hospital
         care. There should be a shift in mental health services and  public
         investments in the community, with initiatives  grounded  in  human
         rights and modern principles of mental health policy and  based  on
         quality services and the empowerment of users.'"

39. It is clear from that report that  there  are  mental  and  psychiatric
    services available in Algeria for persons  with  difficulties  such  as
    this appellant has, including but not limited to in-patient  treatment,
    which the appellant thinks he has used a number of times in the past.

40. I must consider therefore whether the errors of law in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision are likely to be material, that is to say,  whether
    the outcome would be the same. I must ask myself the question  set  out
    in Soering v United Kingdom 14038/88 [1989] ECHR  14,  [1989]  11  EHRR
    439:

         "91. [Article 3 ECHR may be  engaged]  ...  and  hence  engage  the
         responsibility of the [Contracting State]  under  that  Convention,
         where substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that  the
         person concerned,  if  extradited,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being
         subjected to torture  or  to  inhuman  or  degrading  treatment  or
         punishment in the requesting country."

41. Any Judge considering the Article 3 risk to this  appellant  on  return
    must do so in relation to the test in N, that is to say, the 'deathbed'
    test.  The Article 8 ECHR appeal cannot succeed if the Article 3  claim
    fails.  I  remind  myself  that  the  slightly  more  relaxed  test  in
    Paposhvili is not applicable in the United Kingdom (EA & Ors (Article 3
    medical cases - Paposhvili not  applicable:  Afghanistan)  [2017]  UKUT
    445).

42. On any view, and even taking into account Ms Pargeter's evidence, there
    is some treatment for mental health problems in Algeria  and  the  very
    high standard in D and N is not reached.

43. I therefore set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I
    dismiss the appeal.



DECISION

44. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision by dismissing
    the appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson     Date: 16 August 2019
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

