
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06406/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th January, 2018                |On 23rd January, 2018                |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                    mrmT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Jegarajah of Counsel, instructed by KQ Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka, who was born on [ ] 1989,  and
    who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  against  the  refusal  of  the
    respondent to grant him his claim to asylum, humanitarian protection or
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom on the basis of his human rights.
     The date of the respondent's decision was 7th June 2016.

2.   The appeal was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  M  P  W  Harris,
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 20th July 2017.  The  judge  considered  the
    appellant's appeal and concluded that the appellant had not shown  that
    he was at real risk of serious harm from the Sri Lankan authorities  by
    reason of his imputed political opinion.  The judge went on to  dismiss
    his claim based on his sexuality and dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, on humanitarian protection grounds and dismissed the appeal on
    human rights grounds.  He preserved and continued a direction  of  23rd
    November 2016, made by First-tier Tribunal Judge N J Bennett,  granting
    the appellant anonymity throughout these proceedings.

3.   The appellant, dissatisfied with  the  determination  of  Judge  Harris
    submitted grounds of  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  and  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Boyes granted permission, believing the  grounds  to  be
    arguable.

4.   The first ground of challenge suggested that in dealing with  the  risk
    on return to the appellant, the judge failed  to  resolve  the  tension
    between the country guidance case of LH and  IP  (gay  men:  risk)  Sri
    Lanka CG [2015] UKUT 00073 (IAC) and  an  Upper  Tribunal  decision  of
    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini, in Appeal AA/07983/2015.

5.   In addressing me, Ms Jegarajah confirmed that there had been  no  grant
    of leave of the Upper  Tribunal  for  the  appellant  to  rely  on  the
    unreported determination of  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Saini.   I
    indicated that unless leave had been granted, it could not be an  error
    on a point of law by Judge Harris not to have dealt with the issue.  In
    any event, the determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  Saini  was
    an unreported decision, and in so far as it differed from  the  country
    guidance decision of LH and IP, the decision of LH and IP was  the  one
    which the First-tier Tribunal Judge was required to follow.

6.   The second ground suggested that the findings  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Harris on the risk to the appellant on return as a gay  man  were
    inconsistent  and  lacking   clarity.    At   paragraph   86   of   the
    determination, the judge stated:

         "I consider the appellant does not demonstrate on the  evidence  in
         this appeal that it would be unduly harsh for him  to  relocate  to
         Colombo even if he is at real risk as an openly gay man in his home
         area."

7.   Addressing me, Counsel suggested that the  findings  at  paragraphs  85
    and 86 of the determination  were  not  clear  as  to  the  appellant's
    sexuality if he were to be removed back to Sri  Lanka.   She  explained
    that the evidence before the judge was that the appellant  had  entered
    into a civil partnership, a copy of that is at page 53 of  his  bundle,
    but by the time of the hearing there was also evidence in the  form  of
    written statements, and in particular a statement  from  the  appellant
    starting at page 24 of the bundle, in which he makes reference  to  his
    sexuality.   Counsel  suggested  that  a  clear  finding  as   to   the
    appellant's sexuality was required and the judge  had  failed  to  make
    one.

8.   Responding, Mr Jarvis referred me to  paragraphs  50  to  59  of  Judge
    Harris's determination.  At paragraph 50 the judge recorded that in the
    light of an earlier decision by Designated Judge Manuell,  it  was  not
    disputed by the respondent that the appellant was a gay man.  The judge
    went on to find that while it is accepted that the appellant  was  gay,
    there is no real risk to him on his return to Sri Lanka.

9.    Mr Jarvis pointed out  that  the  judge  had  regard  to  the  country
    guidance case of LH and IP (gay men: risk) Sri  Lanka  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00073 (IAC) and summarised paragraph 123 of that decision at  paragraph
    49 of the determination.

10.  At paragraph 85 of his determination, the judge refers  to  statistical
    information which was not before the Upper Tribunal in LH and IP and to
    an article in  the  background  material  produced  by  the  appellant,
    referring to incidents of serious harm in places outside  Colombo,  but
    not in Colombo itself.  He referred  to  one    article  in  which  one
    interviewee was recorded as saying that she can live relatively  openly
    in Colombo, albeit not in her home village near Jaffna.

11.  At paragraph 86 of the determination,  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    appellant does not demonstrate on the evidence in this appeal  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for him to relocate to Colombo, even if he is  at
    real risk as an openly gay man in his home area.

12.  Ms Jegarajah  responded  by  suggesting  that  the  issues  go  to  the
    requirement for an assessment in the way in which  the  appellant  will
    exercise his sexuality.  At paragraph 89, the judge merely says that on
    the evidence before him he is not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  has
    demonstrated that there is good reason  for  him  to  depart  from  the
    findings of Judge Manuell, but Judge Manuell did not consider  the  way
    in which the appellant lived and conducted himself either.

13.  Mr Jarvis suggested that it was only if it could be shown that  in  Sri
    Lanka the background evidence shows a risk to someone being open  about
    their sexuality, would detailed findings as to expression of  sexuality
    be necessary.  The judge has rejected the suggestion of a real risk  of
    serious harm to someone openly gay in Colombo.  The  evidence  did  not
    show that people who are open about their sexuality are at real risk in
    Colombo.  There was, therefore, he suggested, no need for the judge  to
    examine the appellant's expressions of  his  sexuality.   Ms  Jegarajah
    suggested that clear findings needed to be made on all the evidence.  I
    reserved my determination.

14.  In addressing me, Ms Jegarajah told me that she only relied  on  ground
    2 of her five grounds.  It was  only  on  grounds  1  and  2  that  she
    addressed me.

15.  As to the first ground, the Upper Tribunal  have  made  it  clear  that
    reliance should not be  placed  on  unreported  determinations,  unless
    first the Upper Tribunal have granted leave to do  so.   No  leave  was
    sought to rely on the unreported determination of Deputy Upper Tribunal
    Judge Saini.  It cannot, have been error on a  point  of  law  for  the
    judge not to have, as the  grounds  put  it,  "failed  to  resolve  the
    tension" between that determination and country  guidance.  Judges  are
    required  to follow country  guidance  cases,  unless  there  is  clear
    evidence to the contrary and in doing so Judge Harris has not erred  in
    law.

16.  Counsel's submissions to me changed slightly.  Initially  she  told  me
    that there were no clear findings as to the  appellant's  sexuality  if
    removed to Sri Lanka and she pointed out that there  was  now  evidence
    that he was in a civil partnership and a statement from him  indicating
    that he was gay.  However, it is perfectly clear from the determination
    that this had previously  been  accepted  by  the  respondent  and  was
    recorded at paragraph 50 by the judge.

17.  She then suggested that there was no assessment of  the  way  in  which
    the appellant expressed his sexuality and without  such  an  assessment
    the risk to him on return could not be properly  assessed.   Mr  Jarvis
    pointed out that it was only if it could be shown that in Sri Lanka the
    background evidence shows a risk by somebody open about their sexuality
    that  detailed  findings  as  to  expressions  of  sexuality  would  be
    necessary.  The judge rejected  the  proposition  of  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm to somebody being openly gay.  The evidence simply did not
    show that people who were open about their sexuality were at real  risk
    in Colombo and the issue is made clear in paragraphs 85 and 87.   There
    was no need  therefore  for  the  judge  to  examine  this  appellant's
    expression of his sexuality.  What the judge said at paragraphs 84, 85,
    86 and 87 is this:-

         "84. As regards risk from the authorities arising  because  of  his
             sexuality, the appellant relies on the findings in  the  Upper
             Tribunal appeal of AA/07983/2015 to say there is a good reason
             for me to reach a different  finding  to  that  of  Designated
             Judge Manuell.  The Upper Tribunal decision is one made  by  a
             court of record, albeit that it is not a reported case.  It is
             a decision I accept I should take into account: it  points  to
             background  evidence  contained  in   the   respondent's   own
             published material of acts of violence by the  police  against
             gay and lesbians in  Sri  Lanka.   Nevertheless,  the  country
             guidance case law applicable remains that of LH and IP.

         85.  I read Designated Judge Manuell's findings as being  that,  in
             line with the country guidance, the appellant would not be  at
             real risk in Colombo as a gay man and so  internal  relocation
             is  available  there  to  the  appellant.    The   statistical
             information regarding police violence against gay people  that
             was not before the Upper  Tribunal  in  LH  and  IP  does  not
             specify the location of the acts of  violence  reported.   The
             background material produced by the  appellant  (contained  in
             his first bundle) refers  to  incidents  of  serious  harm  in
             places outside Colombo, but not in Colombo itself.  Indeed,  I
             note that in the article, "Still a crime  to  be  gay  in  Sri
             Lanka", one interviewee is recorded as  saying  she  can  live
             relatively openly, albeit not in her home village near Jaffna.

         86.  Given my concerns about what information was made known to  Dr
             Persaud, such as the appellant's  activities  with  TGTE,  and
             what is missing from his assessment of the appellant,  I  have
             not attached a great deal of weight to  the  doctor's  opinion
             that in effect, the appellant could not cope  with  return  to
             Sri Lanka.  The appellant grew up in Sri Lanka.  He would  not
             be a stranger to the country on return.  I consider  that  the
             appellant does  not  demonstrate,  on  the  evidence  in  this
             appeal, that it would be unduly harsh for him to  relocate  to
             Colombo, even though he is at real risk as an openly  gay  man
             in this home area.

         87.  On the evidence  before  me,  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the
             appellant has demonstrated there is  good  reason  for  me  to
             depart from the findings of Judge Manuell."

18.  Earlier, at paragraph 49 of his determination,  Judge  Harris  had  set
    out in summary form, paragraph 123 of LH and IP.

19.  I have concluded that there is no material error of law in the  judge's
    determination.  It was accepted that the  appellant  was  gay  and  the
    judge  considered  the  country  guidance  and  also  considered  other
    evidence in the appellant's own bundle suggesting that he could live as
    an openly gay man in Colombo and it would not be unduly harsh  for  him
    to be expected to do so.

20.  I have concluded that the judge did not materially err in  law  in  his
    consideration  of  this  appeal.   I  uphold  his  determination.   The
    appellant's  appeal  is  dismissed  on  asylum  grounds,  dismissed  on
    humanitarian grounds and dismissed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley
Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

                                                       Date: 23 January 2018
