
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06795/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 31 July 2019                         | On 10 September 2019              |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY

                                   Between

                                     K I
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Capel of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Turfan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born in 2000.  He appealed against a
    decision of the respondent made on 4 July 2017 to refuse his  claim  to
    asylum.

 2. He is a Sunni and a Kurd born in  Sulaymaniyah  in  the  Iraqi  Kurdish
    region of Iraq (IKR) where he  lived  until  he  left  the  country  in
    October 2016.  He entered the UK by lorry in January 2017  and  claimed
    asylum at the port.

 3. The basis of his claim was that in 2015 he began a relationship with  a
    girl.  Her family did not approve.  In September 2015 he was stabbed by
    the  girl's  brother.   He  went  into  hiding.   His  father  received
    threatening phone calls from the brother demanding  to  know  where  he
    was.  The decision was made that he had to leave Iraq for  his  safety.
    If returned he fears he will be killed because of his relationship.

 4. The respondent did not believe that  there  had  been  a  relationship.
    Even if the account was true the appellant had not established that  he
    would be of interest to the brother now.

    He appealed.

First-tier Hearing

 5. Following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 28 January  2019  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Randall dismissed the appeal.

 6. The judge, in summary, found established the  central  element  of  the
    claim, namely, that the  appellant  had  been  stabbed  by  the  girl's
    brother in revenge for his  relationship  with  the  brother's  sister.
    However, he went on to find that the appellant had not established that
    if returned he would be at risk from  the  brother  or  the  family  in
    Sulaymaniyah or even if he was, he could relocate elsewhere in the IKR.

 7. The judge then went on to consider the issue of return.   At  [30]  the
    judge found it to be the case that the appellant  has  no  passport  or
    CSID with him here.

 8. The judge next noted the guidance given in the headnote of  AAH  (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation)  [2018]  UKUT  212.   He  found  that  the
    appellant has patrilineal relatives in Iraq who could assist.   It  had
    not been shown why the appellant could not attend the civil registry in
    Sulaymaniyah with a male relative and thereby get a CSID.  Accordingly,
    he would not face a real risk of destitution.

 9. At [32] noting that international  removals  are  to  Baghdad  he  next
    considered the dangers facing the appellant on the journey  from  there
    to IKR.  The headnote of AAH was noted:

           "P will face considerable difficulty in making the journey
           between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a CSID or valid
           passport.  There are numerous checkpoints en route, including
           two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport.  If P
           has neither a CSID or a valid passport there is a real risk of P
           being detained at a checkpoint until such time as the security
           personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It is not reasonable
           to require P to travel between Baghdad and IKR by land absent
           the ability of P to verify his identity at a checkpoint.  This
           normally requires the attendance of a male family member and
           production of P's identity documents but may also be achieved by
           calling upon 'connections' higher up in the chain of command".


10. The judge's findings on this matter are brief.  He stated:-
           "It was not suggested to me that the appellant's father or great
           uncle could not assist on his journey from Baghdad  to  the  IKR
           ..." [counsel] did not address this option.  "Thus the appellant
           has not established, on the lower standard of proof that for him
           to be returned to Baghdad without a CSID, so that he would  have
           to undertake a land journey north, would be a breach of the UK's
           protection obligations."


11. As a result the judge dismissed the claim under Article 3.

12. He sought permission to appeal which was granted on 28 March 2019 by  a
    judge who considered it arguable that the  issue  of  return  had  been
    inadequately dealt with.  Permission was refused on a  claim  that  the
    judge failed to consider Article 8.

    Error of law hearing


13. At the error of law hearing before me on 24 April 2019 counsel  renewed
    the application in respect of Article 8.  I  refused  the  application.
    The judge did not require to consider Article 8 as it was  recorded  at
    paragraphs 1.3, 3.1, 8.1 and 8.16 of his decision that  Article  8  was
    not being pursued.  There was no requirement on the judge  to  consider
    this matter in the circumstances.

14. Having heard submissions on the return  point  (there  being  no  other
    issue in dispute) I found material error as follows:

           "The judge misdirected himself (at [32]) by failing fully to
           assess the risk to the appellant on return to Iraq in light of
           AAH in being able to get from Baghdad to IKR even with the
           assistance of a relative.  Also, the consequences of remaining
           in Baghdad without a CSID as a Sunni Kurd from the IKR who does
           not speak Arabic and does not have friends, community or family
           in Baghdad."


15. The case was put down for a resumed hearing.

    Resumed hearing

16. Thus  the  matter  came  before  me  on  31  July  2019  when  I  heard
    submissions.

17. Ms Capel made an adjournment  request  to  allow  time  for  an  expert
    report.  She said the issues were first whether the appellant would  be
    returned to Baghdad or the IKR.  There are now direct flights  from  UK
    to IKR but she understood that enforced removals continue to be made to
    Baghdad.  Second, whether it is possible to get  from  Baghdad  to  IKR
    with a laissez passer.  Third, how quickly redocumentation can be  done
    in Baghdad.  Fourth, what risks might result in Baghdad if  a  returnee
    is unable to document himself there.  Fifth,  absent  being  documented
    with a CSID can a returnee get safely to  IKR.   The  country  guidance
    cases did not deal with the redocumenting of returnees in  Baghdad  who
    are from IKR.

18. Other reasons for an adjournment were that although  a  note  detailing
    the error of law had been made it had not been sent out.   Also,  there
    had been pressure of work on the firm.  Further, counsel who  had  been
    due to deal with the matter was away.

19. Mr Turfan clarified that whilst voluntary removals are to IKR, enforced
    removals are to Baghdad, 150 dollars being  given  for  onward  travel.
    The issue was whether the appellant can be documented.  If he  can  the
    claim falls away.

20. I refused an adjournment.  It  was  evident  from  the  file  that  the
    reasons why the decision was being set aside was sent to the parties on
    3 June 2019.  There was no explanation why  a  report  was  not  sought
    sooner.  Further, there was no pressing need for an  expert  report  as
    submissions on the appellant's circumstances could be made  within  the
    context of the existing case law.

21. Ms Capel then sought to lodge  statements  by  the  appellant  and  his
    foster carer.  There was no objection by Mr Turfan and I  allowed  them
    to be received.  Mr Turfan said he had no challenge to their contents.

22. Mr Turfan then made his submissions.   He  referred  me  to  the  Iraqi
    ambassador's letters referred to in the Country Policy and  Information
    Note which indicated  that  assistance  is  provided  to  returnees  in
    getting a CSID and in respect of onward travel from Baghdad.  There was
    no reason why his father and the father's uncle could not meet  him  in
    Baghdad and help him.

23. Making several references to AAH he said there was no  reason  why  the
    appellant could not get a CSID via the Iraqi Embassy  in  London.   His
    father could provide the relevant information.  If necessary  power  of
    attorney could be given to a lawyer in IKR to act as a proxy.

24. The appeal should be dismissed.

25. Ms Capel said that the First-tier Tribunal had found that the appellant
    has no documents.  Nor she submitted can the family provide  such.   It
    would not be possible to get a CSID either directly  or  via  a  proxy.
    Further, the Iraqi civil registry system is in disarray.

26. Turning to what might happen if the appellant was returned  to  Baghdad
    she said the indication was that a returnee would not be able to travel
    to IKR by air with a laissez passer.  He needs  a  CSID.   The  Embassy
    letters referred to in the CPIN were vague and departed from AAH.

27. As for the question of whether he could redocument himself  quickly  in
    Baghdad there is no indication that  there  is  a  IKR  civil  registry
    office there.  He would have to get to IKR to get documents.  If he had
    to remain in Baghdad he would struggle not least because of  his  young
    age, he is a Sunni, he had been outside Iraq for some time and  he  has
    mental health issues which would be likely to get worse.  He  would  be
    at real risk of serious harm amounting to a breach of Article 3.   Even
    if his father or uncle were able to come to  Baghdad  they  might  face
    difficulties.  Much would depend on the attitude of those in charge  of
    the checkpoints.  The situation would be made  more  difficult  because
    the father would not be in possession of a CSID for the appellant.

28. Ms Capel was not able to assist on whether the father would be able  to
    renew the appellant's passport and whether a CSID was necessary  to  do
    so.

29. Ms Capel invited me to remake the decision by allowing  the  appeal  on
    refugee grounds or under Article 3.

30. Following the hearing I received a note from the appellant's solicitors
    seeking to address the issues of whether details of a person's children
    are included on their CSID, and whether a CSID is required to obtain  a
    passport.

Consideration

31. As indicated the sole issues in this case are documentation and return.
     The country guidance is AAH which explains that returns are to Baghdad
    but a returnee of Kurdish origin in  possession  of  a  valid  CSID  or
    passport can journey by land or air practically and affordably  without
    real risk and without relocation being unduly harsh.  Domestic  flights
    to the IKR cannot be boarded without either a CSID or a valid  passport
    and if the returnee has neither there is  a  real  risk  of  his  being
    detained at a  checkpoint  if  he  travels  by  land.   Other  ways  of
    verifying identity at checkpoints such as  calling  upon  "connections"
    were discussed.  In AAH the respondent accepted that returnees who were
    not in possession of a CSID and were not able to obtain one, would face
    a risk of destitution such that Article 3 would be engaged.

32. The fundamental issue is whether the appellant's  male  relatives,  his
    father and great uncle, would be able to get or assist in getting him a
    CSID.

33. Ms Capel relied heavily on the report of Dr Fatah which was referred to
    extensively in AAH and was found to be "insightful and helpful" [91] by
    the Upper Tribunal.

34. The thrust of Mr Turfan's submission was that the appellant could get a
    CSID from the UK.

35. Dr Fatah's evidence about applying  for  a  CSID  through  a  consulate
    abroad is at [26]ff.  The Upper Tribunal's conclusions on the  evidence
    are at [100]ff.  At [100] the UT stated that "... a critical part of  a
    decision-maker's enquiry will  be  what  documents  the  individual  in
    question has, or might  reasonably  be  expected  to  get.   The  first
    question to be asked is whether the proposed returnee is in  possession
    of a CSID; if  he  is  not,  the  second  question  is  whether  it  is
    reasonably likely he will not be able to obtain one."  At [101] the  UT
    noted that the ability to obtain a new CSID was considered in AA (Iraq)
    [173 to 187].  The evidence on consular assistance  was  summarised  as
    follows:-

           "173.  As regards those who have an expired or current Iraqi
           passport but no CSID - Dr Fatah identifies in his first report
           that a CSID may be obtained through the "Consular section of the
           Iraqi Embassy in London", which will send a request for a
           replacement or renewed CSID to the General Directorate for
           Travel and Nationality - Directorate of Civil Status.  A request
           for a replacement CSID must be accompanied, inter alia, by "any
           form of official document in support of the applicant's
           identity" and the application form must be signed by "the head
           of the family, or the legal guardian or representative to verify
           the truth of its contents."  He also added that an applicant
           must also authorise a person in Iraq to act as his
           representative in order for that person to "follow up on the
           progress of the application".


           174.  However, Dr Fatah continued by explaining that if an
           individual has lost his CSID and does not know the relevant page
           and book number for it, then the Iraq Embassy in London will not
           be able to obtain one on his behalf.  Instead, he or she will
           have to attend the appropriate local office of family
           registration in Iraq or give a relative, friend or lawyer power
           of attorney to obtain his or her CSID.  The process of giving
           power of attorney to a lawyer in Iraq to act "as a proxy" is
           commonplace and Dr Fatah had done this himself.  He also
           explained that the power of attorney could be obtained through
           the Iraq Embassy.


           ...


           176.  There is a consensus between Dr Fatah's evidence and the
           following more general evidence provided by UNHCR-Iraq in April
           2015 on the issue of obtaining CSID's from abroad.


                 "In principle, a failed asylum seeker, or indeed any Iraqi
                 citizen abroad, can acquire Iraqi documents through Iraqi
                 embassies and consulates.  There is a special authorisation
                 granted to these bodies to provide documents for Iraqi
                 abroad on the condition that the beneficiaries should have
                 any available documents in order to prove their
                 nationality."

           177.   In summary, we conclude that it is possible for an Iraqi
           national living in the UK to obtain a CSID through the consular
           section of the Iraqi Embassy in London, if such a person is able
           to produce a current or expired passport and/or the book and
           page number for their family registration details.  For persons
           without such a passport, or who are unable to produce the
           relevant family registration details, a power of attorney can be
           provided to someone in Iraq who can thereafter undertake the
           process of obtaining the CSID for such person from the Civil
           Status Affairs Office in their home governorate ... at the
           present time the process of obtaining a CSID from Iraq is likely
           to be severely hampered if the person wishing to obtain the CSID
           is from an area where Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring."


36. Before the First-tier Judge the appellant was unable to clarify why his
    father could not get him documentation.  Ms  Capel  asserted  that  his
    family could not provide documents such as to allow for the getting  of
    a CSID.  It was not explained why  such  should  be  so.   It  was  not
    explained why his father and great uncle would not  have  the  relevant
    family registration details.  There is no evidence that the appellant's
    father and great uncle are living anything other than a normal life  in
    IKR.  As Dr Fatah  explained  at  [23]  the  CSID  card  "the  physical
    representation of the information in the family  record  book  -  is  a
    crucial document for adult life in Iraq."

37. The appellant has not established to  the  lower  standard  that  these
    family members do not have a CSID and other documents necessary for day
    to day living.  I find no reason why "the  book  and  page  number  for
    their family registration details" could not be produced  such  that  a
    CSID could be got through the consular section of the Iraqi Embassy  in
    London.

38. Even if that were so no adequate reason has  been  given  why  a  proxy
    through a power of attorney  could  not  be  used.   The  Civil  Status
    Affairs Offices in IKR are not in an area where Article 15(c)  applies.
    That there are such offices in IKR is clear from the CPIN (section 5).

39. I thus conclude from the material  before  me  that  it  is  reasonably
    likely the appellant will be able to obtain  a  CSID  via  the  Embassy
    here, via his father or via a proxy.  The result is he will be able  to
    return to Baghdad and thence by air or land  to  IKR  without  risk  of
    serious harm.

Notice of Decision

40. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal showed material error  of  law.
    It is set aside and remade as follows.

    The appeal is dismissed.

    An anonymity order is made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.   Failure  to
    comply with this order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








    Signed                                         Date

         Upper Tribunal Judge Conway                     05 September 2019

