
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06461/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Field House   Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 28th March 2019     On 02nd April 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                   M D Q Z
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C Talacchi, Counsel, instructed by L and L Law
For the respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

      1. The appellant is a national of the People's Republic of China, born
         in [~] 1965. She came to the United Kingdom on 20 December 2011  on
         a visit Visa. She was arrested in November 2014 in  relation  to  a
         charge of actual bodily harm. She gave false aliases. It  was  then
         discovered she had no status in the United Kingdom. She  was  later
         released from custody whereupon she  absconded.  She  was  arrested
         again in November 2017 for suspected  human  trafficking  offences.
         She then indicated a wish to claim protection.

      2. The basis of her claim is that she had been married in  China.  Her
         husband was addicted to gambling. He was also  a  gang  member.  He
         would take money from the appellant and assault her. They  had  one
         son. They divorced in May 2010 but he  continued  to  demand  money
         from her.

      3. The claim was refused on 8 May 2018. The claim made did not  engage
         the Refugee Convention. The respondent concluded the appellant  had
         not established the underlying facts. She had not provided evidence
         to show she had been married and her evidence about gang membership
         was vague. There was inconsistency in aspects.  For  instance,  she
         said the last time her former husband beat her was in 2011  whereas
         at screening she said it was 2001. In considering  her  credibility
         reference was made to section 8 considerations and her  failure  to
         claim until her 2nd arrest.

      4. The respondent also felt that even if  the  claim  were  true  then
         there was protection in China and she had the reasonable option  of
         relocating.

The First tier Tribunal

      5. Her appeal was heard by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Swinnerton  at
         Taylor House on 17 December 2018. In a decision promulgated  on  18
         January 2019 it was dismissed.

      6. Both parties were represented in  the  Upper  Tribunal.  Under  the
         heading `Preliminary Issues' the judge recorded that the respondent
         had not received the appellant's appeal bundles. The judge  allowed
         the Presenting Officer time to read these.

      7. Within the appeal bundle was  a  draft  report  from  a  Dr  Gupta,
         consultant psychiatrist. At paragraph 12 the  judge  observed  that
         the report was  unsigned;  undated;  in  draft  form  and  appeared
         incomplete. The judge made the appellant's representative aware  of
         this and granted her time to take  instructions.  She  advised  the
         judge that a complete report would be submitted.

      8.  In  the  decision  the  judge  commented  that  at  the  time   of
         preparation, a month later, the final report had not been provided.
         The judge commented the appellant's solicitors had the  opportunity
         to do so during and after the hearing.

      9. The decision indicates  that  the  judge  did  consider  the  draft
         medical. Paragraph 12 suggests that the presenting officer had made
         submissions that the report should not be considered on  the  basis
         it was incomplete; in draft form only; and the doctor had  not  had
         access to the appellant's medical records.

     10. In the decision the judge rejected the consultant's draft diagnoses
         of a complex mental health condition associated  with  trauma.  The
         judge expressed concern that the diagnoses had  been  made  in  the
         absence of any medical history. At paragraph 46 the judge  referred
         to the absence of  any  evidence  from  a  clinician  treating  the
         appellant for mental health issues.

     11. At the appeal the appellant had produced documents purporting to be
         her marriage certificate and the divorce  certificates.  The  judge
         commented on the absence of  certified  copies  of  the  documents.
         There was an earlier reference to issues over  the  translation  of
         the divorce certificate (Para 15). The judge was  not  prepared  to
         rely upon these documents.

     12. The judge also concluded the appellant had  failed  to  demonstrate
         her former husband was a gang  member.  She  had  claimed  to  have
         approached the police  for  protection  and  they  were  unhelpful.
         However, the  judge  found  the  evidence  in  this  regard  to  be
         inconsistent and this claim was rejected. The judge  also  referred
         to inconsistency in the evidence about treatment  for  the  claimed
         injuries sustained. The judge referred to  country  information  in
         relation to sufficiency of protection.

     13. Paragraph 42 contains a summary of the judge's conclusions: namely,
         that the appellant had not given a truthful  and  accurate  account
         and she  lacked  credibility.  The  judge  went  on  to  deal  with
         relocation. Given the absence of  evidence  of  treatment  and  the
         submission of a draft report only the judge was not  satisfied  she
         had any serious mental illness.

The Upper Tribunal

     14. Permission to appeal was sought on a number of grounds. The bulk of
         these were rejected on the basis they consisted of statements about
         the claim and no specific error of law  identified.  Permission  to
         appeal was granted in relation to how  the  judge  dealt  with  the
         draft psychiatric report.

     15. Mr Talacchi said that his instructions were that the  draft  report
         been submitted in the original bundle in error by  the  caseworker.
         He then referred me to paragraph 12  of  the  decision.  The  judge
         records that despite Counsel for the appellant stating that a  full
         and complete psychiatric report would be  submitted  this  did  not
         happen. Mr Talacchi said his instructions were that  Counsel  never
         advised her instructing solicitors of the need to do this. He  said
         the first they became aware of  this  was  when  the  decision  was
         promulgated. He submitted that the  contents  of  the  report  were
         relevant to the consideration of the reasonableness of  return.  He
         highlighted this in the context of article 8, albeit  the  decision
         records at hearing that article 8 was not in contention.

     16. He submitted that the decision should be set  aside  on  the  basis
         there had been unfairness and the submission of a completed  report
         could have affected the outcome.

     17. Similarly, in relation to the divorce documentation and the absence
         of a translation, his instructions where  that  this  was  again  a
         caseworker error.

     18. I noted that the claim made included  the  appellant  being  forced
         into prostitution when she arrived in the  United  Kingdom.  Whilst
         the refusal letter refers to the appellant being  arrested  herself
         for alleged sexual exploitation and trafficking offences I asked if
         there had been a referral to the Competent Authority in respect  of
         her own claims. I was advised that subsequent to the hearing on  15
         March 2019 a referral was made by a charity. A  reasonable  grounds
         decision has been made and a conclusive decision is awaited.

     19. Mr Melvin relied upon the rule 24 response. Paragraph 5 states that
         the judge was correct in rejecting the draft report  produced.  The
         appellant's representative has now produced a completed report  but
         this is post hearing. Mr Melvin pointed out the was  no  record  of
         the appellant's representatives asking for an  adjournment  pending
         the submission of a complete report. He made the point  that  there
         was no statement from Counsel in the First tier Tribunal  that  she
         had not relayed to her instructing solicitors the need to submit  a
         complete report.

     20. Mr Talacchi confirmed that there was  no  correspondence  from  his
         instructing solicitors upon receipt of the decision in January 2019
         indicating they were unaware of the issue.

     21. I note that the judge did read the draft report which is  contained
         at page 6 of the appellant's supplementary bundle. The  appellant's
         representatives have also provided a final version of  that  report
         which is dated 20 March 2019. The draft is largely the same as  the
         final report. It is a very lengthy report, the bulk of which  is  a
         recitation of the appellant's family history and her claim to  have
         been in an abusive relationship. This is largely  based  upon  what
         the appellant has told the doctor, albeit the  doctor  did  have  a
         copy of her statement of evidence form and the refusal letter. Most
         significantly, the doctor  did  not  have  access  to  her  medical
         records. At the outset the doctor commented that she had  not  been
         assessed in respect of mental health issues.

     22. Given the incomplete nature of the  report  its  admissibility  and
         weight if admitted was in issue. The judge raised this with Counsel
         and allowed time for her to take instructions. This  would  suggest
         she contacted her instructing solicitors as she was able to  advise
         the judge that a fall and complete report would be submitted.  This
         does not square was the suggestion that the 1st her representatives
         were aware of this issue was when  the  decision  was  promulgated.
         This is further undermined by the fact that they  did  not  respond
         when the decision was promulgated.

     23. My conclusion is that  no  unfairness  is  demonstrated.  The  same
         applies in relation to the documents about her divorce.  The  judge
         can  only  deal  with  the  case  as  presented.   Similarly,   the
         trafficking issue postdates the decision.

     24. The  decision  indicates  careful  preparation  and  addresses  the
         various issues arising and evaluates the evidence. The  judge  said
         the central  issue  was  the  appellant's  credibility.  The  judge
         rejected the truth of the claim and give a number  of  reasons  for
         doing so. The challenge  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  been  on  a
         relatively narrow point. I find this has not been  successful.  The
         outcome is consistent with the appellant's immigration history  and
         her delay and behaviour. I see no evidence of  possible  underlying
         unfairness. I find no material error of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been demonstrated in  the  decision  of  First-
tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton. Consequently, that decision, dismissing  the
appeal shall stand.


Francis J Farrelly
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge.


Dated 28 March 2019
