

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/06025/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                   |             Decision & Reasons    |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 18 December 2017                |             On 4 January 2018     |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before


                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                            KAMAL MOHAMMED OSMAM
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Ms L McCrorie of Loughran & Co, solicitors
For the Respondent:      Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Kempton promulgated on 7 August  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 16 May 1985. He is a national of Eritrea.

4. The appellant arrived in the UK on 8 August 2015. He claimed asylum  that
day. On 16  July  2017  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the  Appellant's
protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

5. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Kempton ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 25 October  2017  Judge  Bird
gave permission to appeal stating

      3. It is arguable that in the conclusion that  the  Judge  reaches  at
      paragraph 20 that the appellant was a "recognised  refugee  in  Sudan"
      the Judge failed  to  take  into  account  and  comment  on  what  the
      appellant states in paragraph 25 of the WS. In doing so that Judge has
      misunderstood the evidence and thus made an arguable error of law,


      4. Secondly it is alleged that the Judge erred in law in finding  that
      the appellant has failed to provide a translated copy of his thesis to
      show how the Eritrean authorities would see it as  being  critical  of
      them. Ground 2 alleges that in this the Judge failed to take  note  of
      chapter 3 which was translated was at  annex  C  of  the  respondent's
      bundle.


      5. It is arguable that in failing to assess whether what was contained
      in the respondent's bundle would be enough to bring the  appellant  to
      the adverse attention of  the  authorities,  the  Judge  has  made  an
      arguable error of law.


      6. All other grounds are arguable.

The Hearing

6. (a) Ms McCrorie moved the grounds of appeal. She told me that  the  Judge
failed to take account of the appellant's witness  statement.  She  told  me
that the Judge could not have made the findings that she makes  at  [20]  of
the decision if she had taken account of the appellant's witness  statement,
which details the appellant's circumstances  in  Sudan.  She  told  me  that
[20], [21], [22] and [28] of the decision demonstrates that  the  judge  has
not taken account of the appellant's evidence.

(b) Mr McCrory took me to [23] of the  decision  where,  she  told  me,  the
Judge misinterprets the importance of the appellant's thesis.  She  told  me
that chapter 3 of the appellant's thesis had been translated  &  was  before
the Judge, but the Judge says there is  no  translated  copy  of  the  whole
thesis. She told me that the Judge should have made a finding on whether  or
not the appellant  would  be  perceived  to  have  a  political  opinion  in
Eritrea.

(c) She told me that the Judge failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
findings at [24], [31], [32], & [33] of the decision. Ms  McCrorie  told  me
that the Judge incorrectly placed reliance on  the  appellant's  failure  to
produce corroborative evidence at [24], [29] and [30] of the decision.

(d) Ms McCrorie told me that the Judge failed to take account of  background
materials when considering whether or not  the  appellant  could  apply  for
Sudanese citizenship. She told me  that  the  appellant's  second  inventory
contained background materials which supported the  appellant's  claim  that
he could not make an application for Sudanese citizenship.

(e) Ms McCrorie told me  that  the  Judge  failed  to  understand  that  the
appellant arrived in Sudan in 1988, before the Eritrean border was drawn  in
1993. Ms McCrorie  relied  on  MST  and  Others  (national  service  -  risk
categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC). She  urged  me  to  set  the
decision aside and remit the case to the  First-tier  to  be  determined  of
new.

7. For the respondent, Ms  O'Brien  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise. She told me that what is  argued  for
the appellant amounts to no more than a disagreement with the facts  as  the
Judge found them to be, and the appeal is simply an attempt  to  re-litigate
a matter which has been competently considered by the  Judge.  She  told  me
that the Judge reached conclusions which  were  well  within  the  range  of
reasonable conclusions available to the Judge, and that the Judge's  finding
that the appellant did not leave Eritrea illegally and can safely return  to
Eritrea is safe. She urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow  the  decision
to stand.

Analysis

8. The respondent accepted that the appellant is an  Eritrean  national  but
rejected his claim to have no status in Sudan, rejected his  claim  to  have
been politically active against the Eritrean government, rejected his  claim
to be of interest to the Eritrean authorities & refused to accept  that  the
appellant had left  Eritrea  illegally.  The  respondent  accepts  that  the
appellant is an Eritrean national who has lived and  studied  in  Sudan  but
returned to Eritrea in December 2009 remaining there until February 2015.

9. It is common ground that between December  2009  and  February  2015  the
appellant  did  not  undertake  national  service.  It  is  the  appellant's
position that he worked as a volunteer teacher in a  school.  The  appellant
was born in 1985 so he is now 32 years of age. The respondent's decision  is
to forcibly return the appellant to Eritrea.

10. The Judge's findings of fact start at [19] of the decision. At [24]  the
Judge declares that she finds the appellant's account to be incredible.  The
Judge bemoans the lack of supporting evidence for  the  appellant's  account
that he lived in Sudan and return to Eritrea. At [25] the Judge  appears  to
be accepting that the appellant's uncle (in Saudi  Arabia)  paid  a  lot  of
money to arrange for the appellant's illegal exit from Eritrea. At [27]  the
Judge appears to accept that the appellant returned to Eritrea, but at  [28]
and [38] it is  not  clear  whether  or  not  the  Judge  accepts  that  the
appellant returned to Eritrea in 2009. At [31] the Judge says

           I do not accept that he left Eritrea illegally

11. At [32] the Judge  appears  to  take  the  appellant's  account  at  its
highest, and then reject it. The  Judge  says  that  she  is  aware  of  the
country guidance but does not name the country guidance case  nor  does  she
make an explicit self-direction.

12. The result is that the Judge makes conflicting findings of fact  and  it
is not clear how the Judge reached her conclusions. I have to find that  the
decision is tainted by material errors  of  law  because  of  inadequacy  in
reasoning and fact-finding.    In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan  [2013]
UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it  was  held  that  (i)  It  was  axiomatic   that   a
determination disclosed clearly the reasons for a tribunal's decision.  (ii)
If  a  tribunal  found  oral  evidence  to  be  implausible,  incredible  or
unreliable or a document to be worth no weight whatsoever, it was  necessary
to say so in the determination and for such  findings  to  be  supported  by
reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness  was  not  believed  or  that  a
document was afforded no weight was unlikely to satisfy the  requirement  to
give reasons.

13. As I find that the decision is tainted by material error of law  I  must
set it aside.

14. Although I set the decision aside,  I  find  that  there  is  sufficient
material before me to substitute my own decision.

15. The undisputed facts are that the appellant is an Eritrean national.  He
is 32 years of age.  The  respondent  intends  to  forcibly  return  him  to
Eritrea.

16. It was held in MST and  Others  (national  service  -  risk  categories)
Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC) that (i) Although reconfirming  parts  of
the country guidance given in MA  (Draft  evaders  -  illegal  departures  -
risk) Eritrea CG [2007] UKAIT 00059 and MO (illegal exit - risk  on  return)
Eritrea CG [2011] UKUT  00190  (IAC),  this  case  replaces  that  with  the
following: (ii) The Eritrean system  of  military/national  service  remains
indefinite and since  2012  has  expanded  to  include  a  people's  militia
programme,  which  although  not  part  of  national  service,   constitutes
military service; (iii) The age limits for national service  are  likely  to
remain the same as stated in MO, namely 54 for men and 47 for  women  except
that for children the limit is now likely to be 5 save  for  adolescents  in
the context of family reunification. For peoples'  militia  the  age  limits
are likely to be 60 for women and 70 for men; (iv) The categories of  lawful
exit have not significantly changed  since  MO  and  are  likely  to  be  as
follows: (a)  Men aged over 54; (b) Women aged over  47  (c)  Children  aged
under five (with some scope for adolescents in family  reunification  cases;
(d) people exempt from national  service  on  medical  grounds;  (e)  People
travelling abroad for medical treatment; (f) People  travelling  abroad  for
studies or for a conference; (g) Business and sportsmen; (h) Former  freedom
fighters   (Tegadelti)   and   their   family   members;    (i)    Authority
representatives in leading  positions  and  their  family  members;  (v)  It
continues to be the case (as in  MO)  that  most  Eritreans  who  have  left
Eritrea since 1991 have done so illegally. However, since there are  viable,
albeit still limited, categories of lawful  exit  especially  for  those  of
draft age for national service, the  position  remains  as  it  was  in  MO,
namely that a person whose asylum claim has not been found  credible  cannot
be assumed to have left illegally. The  position  also  remains  nonetheless
(as in MO) that if such a person is found to have left Eritrea on  or  after
August/September 2008, it may be that inferences can  be  drawn  from  their
health history or level of education or their skills profile as  to  whether
legal exit on their part was feasible, provided that such inferences can  be
drawn in the light of adverse credibility findings.  For  these  purposes  a
lengthy period performing national service is likely to enhance  a  person's
skill profile; (vi) It remains the  case  (as  in  MO)  that  failed  asylum
seekers as such are not at risk of persecution or serious  harm  on  return;
(vii)   Notwithstanding   that   the   round-ups   (giffas)   of   suspected
evaders/deserters,  the  "shoot  to  kill"  policy  and  the  targeting   of
relatives of  evaders  and  deserters  are  now  significantly  less  likely
occurrences, it remains the case, subject to three  limited  exceptions  set
out in (vii) (c) below, that if a person of or approaching  draft  age  will
be perceived on return as a draft evader or deserter, he or she will face  a
real risk of persecution, serious harm or ill-treatment contrary to  Article
3 or 4 of the ECHR. (vii) (a) A person who is likely to be  perceived  as  a
deserter/evader will not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk  merely
by showing they have paid (or are willing to pay) the diaspora tax  and/have
signed (or are willing to sign) the letter of  regret;  (vii)  (b)  Even  if
such a person may avoid  punishment  in  the  form  of  detention  and  ill-
treatment it is likely that he or she will be assigned to perform  (further)
national service, which, is  likely  to  amount  to  treatment  contrary  to
Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR unless he or she falls within one  or  more  of
the  three  limited  exceptions  set  out  immediately  below  in  (vii)(c);
(vii)(c)) It remains the case (as in MO) that there are persons  likely  not
to face a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm  notwithstanding  that
they will be perceived on return as draft  evaders  and  deserters,  namely:
(1) persons whom the regime's military and  political  leadership  perceives
as having given them valuable service (either in  Eritrea  or  abroad);  (2)
persons who are trusted family members of, or are themselves  part  of,  the
regime's military or political leadership.  A  further  possible  exception,
requiring a more case specific analysis is (3) persons (and  their  children
born afterwards) who fled (what  later  became  the  territory  of)  Eritrea
during the War of Independence; (vii) Notwithstanding  that  many  Eritreans
are effectively reservists having  been  discharged/released  from  national
service and unlikely to face recall, it  remains  unlikely  that  they  will
have received or be able to receive official confirmation of  completion  of
national service. Thus it remains the case, as in MO that "(iv) The  general
position adopted in MA, that a  person  of  or  approaching  draft  and  not
medically unfit  who  is  accepted  as  having  left  Eritrea  illegally  is
reasonably likely to be  regarded  with  serious  hostility  on  return,  is
reconfirmed, subject to limited  exceptions..."  (ix)  A  person  liable  to
perform service in the people's militia and who is  assessed  to  have  left
Eritrea illegally,  is  not  likely  on  return  to  face  a  real  risk  of
persecution or serious harm. (x) Accordingly, a person  whose  asylum  claim
has not been found credible, but who is able  to  satisfy  a  decision-maker
(a) that he or she left  illegally,  and  (b)  that  he  or  she  is  of  or
approaching draft age, is likely to  be  perceived  on  return  as  a  draft
evader or deserter from national service and as a result face  a  real  risk
of persecution or serious harm; (xi) While likely to be a rare case,  it  is
possible that a person who has exited lawfully may on forcible  return  face
having to resume or commence national service. In such a  case  there  is  a
real risk  of  persecution  or  serious  harm  by  virtue  of  such  service
constituting forced labour contrary to Article 4(2) and  Article  3  of  the
ECHR; (xii) Where it is specified  above  that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
persecution in the context of performance of military/national  service,  it
is highly likely that it will be persecution for a Convention  reason  based
on imputed political opinion.

17. The appellant is a national of Eritrea, of National service age. He  has
not participated in national service and faces forcible return  to  Eritrea.
Headnotes (x) & (xi) of MST and Others (national service - risk  categories)
Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC)  tell  me  that  with  that  profile  the
appellant would be at risk of persecution on return to Eritrea.

18. Given these conclusions, I find that the Appellant  has  discharged  the
burden of proof to establish that he is a refugee. I come to the  conclusion
that the Appellant's removal would cause the United Kingdom to be in  breach
of its obligations under the 2006 Regulations.

Humanitarian protection

19. As I have found the appellant is a refugee I cannot consider whether  he
qualifies for humanitarian protection. Therefore, I find  the  appellant  is
not eligible for humanitarian protection.

Human rights

20. As I have found the appellant has established  a  well-founded  fear  of
persecution, by analogy I find that his  claim  engages  article  3  of  the
Human Rights Convention because he  would  face  a  real  risk  of  torture,
inhuman or degrading treatment  if  he  were  returned  to  his  country  of
origin.

21.   Article 4 of the 1950 Convention is a prohibition on slavery.  I  have
found that return to Eritrea would breach the appellant's rights on  article
3 ECHR grounds. I have found that the appellant will be perceived  to  be  a
draft evader who  left  Eritrea  illegally.  In  MST  and  Others  (national
service - risk categories) Eritrea CG [2016] UKUT 00443 (IAC)  it  was  held
(inter alia) that

    (vii) (a) A person who is likely to be perceived as  a  deserter/evader
    will not be able to avoid exposure to such real risk merely by  showing
    they have paid (or are willing to pay) the diaspora tax and/have signed
    (or are willing to sign) the letter of regret; (vii) (b) Even if such a
    person may avoid punishment in the form of detention and  ill-treatment
    it is likely that he or she  will  be  assigned  to  perform  (further)
    national service, which, is likely to amount to treatment  contrary  to
    Articles 3 and 4 of the ECHR...

By analogy I find the appeal succeeds on article 4 ECHR grounds.

22. The appellant does not  claim  that  any  other  articles  of  the  1950
Convention are engaged.

23.   In the light of the  above  conclusions,  I  find  that  the  Decision
appealed against would cause the United Kingdom to be in breach of  the  law
or its obligations under the 1950 Convention.

CONCLUSION

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 7 August 2017  is
tainted by a material error of law. I set it aside.

25. I substitute my own decision.

26. The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

27. The appeal is dismissed on Humanitarian Protection grounds

28. The appeal is allowed on article 3 & 4 ECHR grounds.



Signed

Paul Doyle

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle                            Date 28
December 2017

