
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06821/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 22nd November 2017                    |On 30th November 2017               |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     WM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Brakaj, instructed on behalf of the Appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Libya.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant with permission, appeal against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge Fox), who, in a determination promulgated  on  the
    30th May 2017, dismissed WM's claim for protection and  found  that  he
    was not entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection.

 3. The appellant's immigration history and  basis  of  claim  is  set  out
    within the determination at paragraphs 2-7 and the decision  letter  of
    the 20th June 2016. The appellant is a national of Libya and studied at
    university in his home area. He applied for  a  student  Visa  in  2008
    which was issued and further leave to remain was  granted  until  March
    2010. He left the United Kingdom in September 2010 and  on  9  December
    2014 applied for a visit Visa. That was issued and he travelled to  the
    UK in April 2015 for a week. He applied for a further Visa in July 2015
    and travelled to the UK in September 2015 for one month.

 4. During the summer of 2015 he converted from Sunni to Shia Islam  having
    been introduced by a friend named A. He was aware that there would be a
    danger when he converted, he did not think anyone would find out.  When
    he converted he went to see a Sheik. On  5  November  2015  A's  cousin
    called the appellant and asked if he knew why A had  been  arrested  by
    the police. The appellant believed it was because it had  become  known
    that he was a Shia Muslim. The appellant believed that when  A  got  to
    the police station he would be ill-treated and would  tell  the  police
    about the appellant's conversion. He therefore picked up his  passport,
    money, his birth certificate and bag and left the area. He  went  to  a
    place that was 600 km from his home area. He went to stay with a friend
    called M. At first M refused to help him because of  their  differences
    of religion but then he agreed to help  him.  However  that  night  the
    authorities came to look for him and threatened his family to hand  him
    over. He was also told that the police and militias  were  looking  for
    him. The appellant claimed his family were forced to leave home and  he
    does not know what is happening to them the appellant  stayed  with  M.
    The last time he was told that the police were looking for  him  was  a
    week before he left Libya. In the range and agent to take the appellant
    out of Libya because he found his name had been distributed to all  the
    checkpoints. In February 2016, when in the UK M sent the appellant  the
    document concerning his arrest in Libya.

 5. The appellant travelled to the UK from Libya on 27  November  2015.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 4 January 2016 claimed asylum.

 6. His protection claim was refused in  a  detailed  reasons  for  refusal
    letter dated 20th June 2016. In that decision letter, the Secretary  of
    State considered his protection claim in  the  light  of  the  evidence
    relating to conversion from Sunni to Shia Islam and whether he would be
    wanted for apostasy in Libya.  The  Secretary  of  State  set  out  the
    objective material in the  decision  letter.  The  Secretary  of  State
    accepted that the appellant was a national of Libya and did not  accept
    his conversion or that he was wanted by the  Libyan  authorities.  Even
    taking the claimant's highest, if accepted that the Libyan  authorities
    were seeking to ill treat him due to his  religion  it  was  considered
    whether he would fall into one of the  risk  categories  on  return  to
    Libya. The decision is also considered Article 15 C but for the reasons
    set out at paragraphs 23 onwards, the Secretary of State concluded that
    he was not entitled to a grant of humanitarian  protection.  Article  8
    was also considered at paragraphs 38 onwards.

 7. The appellant exercised his right  to  appeal  that  decision  and  the
    appeal came before the First-tier Tribunal on the 23rd  May  2017.  The
    judge rejected his factual claim to be at  risk  of  harm  although  he
    accepted that the appellant had converted from being a Sunni Muslim  to
    a Shia Muslim (I refer to the findings of fact made at paragraphs 17  -
    34). The judge found that the religious problems between the Sunnis and
    the Shias "went beyond the borders of  Libya"  but  there  was  no  law
    prohibiting  Shia  Muslims  from  practising  within   Libya   or   any
    legislation banning such a conversion. He concluded  that  he  was  not
    satisfied that there was sufficient evidence to persuade him that there
    were any particular problems  in  Libya  and  that  whilst  there  were
    sporadic outbreaks of violence Libya had  more  problems  in  terms  of
    civil unrest than religious intolerance (paragraph 24).

 8. At paragraph 25 he considered the issue of humanitarian protection.  He
    made reference to the  Country  Guidance  decision  of  AT  and  Others
    (Article 15c; risk categories) Libya CG [2014] UKUT  00318  earlier  in
    the decision at paragraph 14. It does not appear that any reference was
    made to the current country guidance case law of FA (Libya: Art  15  c)
    CG [2016] UKUT 413 which was reported on 30 September 2016  which  made
    it clear that the numerous changes in Libya since  November  2013  were
    sufficient to render unreliable the previous guidance set out in AT and
    others (as cited). The judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 9. The Appellant sought permission to appeal that decision  on  the  basis
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law in his consideration of
    the background material relating to the problems between the  different
    branches of Islam and that the  determination  was  beset  with  typing
    errors, some of which had no effect on the  determination  that  others
    made the decision  more  difficult  to  understand.  In  particular  at
    paragraph 33 the judge had provided no evidence to  support  the  broad
    assertion made as to passing through security.  It  was  also  asserted
    that the judge failed to  properly  consider  the  background  material
    concerning religious intolerance and that  the  findings  affected  the
    credibility assessment.

10. On 15 September  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Gillespie  granted
    permission to appeal.

11. At the hearing before  me,  Mr  Diwncyz  informed  me  that  there  was
    agreement between the parties as to the correct outcome of  the  appeal
    namely, that that the appellant was entitled to a grant of humanitarian
    protection in the light of the decision ZMM (Article 15  (c)  Libya  CG
    [2017] UKUT 00263 (IAC) (promulgated shortly after the promulgation  of
    the First-tier Tribunal's decision on the 30th May 2017). The head note
    to that decision reads as follows :

    "The violence in Libya has reached  such  high-level  that  substantial
    grounds are shown to believe that a returning civilian would, solely on
    account of his presence on the territory of  that  country  or  region,
    face a real risk of being subject to a threat to his life or person."

12. Mr Diwncyz did not seek  to  uphold  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and therefore it should  be  set  aside  and  remade  by  this
    Tribunal by substituting a decision to allow the appeal on the basis of
    Article 15 (c) and allowing  the  appeal  on  that  ground.  Ms  Brakaj
    confirmed that in the circumstances  the  appellant  did  not  seek  to
    pursue the asylum claim and that he withdrew his claim in that respect.

13. I note that to the extent that the judge applied AT and others,  it  is
    arguable that this was an error, given that the  country  guidance  had
    been replaced by the decision in FA (Libya: Article  15  C  (Libya)  CG
    [2016) UKUT 00413 (IAC).   Furthermore,  although  he  could  not  have
    considered ZMM, the issue of the judges risk assessment  under  Article
    15 c is now arguably flawed in the light of the conclusions reached  in
    that decision.

14. In the light of the decision of the most  recent  country  guidance  as
    referred to in the preceding paragraphs, the Appellant's appeal will be
    remade. The parties agree that the correct outcome is that  the  appeal
    should be allowed on the basis of Article 15 (c).

    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law. The decision is set aside and remade by  consent  as
    follows; I remake the decision in respect of Article 15 (c) by allowing
    the appeal on that ground and on Article 8 grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  [pic]                           Date 22 /11/2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

