
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06707/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 14 November 2017                      |On 6 March 2018                     |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART


                                   Between

                                     S.K
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Easty of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan.  He was born  on  1  January
    1988.

 2. He appealed against the respondent's refusal to grant him asylum  dated
    14 June 2016.  The respondent  did  not  accept  the  appellant  was  a
    credible witness with regard to events in his own country such that  he
    would not be at risk on return.

 3. The appeal was dismissed by Judge Francis  J  Farrelly  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 22 May 2017.  The judge did not accept the appellant was
    credible.  See [18]-[21].

 4. There are four grounds:

 5. Ground 1.  The judge failed to consider that  it  was  the  appellant's
    claim that he was beaten unconscious and the Taliban might have thought
    he was dead.   See  his  witness  statement  at  [8]  (page  4  of  the
    appellant's bundle).  Further, at the time of the  attack  the  Taliban
    were not aware of his name and family.  See statement at [9].

 6. Ground 2.  The judge said he did not  accept  that  the  Taliban  would
    resort to sending threatening letters rather than taking  action.   The
    ground claims the  judge  erred  because  he  failed  to  consider  the
    background evidence in relation to the Taliban and threatening  letters
    which are called night letters.  See pages 126-127 of  the  appellant's
    bundle.

 7. Ground 3.  The judge said the appellant could relocate to Kabul but  at
    [21] of his decision he accepted that there is reference to tribal  and
    family connections being a means of identifying  persons.   The  ground
    claims that the judge had not given consideration to the fact that  the
    appellant's family are a well-known military family.  The judge  failed
    to consider pages 113-115 of the  appellant's  background  evidence  in
    relation to the Taliban tracing those who are wanted by them.

 8. Ground 4.  The judge failed to consider the witness  statement  of  the
    appellant's father and whether he accepted the truth of that statement.
     The judge failed to consider the documents from the appellant's family
    members and MSM (journalists; political opinion; risk)  Somalia  [2015]
    UKUT 00413 (IAC) which was referred to by Counsel, given the fact  that
    the appellant said in his evidence that there was no other work that he
    would do in Afghanistan apart from with the military.

 9. Judge Saffer in a decision dated 12 September 2017 considered that  all
    grounds were arguable for the reasons set out in the application,  that
    is, inadequate consideration of the "facts" asserted regarding the  bus
    incident and inadequate findings regarding the risk associated from the
    appellant's past army service.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Ms Easty relied upon the grounds.  The judge carried out an  inadequate
    analysis.  The judge had failed to engage with the appellant's evidence
    in terms of background material and statements of his  family  some  of
    whom had been granted asylum here.

11. Mr Tufan submitted that the judge had engaged with the issues.  He  had
    assessed the appellant's circumstances against the appropriate case law
    AK (Article 15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) although  the
    judge had in error called it HJ.

Conclusion on Error of Law

12. There was considerable material with which the judge failed to  engage.
    The  sum  total  of  his  analysis  was  contained  within  two   short
    paragraphs, [18] and [19] of his decision.  I do not  accept  that  the
    judge gave this asylum appeal anxious scrutiny.   There  is  either  no
    analysis or an inadequate  analysis  of  the  appellant's  account  set
    against the judge's reasons for disbelieving  the  account.   What  the
    judge has done is to set out the respondent's view of  the  application
    without properly engaging with the appellant's evidence.  At  [18]  and
    [19] the judge adopts a plausibility approach to the appellant's  claim
    without analysis of the claimed events.

Notice of Decision

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in its  entirety  as  it
contains material errors of law.  The appeal will be reheard de novo in  the
First-tier.

Short directions are attached to this decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 14 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
