
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06481/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Civil Justice Centre, Manchester     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                          |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     t t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, TT, was born in 1995 and is  a  female  citizen  of  the
    Democratic Republic of Congo (DRC).  She initially applied  for  asylum
    in September 2014.  That claim was refused and an  appeal  subsequently
    dismissed on 9 July 2015 by Judge  Smith.   She  appeal  became  rights
    exhausted on 16 September 2015.  The appellant made further submissions
    on 13 March 2017 which were rejected by the Secretary of State but  the
    appellant was granted limited leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
    under D-LTRPT1.2 (parental relationship)  The  appellant  proceeded  to
    appeal against her asylum refusal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Malik) which, in a decision promulgated on 21 November 2017,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The appellant now appeals, with permission, to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. In this litigation, the appellant has been  without  solicitors  for  a
    period of time but  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  the  benefit  of
    representation by Counsel, Mr  Holmes.   The  Secretary  of  State  was
    represented by Ms Aboni, a Senior Home Office Presenting  Officer.   Mr
    Holmes  explained  that,  although  there  were  two  sets  of   appeal
    (permission having been granted in the Upper Tribunal upon renewal) the
    appellant sought to rely upon one ground from the first set of  grounds
    of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal (the  appellant  now  has  limited
    leave to remain until 27 December 2019 and argues  that,  in  light  of
    that grant of leave, she had no motive for dissembling  in  respect  of
    her asylum application) but otherwise relies upon the grounds of appeal
    renewed to the Upper Tribunal.  The previous judge  (Judge  Smith)  had
    found that the appellant's  account  of  past  events  was  unreliable.
    Judge Malik relied upon the authority of Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department v D (Tamil) [2002]  UKIAT  00702  *  and  rejected  the
    credibility of the appellant's account.  She did so notwithstanding the
    evidence included a medical report (Freedom from Torture) which had not
    been before the first  Tribunal.   The  report  gave  support  for  the
    appellant's claim to have been raped whilst in detention.   The  report
    also gave support for the appellant's claim to have  attempted  suicide
    whilst in the United Kingdom.  The grounds of appeal complain that  the
    judge has not made a clear finding as to whether she accepted that this
    attempt had been made.

 3. Mr Holmes submitted that it was not open to  the  judge  to  attach  no
    weight to the medical report.  The judge had failed properly to analyse
    the  state  of  mind  of  the  appellant  consequent  upon  her  sexual
    mistreatment and how this may have affected the evidence which she  had
    given as part of her asylum claim.  The judge had failed to  apply  the
    principles of J v Secretary of State for  the  Home  Department  [2005]
    EWCA Civ 629 as regards suicide risk on return to DRC.

 4. I find that Judge Malik has produced a detailed and  thorough  decision
    which is not flawed in law for the reasons asserted in  either  of  the
    sets of grounds of appeal or at all.  The judge was fully aware of  the
    issues raised by the submission of the  Freedom  from  Torture  report.
    She subjected those issues to a detailed analysis but did so  correctly
    in the context of the previous credibility  findings  of  the  Tribunal
    (Devaseelan).  The judge  has  provided  an  accurate  summary  of  the
    decision in Devaseelan [40].  She accepted [45] the diagnosis  of  PTSD
    (post-traumatic stress disorder) and depression.  Quite  properly,  the
    judge treated the appellant as  a  vulnerable  witness.   However,  the
    judge has not, as the grounds of appeal suggest, given no weight to the
    new medical evidence.  At [50] the judge wrote:

         "For the above reasons and as per Devaseelan I do not find that new
         evidence such as this is one of those "occasional cases" where  the
         circumstances surrounding the first appeal were such that it  would
         be right for the second Tribunal to look at the matter  as  if  the
         first determination had never been  made  as  the  issues  at  this
         appeal are materially the same, even accepting  now  the  appellant
         has a diagnosis."

 5. That conclusion followed on from the judge's finding that the author of
    the medical report  had  been  misled  as  to  material  facts  of  the
    appellant's account.  However, the judge has not simply assumed that to
    be the case because a previous Tribunal has  rejected  the  appellant's
    credibility.  Rather, in paragraphs [45-49] the  judge  gives  detailed
    reasons why, notwithstanding the observations of  the  medical  report,
    the appellant should not be treated as a reliable witness.   There  are
    significant problems with the  chronology  provided  by  the  appellant
    which the judge  considers  at  [46].    There  remains  a  significant
    discrepancy as to whether the appellant was a member  or  supporter  of
    the organisation CDP [47].  The judge was particularly  concerned  that
    the appellant was now seeking to rely upon documentary  evidence  which
    had been produced many months after the events to which  the  documents
    relate.  That was a finding reasonably open to the judge and I  do  not
    find that the appellant has successfully challenged it.  At  [49],  the
    judge refers to HE [2004] UKIAT 00321 and looks at some detail  at  the
    difficulties  facing  doctors  especially  those  writing   psychiatric
    reports who are "even more dependent on what a patient says" than where
    there may be physical evidence  of  past  ill-treatment.   The  judge's
    approach is, in my opinion, free from legal error.  Mr Holmes submitted
    that Judge Malik should have asked herself whether  Judge  Smith  would
    have reached different findings had he had  the  Freedom  from  Torture
    report before him.  I do not consider that is the correct approach.  If
    it were, it seems likely that,  in  any  case  where  new  evidence  is
    produced, findings of a previous Tribunal would have  to  be  discarded
    since one could not be sure  that  the  new  evidence  would  not  have
    affected the analysis of credibility.  In the present appeal, the judge
    has considered the  new  evidence  in  detail,  she  has  accepted  the
    diagnosis of PTSD and depression  which  was  within  the  professional
    competence of the author of the medical report and has given clear  and
    cogent reasons for concluding that the account of past events given  by
    the appellant to the author of the report was no more reliable than the
    account given to the previous Tribunal and to the Secretary  of  State.
    Those were findings properly open to Judge Malik on the evidence.

 6. As regards the suicide attempt, I find that the judge  has  dealt  with
    this adequately at [55].   At  [55],  she  appears  to  accept  without
    questioning that the appellant did, as she claimed, attempt suicide  or
    had suicidal ideation but properly considers what medical resources and
    family support network she would be able to access on  return  to  DRC.
    Her conclusions at [55] deal adequately with  suicide  risk  which  the
    judge finds is not at such a level  as  to  entitle  the  appellant  to
    protection in the United Kingdom.

 7. As regards the lack of any motive to  dissemble  on  the  part  of  the
    appellant given her grant of limited leave to remain, I find that  this
    ground has no merit.  The appellant has now advanced accounts  of  past
    events in DRC which two Tribunals have  considered  to  be  unreliable.
    Judge Malik has  given  sound  reasons  for  applying  Devaseelan  and,
    notwithstanding the new medical  evidence,  refraining  from  departing
    from the findings of credibility made by the previous  Tribunal.   This
    appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 10 December 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 5 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

