
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06163/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals,          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Liverpool                                     |                              |
|On 13th August 2018                           |On 25th September 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  DANA [A]
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss N Wilkens (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Alis, promulgated on 4th August  2017,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester  on  26th  July  2017.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq, appealed against the decision of  the
    Respondent dated 13th June 2017 refusing his application for asylum and
    human rights protection under paragraph 339C of HC 395.  The  basis  of
    the Appellant's claim is that he is a Sunni Kurd,  who  speaks  Kurdish
    Sorani, and has limited knowledge of Arabic.  He  was  born  in  Kirkuk
    where he lived with his family until around 2003.  This is when he  and
    his family moved to Adhbah, in the Nineveh province.  His  village  was
    close to Mosul.  His father had worked for the  Ba'ath  Party.   Around
    November 2016 Daesh came to his  village  and  tried  recruiting  young
    males.  They knocked on all the houses and  took  details  of  who  was
    there.  Two days later, the Appellant, his mother and his  sister  fled
    the village.  They went to Turkey.  They remained for five weeks.  From
    there, the Appellant came to the UK.  He  now  claims  that  he  cannot
    return to Kirkuk or to Adhbah because these are "contested areas".   He
    cannot relocate to the IKR because  he  does  not  have  the  means  of
    support and his father was a member of the Ba'ath Party and harmed  the
    Kurdish so would be unable  to  return  to  the  IKR.   He  would  face
    persecution from the Peshmerga.

The Judge's Findings

 3. The judge observed that the Appellant's fear of persecution from  Daesh
    was based on the fact that they had entered  his  village  in  November
    2016 and forcibly recruited young men.  The judge  found  that  it  was
    surprising that the  Appellant  himself  was  not  forcibly  recruited,
    although the judge accepted that for a short period of time  Daesh  did
    recruit people in the village (paragraph 49). The judge  also  observed
    that as recently as the end of  June  2017  it  has  been  reported  by
    numerous news sources that Daesh  has  been  defeated  in  their  final
    stronghold of Mosul and this was the last place in  which  they  had  a
    presence in Iraq (paragraph 52).  The judge held that the Appellant was
    not entitled to protection especially in the light  of  the  fact  that
    Daesh were no longer there (paragraph 53).

 4. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge wrongly  departed  from
    established country guidance in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq [2015] UKUT 544
    and the case of BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018.  The
    judge failed to identify what country evidence  provided  "very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence" that entitled him to depart  from
    country guidance.  All that the judge had done was to refer vaguely  to
    news reports in  the  public  domain  without  identifying  them.   The
    Respondent did not submit that evidence nor rely on it.  In fact, there
    was no evidence before  the  judge  that  supported  his  evidence  (at
    paragraph  52)  that  Daesh  no  longer  has  a   presence   in   Iraq.
    Accordingly, the judge wrongly found that the Appellant can  internally
    relocate to the IKR.

 6. On 12th  December  2017,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  the
    Tribunal, on the basis that it was arguable that the  judge  failed  to
    identify  any  particular  evidence  relied  upon   to   displace   the
    established country guidance.  The judge  also  failed  to  assess  the
    durability of the situation in Iraq upon which he based  the  dismissal
    of the appeal.

 7. On 17th January 2018, a Rule 24 response was entered by the  Respondent
    to the effect that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate why internal
    relocation to the IKR would not be possible.  The judge had given clear
    and concise reasons as  to  why  the  appeal  could  not  succeed  (see
    paragraphs 66 to 71) and that internal relocation to the IKR would  not
    be unreasonable.  The Appellant was 32 years of age and in good  health
    and it was clearly open to the judge to find that he would not need his
    family to support him in Iraq.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 13th August 2018, Miss  Wilkens,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, relied upon  the  grounds  of  application.
    The judge needed to show  that  there  was  evidence  of  "very  strong
    grounds supported by cogent evidence" if country  guidance  was  to  be
    displaced.  The country guidance established that both Mosul and Kirkuk
    were contested areas.  Second, internal relocation  was  wrongly  dealt
    with by the judge, because the judge failed to deal with tribal  issues
    and  employment  issues.   The  official  position  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State is that enforced return is only  to  Baghdad,  which
    would mean that the Appellant would need a CSID, which he had  left  in
    his home village, and it was unclear what had happened to it,  but  the
    judge does not deal with this issue at all.  The judge has to  consider
    the availability of CSID, whether from family or friends, or otherwise.

 9. For his part, Mr Diwnycz submitted that he would rely upon the Rule  24
    response dated 17th January 2018.  He submitted that at the date of the
    hearing, there were no international flights to Erbil and  Sulaimaniya,
    but they had now been reinstated as of 28th March 2018.   Even  so,  he
    accepted that  enforcement  proceedings  only  apply  with  respect  to
    returns to Baghdad.  He would have to  accept  also  that  the  refusal
    letter therefore made it clear that the Appellant could return  to  the
    IKR, but without considering whether a CSID would be available to  him,
    once he had arrived back in Baghdad.  The judge did not  consider  this
    question.

10. In reply, Miss Wilkens submitted  that  the  Appellant  does  not  have
    connections in the IKR.  He does not  have  any  work  experience.   He
    would not be able to seek employment there.  He  has  lost  touch  with
    people.





Error of Law

11. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.

12. First, as Miss Wilkens makes clear in her detailed and helpful skeleton
    argument, the  judge  does  not  point  to  any  "very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence", such that it enables him to depart  from
    the country guidance given in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq [2015]  UKUT  544
    as well as BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq  CG  [2017]  UKUT  00018.   The
    judge also does not give consideration to AA  (Iraq)  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    944.  A reliance upon other evidence, on the basis that it  is  "openly
    reported within the public domain" (paragraph 52)  is  insufficient  to
    displace the requirement that country guidance is to be followed.

13. Second, the judge  does  not  give  consideration  to  the  Appellant's
    ability to procure a CSID card.   These  issues  have  been  important,
    particularly since the 2017 case of  AA  (Iraq),  which  has  now  been
    refined by the more recent case of AAH (Iraq) [2018]  UKUT  212,  which
    was not available at the time of the hearing  or  the  decision,  being
    promulgated only more recently on 26th June 2018, but which is relevant
    to the issue of the CSID when it falls to be reconsidered  again  by  a
    judge other than Judge Alis.

14. Accordingly, although I make a finding on an error of  law,  I  do  not
    proceed to re-make the decision, because this matter must  return  back
    to a judge other than Judge Alis under  Practice  Statement  7.2(b)  so
    that the position of the Appellant with regard to the availability of a
    CSID card (which is not to be confused with the possession of a laissez-
    passer) can be considered properly upon the evidence.

Notice of Decision

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law, such that it falls to be set aside.  I set aside the
    decision of the original judge.  I re-make  the  decision  as  follows.
    This appeal is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard by
    a judge other than Judge Alis, pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b) of
    TCEA 2007.

16. No anonymity direction is made.

17. This appeal is allowed.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd September 2018

