
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06466/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 March 2018                              |On 21 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     S R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, instructed by Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, S R, was born in 1985 and is a female citizen  of  Iran.
    She arrived in the United Kingdom  in  January  2017  and  applied  for
    asylum.  Her application was refused  by  decision  of  the  respondent
    dated 22 June 2017.  The appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge T R Smith), which, in a determination promulgated on  21  August
    2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of  appeal.   In  addition  to  the  grounds  as
    pleaded, Mr Brown, who appeared for  the  appellant  before  the  Upper
    Tribunal, indicated that there was a "Robinson" point  arising  in  the
    appeal which had not been addressed before the First-tier Tribunal  but
    which was of significant relevance.  It was unclear from the papers  in
    this appeal whether the appellant's son (born May 2011) and who is with
    the appellant in the United Kingdom had been considered as a  dependant
    in her appeal or otherwise.  Further, the appellant  claimed  that  she
    had left Iran illegally having divorced from the father of  her  child.
    Mr Brown submitted that it would have been necessary for the  appellant
    to have obtained the consent of the father of the  child  in  order  to
    leave Iran and that, upon her return, her illegal  exit,  coupled  with
    her failure to obtain consent, might possibly  expose  her  to  a  real
    risk.  Mrs Aboni, who appeared for the Secretary of State, acknowledged
    that the Tribunal should have dealt with this issue notwithstanding the
    fact that it appears not to have been raised in the grounds  of  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.  It was, she submitted, an issue which  now
    needed to be addressed.

 3. Mr Brown submitted that his client's strongest ground was Ground  Four.
    Before the First-tier Tribunal, the appellant relied upon the  evidence
    of a Mr [S].  The judge acknowledged that [18-19], Mr [S] had  provided
    a written statement and also gave oral evidence  before  the  Tribunal.
    Beyond  that,  there  is  no  discussion  of  his   evidence   in   the
    determination of the First-tier Tribunal.  Mr Brown submitted that this
    omission constituted an error of law.  If the judge attached no  weight
    or limited weight to the evidence of  Mr  [S],  he  should  have  given
    reasons for doing so.  Mrs Aboni submitted that Mr [S]'s  evidence  was
    of  limited  value  in  any  event.   The  appellant  claimed  to  fear
    persecution in Iran on account of her Baha'i faith.  Mr  [S],  although
    he had given evidence to the effect that the appellant had  been  taken
    to Baha'i meetings by car, he was not himself an adherent of the Baha'i
    faith.

 4. In the light of Mrs Aboni's position on the "Robinson"  point  referred
    to above, I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be
    set aside.  I agree with both advocates  that  the  issue  of  risk  on
    return  went  beyond  the  credibility  findings  in  respect  of   the
    appellant's claimed religion; having found that the appellant's account
    of her religious conversion was not credible, the judge should, in  any
    event, have gone on to consider whether she was at real risk on  return
    to Iran.  Further, I find that the judge has erred in law by not making
    any  findings  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of  Mr  [S].   Mr  Brown
    acknowledged that Mr [S] might  not  be  in  a  position  to  give  any
    evidence regarding the authenticity of the  appellant's  conversion  to
    the Baha'i faith, but his evidence regarding taking  the  appellant  to
    Baha'i meetings should have been assessed.  I have  considered  whether
    to preserve any of the findings of fact of the First-tier Tribunal  and
    have  decided  that  it  would  be  better  not  to  do  so.   In   the
    circumstances there will need to be a new fact-finding  exercise  which
    is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which  this  case  is
    now returned to remake the decision.



Notice of Decision

 5. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  21
    August 2017 is set aside.  None of the findings of  fact  shall  stand.
    The case is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge T  R  Smith)
    for that Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 19 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

