
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06790/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4th October 2018                   |On 22 October 2018                   |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL
                          UPPER TRIBNAL JUDGE BLUM


                                   Between

                                     a r
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Hulse, Counsel instructed by M & K Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
       Dean, promulgated on 25th July  2018,  in  which  he  dismissed  the
       protection and human  rights  appeal  of  the  appellant  against  a
       refusal by the respondent, dated 23 May  2018,  of  the  appellant's
       protection and human rights claims.



Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He was born in  1984.   He
       entered the United Kingdom in  September  2009  as  a  student.   He
       applied for leave to remain as a Tier 1  (Post-Study  Work)  Migrant
       and then again as a Tier 4 (General) Student, the last period  being
       valid until 30th April 2016.  On 2nd May 2016 the appellant made  an
       application on the  basis  of  his  family/private  life.  This  was
       refused by the respondent on 24th July 2017. The appellant had  also
       made an application for leave to remain  on  compassionate  grounds.
       This application was refused on 10th August 2017. The appellant  was
       then detained on 20th November 2017. It is pertinent to  note  that,
       in the interview following his arrest, he claimed to have  witnessed
       suicide attacks in Pakistan but did not mention any attack on him or
       that he received any threats.

    3. On 28th November 2017 the appellant made an asylum claim based on  a
       fear of persecution in Pakistan as a Shia Muslim. We  summarise  his
       claim. From 2004 or 2005 he worked as  a  youth  coordinator  for  a
       religious organisation, the Khairul Amal Foundation which  was  part
       of the  NWM,  a  political  organisation.  In  2007  he  started  to
       experience problems because of his religion.  He was attacked on his
       way home and beaten  whilst  being  subjected  to  anti-Shia  abuse.
       Whilst participating in a procession around  September/October  2007
       he apprehended a person who was acting suspiciously and brought this
       person to the attention of security guards. After this  incident  he
       started to receive threatening  letters  from  Lashkar-e-Jhangvi,  a
       banned extremist organisation very much opposed to the rights of the
       Shia Muslim population.  These threats occurred seven to eight times
       around 2008.  As a result, he believed that his  life  would  be  in
       danger and fled the country.

    4. In his refusal letter the respondent accepted that the appellant was
       Shia but did not accept that he was an  activist  and  rejected  his
       account to have  encountered  any  difficulties  in  Pakistan  as  a
       result.

The First-tier Tribunal decision

    5. The appellant exercised his right of appeal.  At the outset  of  his
       appeal hearing before the First-tier Tribunal on 28th June 2018  the
       judge noted,  as  a  preliminary  matter,  that  there  was  medical
       evidence before him, and noted the  submission  that  the  appellant
       ought to be treated as a vulnerable witness.

    6. The medical evidence indicated  that  the  appellant  was  receiving
       antidepressants, was on a course for depression and  low  mood,  and
       was receiving CBT (Cognitive  Behavioural  Therapy).  There  was  no
       clear medical diagnosis of PTSD, although a  chartered  psychologist
       indicated (in letters dated 8th June 2017 and 21st June  2017)  that
       the appellant displayed some  symptoms  of  PTSD.   These  included,
       inter  alia,  hopelessness,  loss  of   appetite,   motivation   and
       concentration, and problems with short  and  long-term  memory.  The
       letters also indicated that the appellant thought of the suicide but
       had no immediate plans,  and  that  his  religiosity  was  a  strong
       protective factor. His immigration case was said to  be  making  his
       condition worse, and the letter dated 21st June 2017  described  the
       appellant's immigration status as the major source of  distress  for
       him. We remind ourselves that in the interview following his  arrest
       on 20th November 2017 the appellant said he witnessed  suicide  bomb
       blasts and the death of a neighbour, but  he  did  not  mention  any
       threats made to him personally.

    7. At [4] the judge reminded himself of the Joint Presidential Guidance
       Note No. 2 of 2010 and  indicated  that  he  conducted  the  hearing
       accordingly. He observation that, at the end  of  the  hearing,  the
       appellant's representative confirmed that he had no  concerns  about
       the conduct of the proceedings. The judge heard oral  evidence  from
       the appellant and  submissions  from  the  representatives.  In  the
       section of his decision entitled findings of  fact  and  credibility
       the judge accepted the appellant's evidence of his involvement  with
       the Khairul Amal Group and, having looked at  the  totality  of  the
       evidence, accepted that the appellant had been involved in community
       activities and that he continued to practise his Shia faith  in  the
       UK.

    8. The judge  observed  that  the  appellant  had  never  reported  any
       incident to the police in Pakistan. When asked why he had  not,  the
       appellant said he did not trust  the  police  and  that  there  were
       people in the police who did not  like  Shia.   The  CIG  Report  on
       Pakistan dealing with the position of Shia Muslims stated that there
       was, in general,  a  willingness  by  the  Pakistan  authorities  to
       protect Shia, although there was a lack of resources  which  limited
       the security forces' ability to protect the community at all  times.
       The  judge  additionally  noted  the   Tribunal   decision   in   AW
       (sufficiency of protection) Pakistan [2011] UKUT 31 which found that
       there was a systematic sufficiency of State protection.

    9. At paragraph 15 the judge stated,

          I find it is not credible that if  the  appellant  received  death
          threats from Lashkar-e-Jhangvi he would fail to report it  to  the
          police because it is  a  known  anti-Shia  extremist  organisation
          which has been banned in Pakistan.  Even if the appellant  thought
          he would not be protected at all times I find that,  at  the  very
          least, he could  reasonably  be  expected  to  have  reported  the
          letters to the police so that they were aware that this  extremist
          organisation was active in his area.  I therefore  find  that  the
          appellant's failure to report the death  threats  from  Lashkar-e-
          Jhangvi goes against the credibility of his account of the facts.

   10. The judge then considered the appellant's account of the  suspicious
       person he observed during a  procession.   The  appellant  had  been
       unable to explain how this person knew who he was or how this person
       could have obtained the appellant's home address in  order  for  the
       threatening letters to be delivered.  Nor was the appellant able  to
       offer any explanation as  to  how  his  telephone  number  had  been
       obtained. The judge found that the appellant's inability to  provide
       any such explanation undermined his credibility.


   11. The judge then noted the significant delay in the appellant's asylum
       claim and the relevance of such a  delay  under  Section  8  of  the
       Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act 2004.   The
       judge noted that, in the appellant's asylum interview,  he  said  he
       did not claim asylum when he arrived in the United  Kingdom  because
       he had a visa and felt safe. However, in the  appellant's  statement
       he claimed that the events in  2007  were  an  extremely  terrifying
       ordeal and caused him extreme fear, anxiety and distress.  The judge
       did not find it credible that someone who claimed to have  fled  the
       home country in fear of their life, having  undergone  a  terrifying
       ordeal, would wait so many years before claiming asylum.


   12. At [21] the judge noted that the appellant was an educated  man  who
       had a number of opportunities to  mention  his  claimed  fears  when
       making various  applications,  and  that  in  his  asylum  interview
       reference was made to his 2016 application where the appellant  even
       mentioned that there was violence in Karachi, but  did  not  mention
       any of the facts that formed the basis of his asylum claim.

   13. Then at [23] the judge found that the  appellant's  credibility  was
       further undermined because he did not mention, when  interviewed  by
       the Home Office on 20th November 2017, that he had been attacked  or
       received death threats. The appellant was however  able  to  mention
       that he had witnessed suicide bombings and  that  this  was  a  very
       harrowing experience. At [25] the judge stated,

          Looking at the totality of the evidence before me I find that  the
          appellant has not provided evidence to the  required  standard  to
          demonstrate that he is at risk of persecution in Pakistan, or that
          there are substantial grounds for believing he faces a  real  risk
          of suffering serious harm if returned to the country.

   14. The judge then went on to consider  an  Article  3/Article  8  claim
       based on the appellant's  physical  and  mental  health.  The  judge
       considered, in significant detail, the evidence before him  relating
       to the appellant's mental health. At [34] the  judge  accepted  that
       the appellant had been receiving "talking therapies" and  medication
       for anxiety and depression, and that his depression had,  at  times,
       been severe. The judge noted however that without an  expert  report
       from  a  suitably  qualified  consultant  the   evidence   did   not
       demonstrate to the required standard that the appellant had received
       a clinical diagnosis of PTSD.  The judge proceeded  to  dismiss  the
       appeal on asylum grounds and also in  relation  to  the  appellant's
       medical condition on Articles 2, 3 and 8 grounds.

The grounds of appeal

   15. The grounds of appeal challenged  several  aspects  of  the  judge's
       conclusion.  It is however only necessary for us to detail the first
       two grounds as, for  the  reasons  set  out  below,  permission  was
       granted only on these. The first  ground  contends  that  the  judge
       failed to give the benefit of the doubt to the appellant's  evidence
       in light of his mental health.  While the judge recognised that  the
       appellant  had  mental  health  issues  he  "completely  failed   to
       demonstrate that he had considered this when  assessing  credibility
       throughout the  determination  under  the  protection  claim."   The
       grounds accepted that,  as  a  preliminary  issue,  the  judge  made
       reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note, but argue that he
       failed  to  bear  this  guidance  in  mind  when   considering   the
       appellant's credibility and "... the need to apply  the  benefit  of
       the doubt more liberally."


   16. The second ground contends that the judge erred in law by making  no
       reference to the appellant falling ill during the  proceedings.   It
       is submitted that the appellant had to lie  on  the  floor  and  was
       given water and the hearing was adjourned  to  allow  the  appellant
       time  to  recover,  but  no  reference  was  made  to  this  in  the
       determination.  It was submitted that this was relevant as it  might
       have impacted upon the appellant's ability to give oral evidence  to
       the best of his ability. It was additionally submitted that the same
       might clearly have been relevant in  the  judge's  assessment  under
       Article 8.

   17. Permission was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kelly,
       but only in respect of the first two grounds. We are grateful to  Ms
       Hulse who, in difficult circumstances, has done her best  to  expand
       upon those limited grounds. Ms Hulse accepted the limited  basis  of
       the appeal.  The essence of her submissions was that  there  was  no
       indication in the decision that the judge  had  adequately  assessed
       the appellant's credibility  by  reference  to  his  mental  health,
       especially given the extent to which the judge had acknowledged  the
       appellant's mental health problems. It was submitted that there  was
       no consideration given to any 'memory' or 'focus' problems that  may
       have prevented the appellant from giving evidence and that, in these
       circumstances, the judge should have applied  the  "benefit  of  the
       doubt".  In relation to the second ground Ms Hulse submits  that  it
       was extraordinary that there was no mention of the incident  of  the
       appellant lying down and that this was a material fact.

Discussion

   18. We are satisfied the judge was, at all times and at  all  stages  of
       his decision, aware of the appellant's  mental  health  issues.  The
       judge identified, as a preliminary matter,  the  Joint  Presidential
       Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010. According to the Guidance Note it is  a
       matter for  a  judge  to  determine  the  extent  of  an  identified
       vulnerability, the effect on the quality of the evidence  caused  by
       the vulnerability, and the weight to be placed on such vulnerability
       in assessing the evidence.  The  Guidance  Note  provides  that,  in
       assessing evidence, a judge should  be  aware  that  some  forms  of
       disability cause or result in impaired memory. A judge needs  to  be
       aware that the order and manner in which evidence is  given  may  be
       affected by mental, psychological or emotional trauma or  disability
       and that a judge  needs  to  be  aware  that  the  comprehension  of
       questions may have also been impaired. Nowhere in the  guidance,  or
       in AM (Afghanistan) [2017] EWCA Civ 1123, where the Court of  Appeal
       specifically considered the Guidance Note, does it make any  mention
       of the "benefit of the doubt being applied liberally".


   19. The second half of the  judge's  decision  consists  of  a  detailed
       assessment  of  the  medical  evidence.   The  judge  gave  detailed
       consideration to the evidence relating to the  appellant's  physical
       and mental health.  We  are  not  persuaded  that  this  experienced
       judge, having indicated his awareness at the outset of  the  hearing
       that he had read the medical evidence and that he was aware  of  the
       Joint Presidential Guidance Note, and  then  having  evaluated  that
       evidence in considerable detail in respect of the Article 3/8  human
       rights appeal, would fail to consider that Guidance when  evaluating
       the appellant's evidence.

   20. We did not read  the  judge's  reference  to  having  conducted  the
       hearing according to the Guidance Note  as  an  indication  that  he
       somehow restricted the application of the Guidance  to  the  hearing
       itself.  In  any  event,  the  majority  of  the   judge's   adverse
       credibility findings are based on matters that are unaffected by any
       impairment in the appellant's memory, or  confusion  or  a  lack  of
       comprehension on his part.

   21.  At [13], [14] and [15] the  judge  found  it  incredible  that  the
       appellant failed to report threats to  the  authorities  given  that
       they originated from a banned organisation, and in light of the  CIG
       report indicating that there  was,  in  general,  a  sufficiency  of
       protection. The medical evidence, none of which dated back  to  2007
       or 2008, did not  suggest  that  the  appellant  suffered  from  any
       cognitive impairment, and cannot explain the appellant's failure  to
       report the threats to the authorities at that  time,  it  not  being
       suggested that his recollection of not  reporting  the  threats  was
       impaired by any current impairment.

   22. At [16]  the  judge  drew  an  adverse  inference  from  a  lack  of
       explanation given by the appellant as to  how  a  suspicious  person
       would have been able to obtain his home  address  or  his  telephone
       number. The medical evidence however provides no  proper  basis  for
       showing that the appellant's inability was attributed to his  mental
       health.

   23. At [23] the judge drew an adverse inference based on the failure  by
       the appellant to mention,  during  the  interview  conducted  on  20
       November 2017,  the  personal  attack  on  him  or  the  threats  he
       received,  in  circumstances  where  he  was  able  to  mention  his
       witnessing of suicide bomb attacks and the killing of  a  neighbour.
       We find the  judge  was  rationally  entitled  to  draw  an  adverse
       inference based on this omission.  The  appellant  described  events
       that were harrowing on 20 November 2017, and no good explanation was
       offered as to why he was unable to also mention the attack  and  the
       threats. At  [20]  and  [21]  the  judge  gave  cogent  and  legally
       sustainable reasons for drawing an adverse inference  based  on  the
       delay of some eight years in the making  of  the  protection  claim,
       especially  given  that  the  asylum  claim  closely  followed   two
       applications made by the appellant, one on the basis  of  his  human
       rights, the other on the basis of compassionate  circumstances,  and
       when he had explained in general terms the  difficulties  that  Shia
       face.  For these reasons we find no merit in the first ground.

   24. In approaching the second ground we note the absence of any evidence
       produced by the appellant in support of the asserted incident,  such
       as statements from the appellant or his  legal  representative.  The
       grounds were not signed by counsel who appeared at the hearing,  and
       no detail is given as to the material relied upon in drafting.

   25. Reference to this incident was however made  by  the  judge  in  his
       notes of the hearing, the judge observing that  the  appellant  laid
       down at the back of the court, that this occurred after he gave  his
       evidence and at the submissions stage, that the  appellant  appeared
       calm, and that his representative said he was fine ("just resting").
       We therefore proceed on the basis advanced by the appellant  in  the
       grounds - that he did lie down during the hearing, that he was given
       water and that there was a brief adjournment. Neither the  note  nor
       the draft indicate that any submissions were made in respect of this
       incident. There is no  requirement  for  a  judge  to  record  every
       occurrence during a hearing.  It  is  apparent  from  the  decision,
       holistically considered, that the judge was aware of the appellant's
       mental health issues, and that the judge accepted that his condition
       was  sometimes  severe.  The  judge  made  full  allowance  for  the
       appellant's mental health at the hearing and in  his  decision.  The
       appellant lying on the ground and being given water, necessitating a
       short adjournment at the submissions stage,  does  not  meaningfully
       add to the probative nature of the documentary evidence  before  the
       judge relating to the appellant's mental health, and the  fact  that
       it was not included in the decision does not mean that  it  was  not
       fully considered by the judge. We  note  that,  at  [4],  the  judge
       observed that the appellant's representatives confirmed  he  had  no
       concern about the conduct of the hearing. In these circumstances  we
       find there is no merit in the second ground.

Decision

First-tier Tribunal decision does not contain  any  material  legal  errors.
The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 16 October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
