
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06262/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 21 February 2020                 |On: 5 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE OWENS


                                   Between

                                   Mr MKU
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Reza, counsel instructed by JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Hobson, promulgated on  24  October  2019.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on 7 January 2020.




Anonymity

 2. Such a direction was made previously and is  retained  because  of  the
    sensitive nature of the claim which involves the appellant's sexuality.



Background

 3. The appellant, who is a national of Bangladesh, arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 4 April 2007 as a visitor. He then overstayed his visit visa
    and eventually claimed asylum on 25 May 2016.  The basis of his claim
    is that he is a gay man who is open about his sexuality and would be at
    risk of serious harm from the Bangladeshi authorities because of his
    sexuality.

 4. By way of a letter dated 26 May 2019, the Secretary  of  State  refused
    the asylum claim raising numerous concerns  about  credibility  issues,
    not  least  the  timing  of  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum.  The
    respondent did not accept that the appellant is a gay man  or  that  he
    would be persecuted if returned to Bangladesh.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The Judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  three  witnesses,
    one of whom claims to  have  a  casual  sexual  relationship  with  the
    appellant. The Judge found  that  the  appellant  was  not  a  reliable
    witness for reasons set out in her decision.

The grounds of appeal

 6. The grounds of appeal were twofold. Firstly, that the Judge  materially
    erred in drawing adverse credibility findings due to the late claim for
    asylum without having  proper  regard  to  C-148/13  to  C-150/13,  and
    secondly failed to make adequate findings or to explain what weight she
    gave to the evidence of the 3 witnesses who  attended  the  appeal.  In
    particular the Judge failed to explain why she gave no  weight  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's claimed sexual partner.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable that
    the Judge erred in law in  assessing  the  appellant's  credibility  by
    failing to make any findings in respect of the evidence of 3  witnesses
    who gave oral evidence at the hearing in support of the appellant   and
    also in his approach to the delay in claiming asylum on  the  basis  of
    sexuality and the expression of sexuality in the UK following the  CJEU
    decision in the case of A,B and C.

 8. The respondent did not submit a Rule 24 response.

Decision on error of law

 9. At the outset of the hearing  Mr  Tarlow  conceded  that  there  was  a
    material error of law and that ground 1 of the grounds was made out.

10. Three witnesses attended the appeal to give evidence in relation to the
    appellant's sexuality. One witness claimed to be  in  a  casual  sexual
    relationship with the appellant and another claimed to have seen him at
    gay venues being intimate with other  men.  All  three  witnesses  gave
    evidence that the appellant regularly  attends  meetings  of  'Apanjon'
    which is a Bangladeshi LGBTQ association.

11. At [35] to [39] the Judge summarises the evidence of the  witnesses  as
    set out in their statements, oral evidence and cross examination. There
    is thereafter in the decision  a  complete  failure  by  the  Judge  to
    consider or weigh this evidence in the round with the remainder of  the
    evidence. The Judge does not refer further to the evidence and does not
    make findings on whether the evidence is accepted or rejected.

12. Mr Tarlow conceded that the Judge's failure to take into  account  this
    evidence when making his  findings  was  an  error  of  law.   He  also
    conceded that the error was material because this evidence was  crucial
    to the assessment of the appellant's sexuality  which  is  the  central
    issue in the claim for asylum. On this basis of this concession,  I  do
    not go onto consider the remaining ground of appeal.

13. The error mentioned above suffices to render unsafe the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal and I set aside that decision in its entirety.

14. While mindful  of  statement  7  of  the  Senior  President's  Practice
    Statements of 10 February 2010, it is the case that the  appellant  has
    yet to have an adequate consideration of his asylum appeal at the First-
    tier  Tribunal  and  it  would  be  unfair  to  deprive  him  of   such
    consideration.

Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error of on a point of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.

The appeal is remitted, de novo, to the First-tier Tribunal  to  be  reheard
at a venue either in London or Birmingham, with a time estimate of  2  hours
by any Judge except First-tier Tribunal Judge Hobson.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:     R J Owens                                    Date:  21  February
    2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Owens

