
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard on 22nd of January 2018        |On 13th of February 2018             |
|Prepared on 31st of January 2018     |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT


                                   Between

                              MR SULEMAN MASIH
                          (Anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Malik of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan born on 15th  of  May  1988.  He
    appeals against the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Chana
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 28th of July 2017 in which she dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated  10th  of
    June  2017.  That  decision  was  to  refuse  to  grant  the  Appellant
    international protection. The Appellants entered the United Kingdom  on
    or about 31st of May 2011 with a student visa valid from  17th  of  May
    2011 until 29th of March 2014. His student leave was curtailed on  18th
    of May 2012 as the Appellant was not attending his college. On 12th  of
    August 2014 he applied for residence in the United Kingdom on the basis
    of his relationship with an EEA national but this was  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 10th of November  2014.  On  10th  of  November  2015  he
    applied for leave to remain on the basis of his family  and/or  private
    life but this was refused on 2nd of September 2016. On 18th of November
    2016 he made an appointment to claim asylum which was completed on 22nd
    of December 2016. It was the refusal  of  that  application  which  has
    given rise to the present proceedings.

The Appellant's Case

 2. The Appellant's case was that he feared a  specific  individual  called
    Khan who was persecuting  the  Appellant  because  of  the  Appellant's
    Christian faith. The Appellant was born into a devout Christian family.
    At school and in college Muslim  children  would  say  that  he  was  a
    Christian and would stop others from talking to  him  or  sitting  near
    him. At the end of 2009 his cousin had an altercation with a Muslim boy
    called Khan who hit the Appellant's cousin with his motorcycle. An hour
    later the cousin informed the Appellant of what had  happened  and  the
    two went to speak to Khan and his group  of  Muslim  friends.  A  fight
    broke out during which Khan threatened the Appellant and said he  would
    not leave him alone. Two or three weeks after the fight  the  Appellant
    relocated to Lahore where  he  stayed  until  he  came  to  the  United
    Kingdom. He returned to his parents' home in Lahore  regularly  (before
    leaving Pakistan) but did not encounter  any  problems.  The  Appellant
    stated he could not return to Pakistan because he feared  he  would  be
    killed by Khan and his associates  because  of  his,  the  Appellant's,
    religion.

The Decision at First Instance

 3. At [25] to [33] the Judge gave her reasons why she  did  not  find  the
    Appellant to be a credible witness and did not accept his account.  The
    altercation between Khan, the Appellant and the Appellant's cousin [the
    Judge refers  at  [25]  and  thereafter  to  the  Appellant's  brother]
    happened in 2009. It was not  credible  that  Khan  would  continue  to
    pursue the Appellant and continue to ask about him for seven years when
    it must have been obvious  to  Khan  that  the  Appellant  was  not  in
    Pakistan because he had been unable to  find  him  during  those  seven
    years. It was not credible  that  Khan  would  continue  to  visit  the
    Appellant's parents and threaten them in those circumstances.

 4. When asked to describe what the "huge incident" was that  had  happened
    in 2009 the Appellant's  description  was  that  his  cousin  saw  Khan
    looking at Christian girls and  his  cousin  tried  to  stop  him.  The
    Appellant said that a fight broke out and Khan hit the cousin. When  he
    went up to Khan to ask him why he had done this Khan started  to  abuse
    the Appellant. The Judge did not consider this could be categorised  as
    a "huge incident" such that Khan would pursue the Appellant  for  seven
    years. It was not credible that the Appellant's  relative  would  think
    that he could stop anyone looking at girls Christian or  otherwise.  It
    was not credible that the Appellant's parents would send the  Appellant
    to Lahore and not his brother given that it was the  relative  who  had
    started the fight with Khan. An FIR produced by the  Appellant  related
    to the cousin's relationship with a Muslim girl forced  to  convert  to
    Islam. This did not assist the Appellant. The Appellant had never  been
    accused of blasphemy and  when  asked  about  that  the  Appellant  had
    refused to answer.

 5. There was no credible evidence that the Appellant had ever  evangelised
    in Pakistan or indeed in the United Kingdom. Christians in general were
    permitted  to  practice  their  faith,  could  attend   church,   could
    participate in religious activities  and  had  their  own  schools  and
    hospitals. The Appellant had lived in Pakistan for most  of  his  life.
    There was no evidence that he and his parents suffered any serious harm
    other than the general discrimination endured  by  Christians  in  that
    country. The Appellant could  internally  relocate  to  live  with  his
    parents in Lahore and it would not be unduly harsh  to  live  there  or
    anywhere else in Pakistan. She dismissed the appeal.

The Onward Appeal

 6. The Appellant appealed against that decision noting that the Judge  had
    erred at [2]  of  the  determination  by  referring  to  the  Appellant
    unlawfully entering the United Kingdom on 31st of May 2011 when in fact
    he had entered with a valid student visa. It was not  unusual  that  an
    assailant such as Khan could pursue a sectarian  vendetta  against  the
    Appellant seven years after their encounter. The recent threats to  the
    Appellant's parents had been reported to the local police  station  and
    documented in court. The fear of serious harm which the  Appellant  had
    came from his religious faith as a Christian and it was not just  based
    on his encounter with Khan in 2009. Sectarian attacks in Pakistan  were
    not confined to evangelical Christians, they affected  all  Christians.
    Anyone who was not at Muslim was regarded as an infidel who  should  be
    subject to persecution. The Judge had failed to take into  account  the
    background material  produced  by  the  Appellant  of  attacks  against
    Christians in Pakistan.

 7. The finding that the Appellant's parents  had  not  suffered  harm  was
    inconsistent with the Appellant's parents  sworn  statement  that  they
    were subject to a series  of  attacks.  The  Appellant  had  previously
    relocated  to  Lahore  but  had  been  found  there  by  Khan  and  his
    associates. The Appellant's internal relocation options were restricted
    to a few minority Christian communities.  The  Judge  had  applied  the
    wrong standard of proof and had relied too heavily on the  Respondent's
    reasons for refusal.

 8. The application for permission to appeal  came  on  the  papers  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Brunnen  on  30th  of  October  2017.
    Granting permission to appeal he wrote that whilst it was an  error  in
    the determination to state that the Appellant had  entered  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully it was immaterial to  the  outcome  of  the  appeal.
    There was no arguable error in the Judge finding that the Appellant was
    not at risk of harm simply because he was a Christian nor had the Judge
    applied an incorrect standard of proof.

 9. What was arguable was the Judge's omission of the 2017  court  petition
    of the Appellant's parents when considering  whether  it  was  credible
    that Khan would maintain his threats against the  Appellant  for  seven
    years. It was also arguable that the Judge had failed to  consider  and
    make findings as to the evidence that Khan had traced  the  Appellant's
    parents to Lahore and failed to consider the effect of the  Appellant's
    religion on the Appellant's ability to relocate.

10. The Respondent replied to the grant of permission by letter dated  20th
    of November 2017 arguing that the Judge's findings were  open  to  her.
    Given the seven years between  the  incident  involving  Khan  and  the
    Appellant's asylum claim in 2016 the Judge  was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the claim that Khan was still harassing the Appellant's parents in
    Pakistan  was  not  true  or  reasonably  likely.  The  fact  that  the
    Appellant's parents had sworn an affidavit in July  2017  attesting  to
    this was not material. There was  no  evidence  that  the  parents  had
    pursued Khan themselves. The Judge's findings had had regard to country
    guidance authority in  relation  to  Christians  in  Pakistan  and  the
    background material. The Judge had not needed to recite this  in  order
    to have applied it appropriately.

The Hearing Before Me

11. At the hearing before me to determine  whether  there  was  a  material
    error of law in the Judge's determination such that it fell to  be  set
    aside and the decision remade, counsel argued there were 3 brief points
    he wished to add to the grounds. The first related to the Judge's error
    when describing the Appellant's immigration history that the  Appellant
    had  unlawfully  entered  the  United  Kingdom  in  2011.  It  was  the
    Respondent who had alleged that the Appellant's leave was curtailed but
    it was for the Respondent to prove that a curtailment letter was served
    on the Appellant. There was nothing on which to base the  finding  that
    the Appellant was not attending college.

12. The 2nd point was  that  the  Judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  the
    Appellant's evidence of the affidavit made by his parents that they had
    received threats from Khan. This was an error which was relevant to the
    issue of relocation.

13. The 3rd point was that the Judge had misunderstood who took part in the
    altercation in 2009. It was not the  Appellant's  brother  it  was  the
    Appellant's cousin who was assaulted by Khan. This was  made  clear  in
    the Appellant's witness statement  and  the  Judge  had  erred  in  her
    description of the incident. The Judge also erred in stating  that  the
    Appellant said he returned home regularly. That did not  mean  that  he
    returned to Pakistan, it meant that he used to go and  see  his  family
    when he returned to live in Lahore and would stay for two to three days
    (see questions 123 and 124 of the substantive asylum interview). Looked
    at as a whole there were serious  errors  in  the  determination  which
    should be set aside and the matter remitted back to the  First-tier  to
    be re-decided.

14. For the Respondent it was submitted that there were no material  errors
    of law in the decision. The Judge's findings were open to  her  on  the
    evidence. The Appellant had put in a number of applications  for  leave
    to remain which had failed until finally he made an asylum claim.  This
    delay undermined his credibility. He had, it was acknowledged,  entered
    the United Kingdom lawfully not  unlawfully.  At  [18]  the  Judge  had
    recorded the Appellant's evidence that he could not go  to  the  police
    because Muslims might accuse him of blasphemy. This was  not  supported
    by the Appellant's own evidence  that  his  parents  had  gone  to  the
    authorities apparently to report the threats received from Khan.

15. Little weight could be  placed  on  the  petition  of  the  Appellant's
    parents. The petition had referred to Khan and  his  friends  attacking
    the parents' home and torturing the Appellant's family.  That  was  not
    part of the Appellant's own case. The document was  looked  at  by  the
    Judge but she did  not  consider  that  it  supported  the  Appellant's
    account.  It  was  correct  that  the  Judge  had   referred   in   her
    determination  to  the  Appellant's  brother  being  involved  in   the
    altercation  with  Khan  but  this  was  not  a  material  error.   The
    Appellant's case was that he relied on a one-off event  which  occurred
    in 2009 yet had never been accused of blasphemy. The Judge's finding at
    [25] that it was implausible that Khan  would  continue  to  visit  the
    Appellant's parents was a finding open to the Judge when assessing  the
    evidence.

16. In conclusion, counsel for the Appellant  stated  that  the  Judge  had
    referred throughout at paragraphs  [25]  to  [28]  to  the  Appellant's
    brother being involved in the fight but the claim  had  nothing  to  do
    with the brother. It had only ever been that  it  was  the  Appellant's
    cousin who was involved. That was a material error of fact.

Findings

17. This is a reasons based challenge to a  determination  which  dismissed
    the Appellant's appeal against  refusal  of  international  protection.
    There are three main points made by the Appellant. The  first  is  that
    the Judge erred in describing the  Appellant  as  entering  the  United
    Kingdom unlawfully in 2011. That was not found by the First-tier to  be
    an arguable error of law upon which  permission  to  appeal  should  be
    granted and I would agree with that  point.  The  Judge  does  not  for
    example at a later stage in the  determination  base  any  findings  or
    assessment of the evidence on allegation that the Appellant entered the
    United Kingdom unlawfully.  She  should  be  taken  to  know  that  the
    Appellant did in fact enter the United Kingdom lawfully and  that  this
    is merely a mistake.

18. The 2nd point is that the Judge failed to engage with an  affidavit  or
    petition sworn by the Appellant's parents.  The  difficulty  with  this
    document was that it conflicted with the Appellant's own  case  as  was
    pointed out in  submissions  to  me  by  the  Presenting  Officer.  The
    argument is that  by  not  dealing  in  terms  with  the  petition  she
    materially erred by failing to take into account relevant evidence. The
    Judge was aware of the existence of the petition because  she  referred
    to it at [18] and was aware at [25] that the Appellant's claim was that
    his parents were being threatened. The problem with this is  that  this
    document did not support the Appellant's claim because it  referred  to
    matters which were not in the  Appellant's  case.  If  the  Appellant's
    parents had been tortured as the petition claimed it is  reasonable  to
    have expected the Appellant to have mentioned such claims.

19. The Judge was assessing the claim on the basis primarily  of  what  the
    Appellant said his case was. He did not refer to  the  alleged  torture
    and it was not incumbent on the Judge to consider in her  determination
    each and every piece of evidence that was put forward where  (as  here)
    that evidence did not assist the Tribunal because  it  conflicted  with
    the Appellant's  own  case.  Indeed,  when  the  Appellant  prepared  a
    supplementary statement dated 24th of July 2017 four  days  before  the
    scheduled hearing before the First-tier, he  made  no  mention  of  the
    claim that his parents had been  tortured  referring  only  to  threats
    against him by Khan who  was  said  to  have  visited  the  Appellant's
    parents address, somewhat coincidently on 12  July  2017,  twelve  days
    before the hearing. The Appellant's statement is  also  rather  curious
    because it refers to repeated threats and assaults from Khan. In  fact,
    there was only one incident upon which the Appellant was  ever  relying
    and that was the incident in 2009.

20. What the Judge had to decide was whether the claim that the Appellant's
    parents had suffered from Khan was at all credible. That the  Appellant
    had put forward a document  from  his  parents  saying  they  had  been
    threatened did not take matters significantly further if that  document
    on its face was unreliable which it was in this case. The Judge did not
    find it credible that Khan would  continue  to  visit  the  Appellant's
    parents and threaten them. That was a conclusion which was open to  the
    Judge on the inconsistent evidence put forward by the Appellant.

21. The 3rd objection taken by the Appellant is that the Judge muddled  the
    identities of who had been involved in the 2009 incident  referring  to
    the Appellant's brother when it was in  fact  the  Appellant's  cousin.
    That was acknowledged by the Respondent  to  be  an  error  but  not  a
    material error. I agree with that submission. What was at the  core  of
    the claim was whether there had  been  any  incident  at  all  in  2009
    involving the Appellant. There was no  evidence  from  the  Appellant's
    cousin of the alleged incident. The Judge was in  a  position  of  only
    being able to assess the Appellant's account of the 2009 incident which
    contained a number of  difficulties.  Not  least  was  the  Appellant's
    exaggeration of it by describing it as a "huge incident".  The  Judge's
    concern was that such a relatively trivial incident would not still  be
    the catalyst  for  persecution  seven  years  later.  That  too  was  a
    conclusion which was open to the Judge on the evidence before her.

22. The cause of the incident was relatively trivial, that the  Appellant's
    relative wanted to stop Khan from looking at Christian  girls  and  the
    result was a fight in which  Khan  hit  the  Appellant's  relative  and
    verbally abused the  Appellant.  It  does  not  even  appear  that  the
    Appellant was physically harmed in this incident. There was no evidence
    that Khan had pursued the cousin for seven years or any other period of
    time which if that relative had been the  instigator  of  the  incident
    might have been more credible. Instead the Appellant claimed that  Khan
    had continued a vendetta for seven years arising out of this relatively
    trivial incident. It was a matter for the Judge to assess whether  that
    claim is at all plausible. She decided it  was  not  and  there  is  no
    material error of law in that conclusion.

23. Whilst it was an error to refer to the brother and to make the  comment
    that the Appellant's parents would also have  been  concerned  for  the
    brother's safety, it was not a material error since it did  not  go  to
    the core of the claim. The Judge gave adequate reasons  why  Christians
    were not at risk per se and permission to appeal  was  not  granted  on
    that  basis.  The  Judge  also  adequately  addressed  the   issue   of
    relocation. It followed from her conclusion that the Appellant was  not
    at risk that he could go to live in Lahore or anywhere else. There  was
    no material error of law in that conclusion either. Overall the grounds
    of onward appeal and submissions amount to no more than a  disagreement
    with the Judge's findings which were open to her  on  the  evidence.  I
    therefore  dismiss  the   Appellant's   onward   appeal   against   the
    determination.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  the  making  of  an
error of law and I uphold the decision to dismiss the Appellant's appeal

Appellant's appeal dismissed

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 8th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and I have dismissed the appeal and therefore  there  can
be no fee award.


Signed this 8th of February 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
