
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06703/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On Monday 29 January 2018                    |On Wednesday  31 January 2018 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M J
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lay, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
solicitors

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity order was made by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  As  this  is  an
appeal on protection grounds, it is  appropriate  to  continue  that  order.
Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify  him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This  direction
applies, amongst others, to  both  parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      Background


    1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  For ease of reference,
       I refer below to the parties as they were in the First-Tier Tribunal
       albeit that the Secretary of State is technically the  Appellant  in
       this particular appeal.  The Respondent appeals against  a  decision
       of First-Tier Tribunal Judge S Lal promulgated on 30  November  2017
       ("the  Decision")  allowing  the  Appellant's  appeal  against   the
       Secretary of State's  decision  dated  22  June  2017  refusing  his
       protection and human rights claims.


    2. The Appellant is a national of Somalia.  He came to the UK  in  1990
       when he was aged ten to eleven years old.  In 1995 he  was  involved
       in an aggravated burglary and  attacked  a  PC.   In  2000,  he  was
       nonetheless  granted  indefinite  leave  to  remain.   His  criminal
       offending has continued apace.  He was  sentenced  to  three  years'
       imprisonment in  April  2005  for  robbery.   An  appeal  against  a
       deportation decision was allowed under Article 3 ECHR by a  Tribunal
       composed of Immigration Judge Pullig and Mr  M  L  James  (non-legal
       member).  A further deportation decision was made in 2009  following
       further convictions but the Appellant was then granted discretionary
       leave.  In November 2011, the Appellant was convicted of affray  and
       sentenced to two  years'  imprisonment  which  led  to  yet  another
       deportation decision, which was also withdrawn.  The  Appellant  was
       granted discretionary leave.  His last leave expired in  June  2013.
       Between November 2014 and  March  2015  the  Appellant  committed  a
       further twelve offences.


    3. In light of the above chronology, it is perhaps  unsurprising  that,
       on appeal, the Appellant's representatives did not dispute  that  he
       should be excluded from humanitarian protection under rule 339(d) of
       the  Immigration  Rules  as  a  persistent  offender.   The   appeal
       proceeded on the basis that the Appellant would be at real  risk  of
       ill-treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR and that removal would be a
       disproportionate interference with his Article 8 rights.  The  Judge
       allowed the appeal on both bases.


    4. The first ground challenges the allowing of the appeal on Article  3
       grounds.  That ground can be summarised by the following sentence:-


           "...the FTTJ fails to give clear reasons in light of the country
           guidance authority of MOJ as to how the Appellant satisfies  the
           requirements for protection under Article 3."


    5. The second ground which addresses the Article  8  conclusion  is  as
       follows:-


           "It is also respectfully submitted that  the  FTTJ  approach  to
           Human rights is flawed at  paragraph  31  by  initially  placing
           reliance on Agyarko and the Razgar approach, although  the  FTTJ
           has referred to section 117 at paragraph 23 of the determination
           there is no evidence that the FTTJ has considered the  mandatory
           requirements of para 5A before embarking on a  brief  Article  8
           assessment at paragraph 31 of the determination, that  fails  to
           deal with the points raised at page 14 of  the  decision  letter
           and if the Appellant cannot  bring  himself  within  the  rules,
           deportation of such offenders can generally be  outweighed  only
           by countervailing factors which are very  compelling  that  have
           not been evidenced."


    6. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
       Judge Peart on 12 December 2017 in the following terms:-


            "...[4]    I find the judge's  analysis  with  regard  to  both
           Article  3  and  Article  8  arguably  inadequate.   The   judge
           identified the issue that as regards Article 3, the  appeal  was
           allowed in 2007 but that MOJ required consideration in terms  of
           the changes that had taken place in  Somalia  in  the  meantime.
           The judge set out the reasons for his decision at [28] but there
           is no analysis in terms of the various issues considered in  MOJ
           and why it is that the appellant fell  within  the  category  of
           persons  who  would  be  entitled  to   Article   3   protection
           notwithstanding beneficial changes in Somalia.
            [5]  As regards Article 8,  the  judge  simply  relied  upon  a
           previous decision some ten years earlier.  Arguably,  the  judge
           erred in not assessing the appellant's circumstances as  of  the
           date of the hearing before him in 2017.
            [6]  All grounds are arguable."


   7. The matter comes before me to determine whether the Decision  contains
      a material error of law and if  I  so  find,  either  to  re-make  the
      decision or remit the appeal for re-determination  by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


    Discussion and Conclusions


    8. Both representatives accepted in submissions that the second  ground
       concerning Article 8 does not require to be determined if the  first
       ground is determined in the Appellant's favour as,  if  there  is  a
       real risk of ill-treatment contrary  to  Article  3,  the  Appellant
       cannot be removed to Somalia.  I  therefore  begin  with  the  first
       ground.


    9. Mr Duffy relied on the Respondent's pleaded grounds.  Those  can  be
       summarised as follows. It is accepted that the  starting  point  for
       Judge Lal was the earlier decision  of  Judge  Pullig  allowing  the
       appeal on Article 3 grounds.  The Respondent says however that Judge
       Lal has failed to place the earlier findings in the context  of  the
       country guidance case of MOJ Somalia CG [2014]  UKUT  0442  ("MOJ").
       The Respondent notes that there is a typographical error in [28]  of
       the Decision which contains the Judge's  reasoning  on  this  point.
       She accepts that this does not infect the Decision.


   10. The Respondent relies however on the Judge's failure  to  take  into
       account what is said in MOJ about  the  economic  boom  in  Somalia.
       Given the advantages of an education gained in the UK, she says that
       the Appellant has failed to demonstrate that he  could  not  benefit
       from that boom.   In this vein, it is also said that the  Judge  has
       failed to consider the financial assistance which the Appellant  may
       be eligible to access from the Facilitated Returns Scheme.


   11. The Appellant is said to suffer from  mental  health  problems.   He
       relies in this regard on a medical  report  from  Dr  Wootton.   The
       Respondent says that this report does not make  a  formal  diagnosis
       and submits that the Judge has failed to give clear reasons why  the
       unspecified mental health condition would entitle the  Appellant  to
       protection under Article 3.  It was made  clear  in  the  course  of
       submissions by both representatives that this is not  an  Article  3
       medical case; it is not suggested that the Judge concluded that  the
       Appellant would be at real risk of ill-treatment by virtue  of  this
       condition alone.  However, the Respondent says that this factor  has
       contributed to the Judge's overall  conclusion  that  the  Appellant
       would face destitution in a camp for  internally  displaced  persons
       (an IDP camp) in Mogadishu and that the evidence does not  bear  out
       the conclusion.


   12. The Respondent also relies on the  Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in
       Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said  [2016]  EWCA  Civ
       442 ("Said").   It is said that the facts  of  that  case  are  very
       similar to this case and that therefore it was not open to the Judge
       to find as he did.  Mr Duffy accepted that  the  Court  of  Appeal's
       judgment in Said was not before the Judge but made  the  point  that
       the same solicitors were instructed in that case  as  in  this  case
       and, given its relevance, those representatives  should  have  drawn
       the Judge's attention to it.


   13. In response, Mr Lay pointed out that the Respondent's  challenge  is
       either that there is an inadequacy of reasons or that  the  Decision
       is perverse having regard to what is said in MOJ and other  case-law
       concerning the position in Somalia.  Importantly, he submitted,  the
       Respondent does not contend that MOJ is wrongly decided. In terms of
       the adequacy of reasons he submitted that  the  Judge's  reasons  at
       [28] are entirely adequate to explain to the Respondent why she  has
       lost.  He also made the  point  that  the  Decision  is  brief  both
       because of the previous appeal findings  and  because  a  number  of
       issues were conceded on either side.  There was therefore  a  narrow
       focus.  I will come on to deal with the  substance  of  the  Judge's
       reasoning below.


   14.  Mr  Lay  also  pointed  out  that,  contrary  to  the  Respondent's
       contention, the facts in Said were not very similar  to  this  case.
       It was not accepted that Mr Said was from a minority clan  (although
       he accepted that this was also not necessarily accepted in this case
       and that in any event, membership of a minority clan is no longer  a
       risk factor in itself).  More importantly he drew  my  attention  to
       what is said at [5] of the judgment that Mr  Said  had  an  extended
       family in the UK who could sent him  money  to  help  him  while  he
       established himself.


   15. Mr Lay also drew my attention to the more  recent  Court  of  Appeal
       judgment in  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home  Department  v  FY
       (Somalia) [2017] EWCA Civ 1853 ("FY").   In that case, the Secretary
       of State's appeal failed.  Mr Lay submitted that the facts  of  that
       case bore more similarities to this case.  In that case,  the  Court
       of Appeal upheld the Tribunal's decision which  was  based  on  FY's
       length of absence and lack of family ties in Somalia.  In that case,
       complaint was also made about the Judge's failure  to  consider  the
       impact of the economic boom.  In that case, the Tribunal  had  given
       reasons why it was said that FY would be unable to find work.


   16. Before setting out the Judge's reasoning for allowing the appeal  on
       Article 3 grounds, it is important to  set  those  findings  in  the
       context of the factual background  and  evidence  in  this  case  as
       recorded at [18] to [20], [24] and [26] of the Decision:-


           "C.   The Evidence
           [18] The Appellant gave evidence in English and  relied  on  the
           contents of the detailed witness statement that had been  signed
           by him and submitted to the Tribunal.  He was asked  no  further
           questions in examination in chief.
            [19] He was cross examined only in the briefest of terms  where
           he confirmed that when he was 9 years of age he  spoke  the  Eli
           language as far as he could remember as he was from Badabo.   He
           said people in Mogadishu spoke Somali.
            [20] In respect of the substantive claim itself, it is based on
           the following as set  out  in  the  Witness  Statement  and  the
           interviews.  He was taken to the capital when  he  was  about  7
           years old; he was sexually assaulted as a child there and  taken
           out when he was about 8-9 years old.  He was in  Germany  for  a
           while and eventually smuggled into the UK.   He  was  eventually
           placed in care and only speaks English.  He has been in  the  UK
           for 27  years  and  suffers  from  mental  health  problems  and
           substance abuse as set out in the Report of Dr  Wootton  in  the
           Appellant's bundle.  He has no contact with any Somali family.
            .....
            E.   Findings and Decision
            ....
            [24] Both parties accepted that the biography and chronology as
           set out in the Refusal letter was accurate and  the  real  issue
           was the impact of MOJ.  The Tribunal started from  the  decision
           of Judge Pullig and his findings of fact  when  he  allowed  the
           Article 3 appeal in 2007.
            .....
            [26] The Appellant is 38 years old and has been in the  UK  for
           27 years having arrived as  a  child.   He  is  a  member  of  a
           minority clan and that this was made out in 2007 before a  Judge
           of the FTIAC.  That Judge found that the  Appellant  has  had  a
           tragic and disturbing history which included domestic abuse  and
           periods in care as well as serious sexual abuse in Somalia.  The
           Judge found that he was excluded from Refugee status and  HP  on
           the basis of his crimes in the UK but was entitled to Article  3
           protection as that is a non-derogable right."


   17. As appears from the above, it is important  to  remember  that  this
       appeal follows on from  an  earlier  allowed  appeal  and  that  the
       Respondent accepts  that  the  earlier  findings  were  the  correct
       starting point for this Judge's assessment.  In short  summary,  the
       earlier Tribunal found that the Appellant is a Somali of mixed  clan
       ethnicity, that he does not speak Somali sufficiently  to  establish
       himself as a member of a majority clan,  that  his  only  family  in
       Somalia is an aunt from whom he  is  estranged  and  who  would  not
       assist the Appellant, and that he would be  "exceedingly  vulnerable
       in Somalia if returned there in  the  circumstances  as  they  are".
       That though was the position in 2007 and is only  the  starting  and
       not the end-point of  the  Judge's  consideration  some  ten  years'
       later.


   18. Following his taking into account of the  findings  in  the  earlier
       appeal, the Judge goes on at [27] to have regard to MOJ.   I  accept
       the Respondent's point that the Judge has not there  indicated  what
       part  of  the  guidance  he  considers  relevant  which  might  have
       indicated what of that guidance is taken into account.  In order  to
       consider though whether any failure to spell that out could be  said
       to amount to an error, I set out below the  parts  of  the  headnote
       relied upon by the parties:-


            "...
      (viii)     The significance  of  clan  membership  in  Mogadishu  has
           changed.  Clans  now  provide,   potentially,   social   support
           mechanisms and assist with  access  to  livelihoods,  performing
           less of a protection function than previously. There are no clan
           militias in Mogadishu, no  clan  violence,  and  no  clan  based
           discriminatory treatment, even for minority clan members.

           (ix)              If it is  accepted  that  a  person  facing  a
           return to Mogadishu after a period of  absence  has  no  nuclear
           family or close relatives in the  city  to  assist  him  in  re-
           establishing himself on return, there will need to be a  careful
           assessment of all of  the  circumstances.  These  considerations
           will include, but are not limited to:

           .       circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;
           .       length of absence from Mogadishu;
           .       family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu;
           .       access to financial resources;
           .       prospects of securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
              employment or self employment;
           .       availability of remittances from abroad;
           .       means of support during the time  spent  in  the  United
              Kingdom;
           .       why his ability to fund  the  journey  to  the  West  no
              longer enables an appellant to  secure  financial  support  on
              return.


           (x)               Put another way, it will  be  for  the  person
           facing return to explain why he would not be able to access  the
           economic opportunities that have been produced by  the  economic
           boom, especially  as  there  is  evidence  to  the  effect  that
           returnees are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never
           been away.


           (xi)             It will, therefore, only be those with no  clan
           or family support who will not be in receipt of remittances from
           abroad and who have no real prospect of  securing  access  to  a
           livelihood on return who will face the  prospect  of  living  in
           circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is   acceptable   in
           humanitarian protection terms.

           (xii)            The evidence indicates clearly that it  is  not
           simply those who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally
           return to live in the city without being subjected to an Article
           15(c) risk or facing a real risk of destitution.  On  the  other
           hand, relocation in Mogadishu for a person of  a  minority  clan
           with no former links to the city, no  access  to  funds  and  no
           other form of clan, family or social support is unlikely  to  be
           realistic as, in the absence of means to establish  a  home  and
           some form of ongoing financial support there will be a real risk
           of having no alternative but to live in makeshift  accommodation
           within an IDP camp where there is a real possibility  of  having
           to  live  in  conditions   that  will  fall   below   acceptable
           humanitarian standards.


   19. The Judge indicates at [27] of the Decision that, having  considered
       MOJ, the Appellant's appeal succeeds under Article 3 ECHR.  He  then
       embarks on his reasons for that conclusion at [28] of  the  Decision
       which reads as follows:-


           "Firstly, his circumstances in Somalia prior  to  departure  can
           only be described as dire and involved being raped  as  a  young
           child.  Secondly, he has been away  for  27  years  and  it  has
           already been accepted that he has no family or clan associations
           in Mogadishu.  He has no access to financial  resources  in  the
           sense that there is no wider family who could  send  remittances
           to him.  Thirdly, he has documented and  longstanding  substance
           misuse and attendant mental health difficulties which Dr Wootton
           comments in the form of her Report noting that (page 57) that he
           is likely to remain disabled by his mental  health  difficulties
           for the foreseeable future, and most likely for the rest of  his
           life.  His difficulties make him vulnerable to substance  misuse
           and at times of crisis, he is a risk to himself and others." The
           Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  [MJ]  falls  into  precisely  the
           category of person envisaged who  would  still  be  entitled  to
           humanitarian protection and Article 3 protection the  change  in
           the case law to reflect that minority claim [sic] membership  by
           itself would be [sic] enough."

       I observe that it is the final  sentence  of  that  paragraph  which
       contains the typographical error to which the  Respondent's  grounds
       allude.  It is clear that the Judge meant to say that minority  clan
       membership by itself would not be enough as otherwise the  reference
       to the change in the case law would make no sense.


   20. As Mr Lay submitted, and I accept, that  paragraph  shows  that  the
       Judge's conclusion was reached for the following reasons:-


    . The history of child abuse (suffered I note whilst he was in Mogadishu
      and including male rape);
    . That the Appellant has no access  to  financial  resources,  including
      from any family in the UK (he has none);
    .  The  Appellant's  history  of  substance  misuse  and  mental  health
      difficulties based on the medical evidence (which I consider below);
    . The Appellant's perceived clan status.


   21. Before considering the adequacy of those reasons  and  whether  they
       fully reflect  the  guidance  in  MOJ,  I  comment  briefly  on  the
       Respondent's ground concerning the medical evidence of  Dr  Wootton.
       Dr Wootton is a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist.  Contrary to  what
       is suggested in the Respondent's grounds, Dr Wootton  does  diagnose
       PTSD as well as emotionally unstable personality disorder.  She also
       points to episodes of depression  and  symptoms  of  anxiety.    She
       describes the Appellant's behaviour as "inflexible, maladaptive  and
       dysfunctional".   She  opines  that  the   Appellant's   personality
       disorder is "lifelong" although can be  improved  through  treatment
       and may attenuate with age.


   22.  Importantly,  Dr  Wootton  concludes  that  "given  his  early  and
       extensive history of trauma, the severity of  his  impairments,  and
       the number of comorbid difficulties, he is likely to remain disabled
       by his mental health problems for the foreseeable future,  and  most
       likely for the rest of his life."


   23. As Dr Wootton points out, being in  Somalia  is  closely  associated
       with the Appellant's traumatic experiences.  She  also  goes  on  to
       identify the circumstances which she would expect  him  to  face  on
       return and says this:-


           "...in [MJ]'s case removal to Somalia and the threat of  removal
           to Somalia are likely to result in  perpetuation  and  an  acute
           exacerbation of his symptoms.  This is likely to  be  compounded
           by any  difficulties  he  will  experience  there;  these  might
           include  difficulties  finding  shelter,  difficulties   finding
           work/supporting himself, not being  able  to  access  treatment,
           social  isolation,  witnessing/experiencing  further   traumatic
           events etc.  Clearly his mental health is relevant here as given
           that his level of functioning is impaired and he has significant
           problems in the UK, it is likely to be more difficult for him to
           meet  his  needs  than  other  people  in  a  similar  situation
           would...."


   24. There was no medical evidence to counter that of Dr Wootton and  she
       did not attend  to  give  oral  evidence  so  there  was  no  cross-
       examination challenging  her  evidence.   The  Judge  was  therefore
       entitled to accept her conclusions as  they  stood  including  those
       which I set out above.


   25. Looking therefore at the Judge's reasons as expressed at [28] of the
       Decision against the guidance in MOJ, the Judge has not decided  the
       issue (as had the previous Tribunal) based on the  Appellant's  clan
       affiliation (once  the  typographical  error  is  removed  from  the
       equation).  He took into account the  Appellant's  circumstances  in
       Mogadishu before departure (which in this case included a history of
       abuse there) and the length of time that the Appellant has  been  in
       the UK (twenty-seven years and from a  young  age).   He  took  into
       account the Appellant's lack  of  family  or  clan  associations  in
       Somalia.  He took into account that the Appellant has no  access  to
       finance from, for example,  family  in  the  UK  which  incorporates
       consideration of availability of remittances from that source.


   26. Although the Judge does not expressly mention the ability to  secure
       a  livelihood  by  employment  or  self-employment,  which  is   the
       Respondent's main complaint, that is in my judgement subsumed in the
       Judge's consideration of the medical evidence  and  the  Appellant's
       mental health difficulties.  In light of the references I have  made
       to that medical evidence, the Judge was entitled to  the  conclusion
       that the Appellant has a level of  mental  health  disability  which
       would, in Dr Wootton's words, "make it more  difficult  for  him  to
       meet his needs than other people in a similar situation".   Although
       there is no express mention of  the  Appellant's  means  of  support
       during his time in the UK, it is clear from the evidence that he has
       been supported throughout by the State.


   27. The Judge has therefore taken into account the factors  set  out  at
       [ix] of the headnote in MOJ.  Paragraph [x] of the headnote is  said
       to express the same point in a different way.  However,  since  this
       is in reality  the  focus  of  the  Respondent's  complaint  in  the
       grounds, I turn to look at the relevance of the case-law to which  I
       was taken.


   28. In Said, the Appellant's mental health coupled with lack  of  family
       or social support in  Somalia  and  lack  of  familiarity  with  the
       customs and traditions in Somalia had led the Tribunal  to  conclude
       that removal would  breach  Article  3.   The  Court  of  Appeal  in
       allowing the Secretary of State's appeal observed  at  [19]  of  the
       judgment, that the highest Mr Said could put his case was  that  his
       mental health condition would make it difficult for him to integrate
       and for him to work. On the evidence there, the Court did not accept
       that this  case  was  made  out  and  also  drew  attention  to  the
       assistance which his family in the UK would be able  to  provide  as
       well as the assistance he could obtain from his clan in Somalia.


   29. Having directed its attention to what was said in MOJ, the Court  of
       Appeal did not accept that, just because a person might end up in an
       IDP camp, that would automatically mean  that  Article  3  would  be
       breached.   As it said at  [31]  of  the  judgment,  the  individual
       circumstances of the person concerned must be  considered.   In  the
       case of Mr Said, the Court held that the Tribunal's allowing of  the
       appeal was in error because, due to the prospect of employment, clan
       support and availability of remittances from his family in  the  UK,
       "AS would have the financial wherewithal  to  establish  himself  in
       Mogadishu".  The Secretary of State's appeal was therefore  allowed.




   30. I accept Mr Lay's submission  that  Said  is  distinguishable,  both
       because of what is said about  the  evidence  concerning  Mr  Said's
       mental health and also that he could look to family  in  the  UK  to
       provide financial support to establish himself in Mogadishu.


   31. FY is closer to the facts of this case.  However,  I  note  what  is
       said by the Court of Appeal in Said  concerning  the  need  for  the
       facts of the individual case to be considered.  I need therefore say
       no more about that case. I do note however the acknowledgement  made
       on behalf of the Secretary of State in that case as recorded at  [9]
       of the judgment that for the purposes of that appeal, if FY were  to
       have to live in an IDP camp in Somalia there would be a real risk of
       a breach of Article 3.  The Court observed that this concession  was
       "inevitable" in light of MOJ (although that conclusion  does  appear
       to be somewhat at odds with what is said at [31] of the judgment  in
       Said).


   32. In my estimation, neither of the two cases to which I  was  referred
       alters my conclusion about the lawfulness of the  Decision  in  this
       case.


   33. For the reasons which I have set out, I do not accept that the Judge
       has failed to consider the  guidance  in  MOJ  in  this  case.   His
       reasoning at [28] of the Decision points to  various  factors  which
       are very obviously lifted from that guidance.  That the  Judge  does
       not expressly consider the factor that the Respondent  says  is  the
       important one does not amount  to  an  error  when  one  takes  into
       account the medical evidence.


   34. Put another way, even though the Judge does not expressly  refer  to
       it in these terms, if one looks at what is said at [xi] and [xii] of
       the guidance in MOJ, the Appellant  falls  within  the  ambit.   The
       Judge was therefore entitled to reach the conclusion he did based on
       that guidance.


   35. Nor can it be said that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  give  adequate
       reasons.  I accept Mr Lay's  submission  that  the  brevity  of  the
       Decision has to be considered in light of both the  previous  appeal
       and sensible concessions made on both sides as the Decision records.
        In any event, the Decision has to be read as a whole and if what is
       said at [28] is read in the context  of  the  evidence  and  factual
       background, the reasons are certainly adequate  to  explain  to  the
       Respondent why she has lost.


   36. For all of those reasons, the Judge was entitled  to  conclude  that
       there would be a real risk to the Appellant of treatment contrary to
       Article 3 ECHR if deported to Somalia.


   37. As I indicated at the outset, it was agreed by both  representatives
       that if I accepted there was no error of  law  in  relation  to  the
       Article 3 finding, the second ground falls away.  I should say  that
       if I had been  considering  only  whether  there  was  an  error  in
       relation to the Article 8 assessment, I would have found that ground
       to be made out.  There is no consideration of the public interest in
       relation to the Appellant's extensive criminal  offending.   Mr  Lay
       accepted that Agyarko and Razgar were probably not the most apposite
       cases against which to consider Article  8  in  this  case.   It  is
       though  possible  that  the  Judge  could  have  reached  the   same
       conclusion even when weighing  the  force  of  the  public  interest
       against the impact on the Appellant given his background and  mental
       health issues.


   38. In light of the concession made by the Respondent,  though,  and  my
       conclusion regarding the first ground, the error in that  regard  is
       immaterial.  The Appellant cannot be removed to Somalia in breach of
       Article 3 ECHR.  I therefore need  say  no  more  about  the  second
       ground.


   39. For the above reasons, the Decision does  not  disclose  a  material
       error of law and I uphold the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.   I
       therefore uphold the Decision.


DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making of an  error  on
a point of law. I therefore  uphold  the  Decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge S Lal promulgated on 30 November 2017 with the  consequence  that  the
Appellant's (MJ's) appeal remains allowed.
Signed           [pic] Dated:    30 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
