
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06816/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 December 2019                   |On 17 January 2020                   |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                      R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Bracaj, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1990 and is a male citizen of Iran. He is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. By decision promulgated on 25 September 2019,  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hemingway found that the First-tier Tribunal  had  erred
    in law is such that its decision falls to be set aside. His reasons for
    reaching the conclusion were as follows:

         "1.  This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought
         with the permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on
         15 February 2019 (the date of  its  written  reasons)  following  a
         hearing of 11 February 2019. The tribunal decided  to  dismiss  the
         claimant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State  of
         18 May 2018, refusing to grant him international protection.

         2.   The tribunal also granted the claimant anonymity. Nothing  was
         said about that before me but I have concluded it is appropriate to
         continue that grant.

         3.    Shorn  of  all   but   essential   detail,   the   background
         circumstances are as follows: the claimant is a Kurdish citizen  of
         Iran and he was born on 1  October  1990.  He  entered  the  United
         Kingdom (the UK)  illegally  on  25  October  2017,  having  passed
         through Turkey, Italy and France during the course of  his  journey
         from  Iran.  In  claiming  international  protection  and  then  in
         presenting his case before the tribunal he  asserted  that  he  had
         previously been involved in smuggling alcohol and other  goods  but
         had ceased to do that in consequence  of  those  activities  having
         come to the intention of the Iranian authorities. He also claims to
         have been a supporter of the Kurdish oppositionist group  known  as
         PJAK. He would, he says, store flags and leaflets belonging to PJAK
         at a shop he used  to  conduct  business  from.  He  says  he  also
         permitted PJAK members to gather at his shop on two occasions.  But
         in 2017 the authorities raided the shop and although  the  claimant
         escaped, pro-PJAK materials were found. Fearing for his  safety  he
         fled Iran. He says that since coming to  the  UK  he  has  attended
         oppositionist demonstrations and has posted anti-regime material on
         the internet including via his Facebook page.

         4.   The Secretary of State did not think the claimant had told the
         truth and concluded he would not be at risk upon return. It is fair
         to say that the tribunal  having  heard  his  oral  evidence  at  a
         hearing at which both  parties  were  represented,  comprehensively
         disbelieved the account involving alleged  support  for  PJAK.  The
         tribunal  did,  though,  accept  that  the  claimant  had  attended
         demonstrations at various locations in the UK from January 2018 and
         that he had "posted materials to that effect on the internet"  (see
         paragraph 49 of the written reasons).  But  it  thought  that  such
         activity had been opportunistic  and  was  not  indicative  of  the
         holding of genuine political views.

         5.   Nevertheless, the tribunal recognised that even if the account
         of events in Iran was untrue and even if his UK based activity  had
         been opportunistic, it was still necessary to consider whether  the
         claimant might face risk upon return  in  consequence  of  how  his
         activity, if it was known or was to become  known  by  the  Iranian
         authorities might be perceived.

         6.   As to the above matter the tribunal said this:

             "53.  In  considering  the  significance  of  the  appellant's
             activities in the United Kingdom, I find  that  the  appellant
             has  failed  to  bring  forward  evidence  showing  that  such
             involvement has come to the attention of the authorities.  Nor
             do the background materials show that the Iranian  authorities
             in the United Kingdom monitor such events. As Mr  Walker  [the
             claimant's representative before the tribunal] accepted, there
             is an absence of evidence in this regard. I remind myself,  at
             this point, that the burden of proof lies with the  appellant,
             whilst accepting that the  standard  of  proof  is  the  lower
             standard that applies in asylum cases.

             54.  In these circumstances, I find that there is insufficient
             evidence before me to support the view  that  the  appellant's
             activities in the United Kingdom  have  come  to  the  adverse
             attention of the authorities in Iran."

         7.   The tribunal  then,  by  reference  to  the  country  guidance
         decision in SSH and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG
         [2016] UKUT 00308, said it was concluding that the  claimant  would
         not be at risk simply as a returning Kurdish asylum seeker. It then
         went on to say as follows:

             "57. I also take account of the guidance in HB (Kurds) Iran CG
             UKUT 00430 to the effect that  the  authorities  take  a  hair
             trigger approach to those of Kurdish origin who are  perceived
             or suspected as being involved in Kurdish political activities
             or support for Kurdish rights; and that Kurdish ethnicity is a
             risk factor to be taken into account on return where they  are
             reasonably likely to be subject to heightened scrutiny.

             58.  In following the guidance of the Upper Tribunal,  I  find
             that the appellant is a  single  male  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             respect of  whom  no  adverse  interest  has  previously  been
             manifest. I find  that  the  appellant  on  return  would  not
             generate heightened suspicion  and  scrutiny  because  of  his
             activities in the United Kingdom nor because of the length  of
             time he has been out of Iran, which is not unduly lengthy.

             59.  I find that there is reasonable likelihood for  there  to
             be heightened scrutiny of the appellant on return, due to  the
             authorities  becoming  increasingly  suspicious   of   Kurdish
             political activity. However, the mere fact  of  being  such  a
             returnee does not  create  a  risk  of  persecution.  Further,
             whilst a genuine supporter or activist cannot be  expected  to
             lie if questioned by the authorities on return, in the present
             case, where there are adverse credibility  findings  as  noted
             above, the appellant would be able to say that he  was  not  a
             committed  supporter  of  PJAK  if  so  questioned,  and,   in
             addition, the degree  of  candour  that  could  reasonably  be
             expected of him is thereby diminished.

             60.  Accordingly, on return the appellant  would  not  face  a
             real risk of serious harm as a failed Kurdish asylum seeker or
             as a person who had exited Iran illegally".

         8.   So, the appeal failed. However, that was not the  end  of  the
         matter because, as noted above, permission to appeal to  the  Upper
         Tribunal was given to the claimant. The granting  judge  relevantly
         said this:

             "2.  The grounds of appeal state that the First-tier  Tribunal
             Judge erred in his application of the decision in  HB  (Kurds)
             Iran cg [2018] UKUT 00430. The grounds state that  the  First-
             tier Tribunal Judge found that the appellant had been involved
             in low-level political activity in the  UK  and  that  he  had
             posted materials about these activities on the  internet.  The
             grounds assert that the First-tier Tribunal Judge has erred in
             finding that these activities would not lead to a risk to  the
             appellant on return to Iran.

             3.   The First-tier Tribunal  Judge  makes  reference  to  the
             relevant case law at paragraph 56 and 57 of the  decision.  He
             finds that there is a  reasonable  likelihood  of  "heightened
             scrutiny" of the appellant on return to Iran [59]  because  of
             the  Iranian  authorities  suspicion  of   Kurdish   political
             activity.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  finds  that   the
             appellant would be able to say that he  was  not  a  committed
             supporter of PJAK when questioned by the authorities  in  Iran
             [59]. It is arguable that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  has
             failed  to  assess  the  likely  response   of   the   Iranian
             authorities to  the  appellant's  activities  in  the  UK  and
             whether that would give rise to  a  risk  notwithstanding  the
             finding that the appellant engaged in those activities in "bad
             faith".

             4.   Permission to appeal is granted".

         9.   Permission having been granted the matter  was  listed  for  a
         hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it  could  be
         decided whether the tribunal had or had not erred in law and, if it
         had, what should flow from that. Representation at that hearing was
         as stated above and I am grateful to each representative.  Although
         it is  apparent  to  me,  notwithstanding  the  various  criticisms
         offered of it, that  the  tribunal's  decision  is  a  careful  and
         considered one, I have concluded that it did err in law  in  a  way
         which was material in the sense that had it not done so the outcome
         of the appeal might (I do not say would)  have  been  different.  I
         shall now explain why I have taken that view.

         10.  Part of the claimant's case was that he had been  active  over
         the internet in putting forth his Kurdish oppositionist views. That
         raised two potential issues. The first of those was whether it  was
         reasonably likely that his internet activities had already come  to
         the attention of the Iranian authorities. The second  was  whether,
         if questioned upon return, the claimant might reveal details  about
         his internet activity (against a background that he  could  not  be
         expected to lie) or whether checks would be made upon return anyway
         which would lead to his internet activity including the content  of
         his Facebook page being discovered. I am not wholly clear as to the
         extent to which those issues were pursued before  the  tribunal.  A
         skeleton argument which had been  sent  to  the  tribunal  did  not
         clearly raise those issues. But in a witness statement of  14  June
         2018, the claimant said that (as I understand it)  footage  of  the
         demonstrations he had attended had been  uploaded  on  YouTube  and
         that some footage and some photographs of  the  demonstrations  had
         been posted on the Facebook page  of  a  Kurdish  activist  who  is
         monitored by  the  Iranian  authorities.  The  claimant  also  said
         (though on my reading he was disbelieved about this)  that  he  had
         been assisting with marshalling at the demonstrations so would have
         appeared to be prominent.

         11.  The tribunal does not appear to have asked itself whether  the
         internet activity of the claimant might already have  come  to  the
         attention of the Iranian authorities. What it said at paragraph  53
         of its written reasons seems to relate more to the issue of whether
         attendance at demonstrations might  be  monitored  by  the  Iranian
         authorities. But the question of monitoring of internet activity is
         not specifically addressed. It might be that the  tribunal  thought
         it unnecessary to  do  so  because  of  the  obvious  difficulties,
         however assiduous the members  of  the  authorities  might  be,  of
         monitoring something so large and  with  so  much  content  as  the
         internet. But there was the reference in the witness  statement  to
         material having been uploaded onto the Facebook page of  a  claimed
         known activist and there was the claimant's own indication that  he
         had posted materials or anti-Government sentiment (as I  understand
         it) on his own Facebook page. In these  circumstances  I  am  quite
         narrowly persuaded that, although very probably the tribunal  would
         not have needed to have said very much, it was required to consider
         and make a finding about whether the internet  activity  which  the
         claimant says he has undertaken (and it does seem to me that  there
         is currently only limited evidence of it) might have  come  to  the
         attention of the authorities such that they will  be  aware  of  it
         upon return.

         12.  The tribunal accepted, following  guidance  contained  in  the
         decision of the Upper Tribunal in HB (Kurds)  Iran  CG  UKUT  00430
         (IAC), that the authorities take a  "hair  trigger  approach"  with
         respect to Kurdish oppositionists. It seemed  to  accept  that  the
         claimant would probably be questioned upon return as  a  result  of
         that (paragraph 59 of the written reasons) but it found he would be
         able to truthfully say he was not a committed supporter of PJAK  if
         questioned. It seemed to accept at this point in its analysis, that
         the claimant "cannot be expected to lie"  (see  paragraph  59  once
         again). Given the "hair trigger" point, whilst ultimately it  might
         well be open to a decision-maker including a tribunal  to  conclude
         the Iranian authorities will be prepared to accept assurances given
         as to the lack of genuine commitment to  pro-Kurdish  oppositionist
         causes despite attending demonstrations and posting material on the
         internet, the tribunal's reasoning was, in my judgment, required to
         be fuller and more detailed  than  it  was  with  respect  to  that
         particular issue.

         13.  The tribunal having said it took the view  that  the  claimant
         could not be expected to lie,  then  went  on  to  suggest,  on  my
         reading, that since adverse credibility findings had been made  the
         degree of candour expected of him in response to any questions that
         might be asked of him by  the  authorities  upon  return  would  be
         reduced (paragraph 59 again). That does seem, on the face of it, to
         conflict a little with  what  the  tribunal  had  previously  said.
         Further, whilst it might have been open to the tribunal  to  simply
         take the view that a dishonest claimant could be expected to lie in
         circumstances where doing  so  would  not  represent  a  denial  of
         genuine political commitment, the reasoning underpinning it had  to
         be explained.

         14.   For  the  above  reasons  I  would  accept  various  of   the
         contentions made by Ms Wilkins on behalf of the claimant. I  accept
         that the tribunal did err in law with respect to its  consideration
         as to what risk the claimant might face upon return notwithstanding
         its  clear  and  cogently  explained  findings  with   respect   to
         credibility.

         15.  In light of the above I have concluded that I must  set  aside
         the tribunal's decision. However, its adverse credibility  findings
         were not the subject of any serious challenge before me and in  any
         event, are very clearly sound. With that in  mind  I  have  decided
         that the proper course is for the decision to  be  re-made  in  the
         Upper Tribunal after a further hearing. I have  also  decided  that
         the adverse credibility findings as set out from  paragraph  32  to
         paragraph 50, in relation to claimed  events  in  Iran  are  to  be
         preserved.  I  have  also  decided  that  I  should  preserve   the
         tribunal's conclusion to the effect that  the  claimant's  UK-based
         activity  does  not  show  him  to  be  a  genuine  PJAK  supporter
         (paragraph 52 of the written reasons).

         16.  As to  the  rehearing  it  will,  of  course,  be  up  to  the
         representatives as to how they would wish to argue their respective
         cases. But there are some aspects which they may wish to  cover  in
         argument which I have set out below.

         17.  First of all, there may be an issue as to the extent to how  I
         should approach the reasoning as contained in the Upper  Tribunal's
         reported decision in AB and Others (internet activity  -  state  of
         evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 00257 (IAC). Ms Wilkins argued that,  in
         consequence of paragraph 13 of Guidance Note 2001 No  2  concerning
         reported  decisions  I  should  regard  the  reasoning   as   being
         persuasive. But there may be a counter argument because  the  Upper
         Tribunal itself made it clear that  the  decision  was  only  being
         reported in order to place the evidence which it had heard  in  the
         public  domain.  It  may  be  that  such  a  specific  and  express
         indication means that whilst regard can  be  had  to  the  evidence
         which was supplied to the Upper  Tribunal  there  is  no  basis  to
         regard its reasoning as  being  even  persuasive.  But  I  have  no
         settled view as to this.

         18.  Secondly, assuming the claimant's UK-based  activity  has  not
         come to the attention of the Iranian authorities but assuming he is
         likely to be questioned by those authorities upon return, there may
         be arguments to be had as to how candid he is required  to  be  if,
         for example, he is asked specific questions as to  whether  he  has
         attended Kurdish oppositionist demonstrations and  whether  he  has
         posted anti-regime material on the internet. Perhaps the lead  case
         in the field is RT (Zimbabwe) v  SSHD  [2012]  UKSC  38.  Does  the
         reasoning contained therein support the proposition  (as  sometimes
         appears to be assumed) that an unsuccessful returned asylum  seeker
         should not be expected to tell untruths in any  circumstances?  The
         judgment in RT seems to me, on the face of it, to be concerned with
         the protection of a right to have no opinions  or  allegiances  and
         the associated right not to have to deny such a lack of allegiance.
         Does that extend to a person in the situation of the claimant  such
         that he could not be expected to simply deny his  none  genuine  UK
         based activity. Again, I have no settled  view  but  it  may  be  a
         matter which should be explored in argument.

         19.  To be clear, I am not anticipating my making authoritative  or
         binding decisions of a general nature with  respect  to  the  above
         matters. I am simply saying it might (but then again it might  not)
         be necessary for me to reach a view  about  such  matters  for  the
         purposes of remaking the decision in this appeal.

         20.  Finally, I have set out some directions which  will  hopefully
         assist with the remaking process. They appear below.




         Directions for the remaking hearing

         A.   The tribunal's decision of 15 February 2019  having  been  set
         aside, there shall be a further hearing before the  Upper  Tribunal
         for the purposes of the remaking  of  the  decision.  That  hearing
         shall, if practicable,  take  place  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Hemingway, at the Bradford  Hearing  Centre,  on  or  prior  to  31
         December 2019.

         B.   The time estimate for the  remaking  hearing  shall  be  three
         hours. The  claimant  shall  be  provided  with  a  Kurdish  Sorani
         speaking interpreter.

         C.   The Upper Tribunal, at the remaking hearing, will have, as its
         starting  point,  the  various  findings  made  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal which it has specifically preserved above.

         D.   The Upper Tribunal appears to have all  of  the  documentation
         which was previously before the First-tier Tribunal.  Either  party
         may supply further written material in  the  form  of  evidence  or
         argument. However, any such material  should  be  supplied  to  the
         Upper Tribunal's administrative staff at Field House (with  a  copy
         simultaneously sent to the opponent) in sufficient time for  it  to
         arrive at least ten days prior to the date which will be fixed  for
         the remaking hearing.

         E.   As noted, certain findings have been preserved.  Nevertheless,
         the claimant may give  oral  evidence  or  call  witnesses  at  the
         remaking hearing with respect to other matters of evidence which it
         is thought might be relevant. However,  if  there  is  to  be  oral
         evidence, witness statements setting  out  that  evidence  must  be
         provided (with a copy  simultaneously  sent  to  the  opponent)  in
         accordance with the above timescale.




         Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  an
         error of law and is set aside. The decision shall be remade by  the
         Upper Tribunal after a further hearing."

 2. I draw  attention  in  particular  to  [15]  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Hemingway's decision and to the findings  of  fact  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal which have been preserved.

 3. Following the making of a transfer order, I have remade  the  decision.
    At the resumed hearing at Bradford on 2 December  2019,  I  heard  oral
    evidence from the appellant. The burden of proof is on  the  appellant.
    It is for the appellant prove that there are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing it to be a real risk to him upon return to Iran  for  one  of
    the grounds recognised in the Refugee Convention  and/or  serious  harm
    under paragraph 339C of HC 395 (as amended).

 4. The appellant gave evidence with the assistance  of  a  Kurdish  Sorani
    interpreter. The appellant said that he had had a new Facebook  account
    for the past year. He has 446 friends on this current Facebook account.
    Cross-examined, the appellant said that he  was  not  himself  familiar
    with the technicalities of Facebook. When he encountered problems  with
    the account, he would ask a friend to assist him.  The  appellant  said
    that he knows only how to sign in to the account and to  make  postings
    on it. He does not know how to close or to modify the  account  in  any
    way. Re-examined, the appellant said that  friends  sometimes  reposted
    information about him on their own Facebook accounts.  He  referred  to
    photographs of himself at demonstrations in the United Kingdom. He said
    that to have his friends who are  PJAK  members  would  sometimes  post
    photographs of him at demonstrations.

 5. I reserved my decision.

 6. This appeal proceeds on  the  basis  of  the  preserved  findings  (see
    above). This appellant is not a member or supporter of PJAK. Insofar as
    the appellant attends meetings or demonstrations of  that  organisation
    in the United Kingdom, he does so not out  of  any  commitment  to  the
    cause which it espouses but for other reasons. The same is true of  his
    Facebook account. He does not  maintain  that  account  because  he  is
    committed to the Kurdish separatist cause in Iran as advanced  by  PJAK
    or any other similar organisation. Having said  that,  the  appellant's
    sur place activities may nevertheless be found to expose  him  to  risk
    and  return  despite  his  having  no  political  commitment  to  those
    activities.

 7. The appellant has produced evidence of postings and  his  new  Facebook
    account. These include photographs of Iranians leaders with red crosses
    across their faces and slogans including, 'Stop executions  of  Iranian
    people'. The appellant's own evidence is that he is not  an  expert  in
    the management of his own or any other Facebook account. He is able  to
    sign into the account and to make postings on it but that is the  limit
    of his knowledge and skill.

 8. I find that the appellant's present intention  is  to  do  anything  to
    avoid exposing himself to risk if he were to be returned now to Iran. I
    find that he would, if faced with return to Iran, seek  the  assistance
    of friends to help him delete his Facebook account.  By  doing  so,  he
    would not compromise  elements  of  his  core  personality  or  beliefs
    because  he  has  no  commitment  to  the  Kurdish  separatist   cause.
    Furthermore, because I find he would have deleted his account before he
    reached Iran, he would be unable to open the account if required to  do
    so when questioned at the airport by Iranian officials. As regards  the
    appellant's claim that friends may refer to him  and  his  postings  on
    their own Facebook accounts, I find that it is  not  reasonably  likely
    that the Iranian authorities would link such postings to the appellant;
    given  that  the  appellant  has  no  profile  whatever  is  a  Kurdish
    separatist, the risk that  the  authorities  would  link  the  Facebook
    accounts of third parties to the appellant is  simply  too  remote.  As
    regards any interrogation of the appellant  on  return,  I  note  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Hemingway's comments at [18]. I find that the  appellant
    would not be expected simply to deny 'non-genuine  UK-based  activity.'
    The only potentially aggravating factor in the appellant's  profile  is
    that he is a Kurd. There is no evidence to show that that factor alone,
    absent any evidence of involvement in separatist politics, would expose
    the appellant to a real risk.

 9. In the circumstances, the appeal is dismissed.



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 31 December 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

