
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06968/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2017                   |On 20 April 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                 Master ASN
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

1.    The First-tier Tribunal made an  anonymity  order.  I  have  not  been
    invited to rescind that order. The order remains appropriate as this is
    a protection claim concerning a minor.



Background / Substantive Issues under Appeal

2.    The Appellant is a national of Iraq born on [ ] 2000. He  entered  the
    United Kingdom, clandestinely, on 12 or 13 November  2015.  He  claimed
    asylum on 22 December 2015 on the basis that he fled his  village  near
    Kirkuk due to the advance of ISIS  fighters  and  now  feared  them  on
    return to Iraq.

3.    The application was refused by the Secretary of State and the  reasons
    for that decision are set out in a letter of 17 June 2016. Nonetheless,
    in view of the Appellant's minority, a grant of Discretionary Leave  to
    Remain was made until 3 October 2017.

4.    It was the refusal of the asylum claim however that gave  rise  to  an
    appeal before First-tier Tribunal Judge Coutts.

5.    There was no dispute before Judge Coutts that the Appellant could  not
    return to Kirkuk as this was a  "contested  area",  but  he  found  the
    Appellant could replace his identity documents and  return  to  another
    area of Iraq (such as Baghdad or the southern region) or  to  the  IKR.
    Judge Coutts thus dismissed the appeal in a decision  dated  25  August
    2017. At an error of law hearing on 28 July 2017, I  decided  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal erred in law and its decision should be  set  aside
    and remade by the Upper Tribunal. It was accepted  the  Appellant  came
    from a "contested area" and the only live issue was whether  there  was
    any consequential risk to the Appellant on return to  Iraq  that  would
    entitle him to international protection. As the parties were not  in  a
    position to proceed the hearing was adjourned.

6.    The matter now came before me to re-make the decision. At  the  outset
    of the hearing, Mr Clarke outlined the Respondent's  case  that  Kirkuk
    was not currently a "contested area" given the change of  circumstances
    on the ground there. The shift in the  Respondent's  position  did  not
    place Ms Brown in difficulties and both parties were content to proceed
    with the hearing. Ms Brown indicated that she did not intend to call on
    the Appellant to give oral evidence as  the  parties  agreed  that  the
    appeal could be determined on the accepted facts.

7.    I thus proceeded to hear submissions from  both  representatives.  The
    Tribunal is grateful to them both and in particular to  Mr  Clarke  who
    while indicating that he could  not  concede  the  appeal,  fairly  and
    properly prefaced his submissions by acknowledging the difficulties  in
    the Respondent's case.

Submissions

8.    Mr Clarke on behalf of the Respondent submitted that:

    (i)    The Appellant's return is not  currently  feasible;  he  has  no
         identity documents.

    (ii)   The lack of documentation does  not  entitle  the  Appellant  to
         international   protection.

    (iii)  Kirkuk is not a contested area, but it was open to the Appellant
         to show on his accepted profile that there is  an  Article  15  (c)
         risk.

    (iv)   It is accepted the Appellant has no support networks in Iraq.

    (v)    The  Appellant  can  board  a  flight  to  the  IKR  and  secure
         employment. .

9.    On behalf of the Appellant Ms Brown submitted that:

    (i)    The Appellant's limited education is an important factor in  the
         assessment of risk.

    (ii)   There is no evidence the  Appellant  could  acquire  a  Laissez-
         passer or passport.

    (iii)  The Appellant has no documents. He cannot obtain a CSID which is
         required to access services in Iraq.

    (iv)   There are insufficient grounds to  depart  from  the  Tribunal's
         Country Guidance (CG).

    (v)    While there have  been  changes  in  Kirkuk,  instability  of  a
         different nature continues in  the  area;  many  people  have  been
         displaced and thousands are fleeing the city.

    (vi)   Alternatively, the Appellant will be subjected to indiscriminate
         violence in light of his accepted profile.

Re-making the Decision

Legal framework

10.   Article 33 of the 1951 Convention states  that  no  Contracting  State
    shall expel or  return  a  person  in  any  manner  whatsoever  to  the
    frontiers of territories where his life or freedom would be  threatened
    on  account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,  membership  of  a
    particular social group or political opinion.

11.   The requirements for a grant of humanitarian protection  are  set  out
    in paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules. So far  as  material  these
    are that:

      a. The Appellant does not qualify as a refugee; and

      b.  Substantial  grounds  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  the
         Appellant, if returned to the country of return, would face a  real
         risk of suffering serious harm and is  unable  or,  owing  to  such
         risk, unwilling to avail himself of the protection of that country.



12.   "Serious harm" is also defined in paragraph 339C  of  the  Immigration
    Rules, namely:

      a. The death penalty or execution;

      b. Unlawful killing;

      c. Torture or inhuman or degrading treatment or punishment of a person
         in the country of return;

      d. Serious and individual threat to a civilian's  life  or  person  by
         reason of indiscriminate violence in situations of international or
         internal armed conflict.

13.   The Appellant bears the burden of substantiating his case  as  at  the
    date of hearing. The standard is  a  reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
    (sometimes referred to as a realistic possibility).

Facts

14.   It is not necessary to rehearse the historical account  given  by  the
    Appellant as the parties  agree  that  the  issue  of  risk  should  be
    assessed  on  the   accepted   facts   relating   to   his   individual
    characteristics. These are:

    (i)    The Appellant is an Iraqi  Kurd  from  the  town  of  Dobz  near
         Kirkuk. He is 17 � years old.

    (ii)   He was separated from his family after they left Iraq  together.
         He has been unable to trace them.

    (iii)  He has no immediate or extended family member(s) in Iraq.

    (iv)   He has no identity documents.

    (v)    Without any  family  member(s)  in  Iraq  he  is  likely  to  be
         vulnerable (see expert report from Dr  Ghaderi  dated  11  December
         2016).

    (vi)   He is uneducated but literate in Kurdish Sorani.

Country Guidance (CG) and background evidence

CG

15.   The Tribunal's CG  relevant  to  the  present  decision  is  set  out,
    firstly, in AA Iraq (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC)  as
    revised by the Court of Appeal in AA Iraq  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944.  The
    guidance applicable is set out  in  the  following  paragraphs  of  the
    revised headnote as follows:

    "A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE QUALIFICATION
    DIRECTIVE

    1.      There is at present a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  government  security  forces,
         militias of various kinds, and the Islamist group  known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict in  the  so-called  "contested
         areas", comprising the governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk,  (aka
         Ta'min), Ninewah and Salah Al-din,  is  such  that,  as  a  general
         matter, there  are  substantial  grounds  for  believing  that  any
         civilian returned there, solely on account of his or  her  presence
         there, faces a real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate
         violence amounting to serious harm  within  the  scope  of  Article
         15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

    2.      The degree of armed conflict in certain parts of  the  "Baghdad
         Belts" (the urban environs around Baghdad  City)  is  also  of  the
         intensity described in paragraph 1 above, thereby giving rise to  a
         generalised Article 15(c) risk. The  parts  of  the  Baghdad  Belts
         concerned  are  those  forming  the  border  between  the   Baghdad
         Governorate and the contested areas described in paragraph 1.

    3.       The  degree  of  armed  conflict  in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
         (including  Baghdad  City)  is  not  such  as  to  give   rise   to
         indiscriminate  violence  amounting  to  such   serious   harm   to
         civilians, irrespective of their individual characteristics, so  as
         to engage Article 15(c).

    4.      In accordance with the  principles  set  out  in  Elgafaji  (C-
         465/07) and QD (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
         [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases  should  assess
         the individual characteristics of the person claiming  humanitarian
         protection, in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are
         such as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

    B.      DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

    5.      Return of former residents of the Iraqi  Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
         will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.  The
         Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P)  in  the  United
         Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession of  a  current  or
         expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a laissez passer.

    6.      No Iraqi national will be  returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
         possession of one of these documents.

     7.     In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and
         Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ
         1276, an international protection claim made by P cannot succeed by
         reference to any alleged risk of harm arising from an absence of  a
         current or expired Iraqi passport  or  a  laissez  passer,  if  the
         Tribunal finds that P's return is not currently feasible on account
         of a lack of any of those documents.

    8.      Where P is returned to Iraq on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
         passport, P will be at no risk of serious  harm  at  the  point  of
         return by reason of not having a current passport.

    C.      The CSID

    9.      Regardless of  the  feasibility  of  P's  return,  it  will  be
         necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be able to obtain
         one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.  A  CSID  is  generally
         required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance  from
         the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
         treatment. If P shows there are no family or other  members  likely
         to be able to provide means of support, P is in general  likely  to
         face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if,  by
         the time any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State  or  her
         agents to assist P's return have been exhausted, it  is  reasonably
         likely that P will still have no CSID.

    10.     Where return is feasible but P does not have a CSID,  P  should
         as a general matter be able to obtain one  from  the  Civil  Status
         Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using  an  Iraqi  passport
         (whether current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such
         a passport, P's ability to obtain a CSID may depend  on  whether  P
         knows  the  page  and  volume  number  of  the  book  holding   P's
         information (and that of P's family). P's ability to  persuade  the
         officials that P is the person named on the relevant page is likely
         to depend on whether P has family members or other individuals  who
         are prepared to vouch for P.

    11.    P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be  severely  hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  of  P's
         Governorate because it is in an area where  Article  15(c)  serious
         harm is occurring. As a result of  the  violence,  alternative  CSA
         Offices for Mosul, Anbar and Saluhaddin have  been  established  in
         Baghdad and Kerbala. The evidence does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         "Central Archive", which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able  to
         provide CSIDs to those in  need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a
         National Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for formal
         recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court  is,
         however, unclear.

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

     14.   As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.

    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:

         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);

         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);

         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;

         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);

         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;

         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;

         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.

    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).

    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION

    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.

    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.

    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.

    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR."

16.   Secondly, the Tribunal gave further CG in the case of BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad Iraq CG) [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC).  The  Tribunal  found  that  the
    level of general violence in Baghdad city remains significant, but  the
    current evidence did not justify a departure from the conclusion in AA
    (Iraq).

Background evidence

17.   The background evidence drawn to my attention by the  parties  can  be
    summarised as follows.

18.    The  Home  Office  Country  Policy   and   Information   Note   Iraq:
    Return/Internal relocation: September 2017 states at para.2.2.3:

    "Since AA Iraq was promulgated, the security situation has  changed  in
    particular:

           . Daesh have lost territory;

           .  Government  of  Iraq  (GoI)  and/or  associated  forces  have
             regained control of some areas;

           . the level of violence has declined; and

           . Internally Displaced Persons (iDPs)  are  returning  to  their
             areas of origin

    2.2.4  Therefore, internal relocation is, in general, possible  to  all
    areas of Iraq

           . parts of Mosul and the surrounding areas;

           . Tal Afar and surrounding areas in northern Ninewah;

           . Hawija and surrounding areas in Kirkuk governorate; and

           . parts of west Anbar."

19.   At the hearing Ms Brown filed various internet articles from the  BBC,
    Jerusalem and Rudaw, reporting the situation on the ground at the  date
    of hearing. They can be summarised shortly  as  their  content  is  not
    disputed. They refer to the victory of the Iraqi army in seizing Kirkuk
    from Kurdish control and the consequential displacement of hundreds  of
    thousands  of  people  to  Erbil  and  Sulaymaniyah  due  to  fear  and
    instability in the area creating a new humanitarian challenge.

Discussion and Conclusions

20.   This is one of an ever  increasing  seemingly  number  of  cases  that
    comes before the Tribunal relating to  return  of  Iraqi  nationals  to
    Baghdad or the IKR. In this case there is no dispute that the Appellant
    will be returned to Baghdad. In order for him to be  returned  he  will
    need either a passport, current or expired, or a Laissez-passer. If  he
    has none of these he will be refused entry. In the light of that  fact,
    the Secretary of State does not return persons who do not  possess  any
    of these documents. The Respondent through Mr Clarke accepts  that  the
    Appellant has none of these documents and thus accepts that his  return
    is not currently feasible. Nonetheless, there is no  dispute  that  the
    unfeasibility of return does not entitle the Appellant to international
    protection: see AA Iraq CoA at headnote [7].

21.   It was accepted at the hearing that each case is  fact-sensitive.  The
    factors in this case that are to be assessed is likely to involve inter
    alia an assessment of the following:

    (a)    the likelihood of the Appellant obtaining a CSID on return;

    (b)    the conditions prevailing in Baghdad and whether the  conditions
    there, in light of the Appellant's  individual  characteristics  places
    him at real risk of serious harm;

    (c)    the practicality of travel from Baghdad to  Kirkuk  or  the  IKR
    (such as to Erbil by air) and whether there are any associated risks.

22.   It is accepted by Mr Clarke that the Appellant is a vulnerable  person
    without family support  and  that  he  is  without  documentation.  The
    absence of any family support in Iraq thwarts the  Appellant's  ability
    to obtain documentation following his return. Without documentation the
    Appellant will not be able to  access  financial  assistance  from  the
    authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical treatment, and
    there are no family members or any other person likely to  be  able  to
    provide any means of support. The Appellant  would  thus  face  extreme
    difficulties in  relocating  to  Baghdad  and  those  difficulties  are
    compounded by his limited education and his lack of fluency in  Arabic.
    The  humanitarian  position  is  serious  in  Baghdad  for   internally
    displaced persons let alone those who have other  personal  factors  of
    disadvantage. The Appellant is in general therefore likely  to  face  a
    real risk of destitution amounting to serious harm in Baghdad.

23.   The Respondent's view is that the Appellant can avoid  the  conditions
    prevailing in Baghdad by boarding an onward flight to the IKR, it being
    accepted that a journey there by land  would  be  perilous.  While  the
    Respondent will return the Appellant to Baghdad there  is  no  evidence
    that she will provide an onward ticket to Erbil International  Airport.
    Consequently, it is necessary for  the  Appellant  to  obtain  his  own
    ticket.  The question then becomes a very narrow one, namely "Will such
    ticket be available?" Unless there is certainty that it is, bearing  in
    mind the risks the Appellant would be exposed to in  Baghdad,  then  it
    cannot be appropriate to return such a person unless there is certainty
    that they will be in a position to move on.  The Appellant will not  be
    in a position to do so without documentation. In such circumstances,  I
    conclude that there is a  real  risk  that  the  Appellant  would  find
    himself stuck in Baghdad which exposes him to risk.

24.   Should I be wrong about  that,  it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  this
    vulnerable Appellant to relocate to the IKR where he has no  family  or
    means of support and a reduced chance of finding employment  given  his
    lack of connections in the area and his limited education.

25.   That leaves the Appellant moving on to Kirkuk. The fall  of  ISIS  and
    the retaking of Kirkuk  by  the  Iraqi  authorities  in  October  2017,
    indicates a significant shift in the position on the  ground  since  AA
    Iraq (and country guidance cases must  give  way  to  those  realities,
    a point recognised by the Court of Appeal in SG (Iraq) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940  at  para  [47]).
    Notwithstanding, the fact that the Appellant has no documentation means
    that there are significant obstacles to his onward travel from  Baghdad
    to Kirkuk also. The Appellant can only access Kirkuk by  road.  It  has
    not been suggested that it would be safe for this vulnerable  Appellant
    to embark on that journey or that he could  travel  there  by  avoiding
    areas in Iraq which remain contested or are otherwise unsafe.  Even  if
    the Appellant could access Kirkuk, which I am  not  satisfied  that  he
    could, and while the situation there has changed, the  parties  are  in
    agreement that it is open to the Appellant to show that on his accepted
    profile there is an Article 15 (c) risk.

26.   The Respondent accepts that this is an Appellant who is vulnerable.  I
    find that he is so by his age; lack of documentation and family support
    in Iraq. While the territory of Kirkuk is not currently contested,  the
    background evidence drawn to  my  attention  illustrates  the  apparent
    dangers still prevailing in that area with  hundreds  of  thousands  of
    persons being displaced from  that  region  as  a  consequence  of  the
    unstable humanitarian situation there. This evidence is uncontested.  I
    thus have no hesitation in concluding that the Appellant in view of his
    distinguishing characteristics  will  be  at  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious  harm  of  the  type  identified  in  Article  15(c)   of   the
    Qualification Directive.

27.   The Tribunal recognised in BA Iraq  that  individual  characteristics,
    which do not in themselves create a real risk of serious harm on return
    to Iraq, might amount to a real risk for the  purpose  of  the  Refugee
    Convention, Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive or  Article  3
    of the ECHR if assessed on a  cumulative  basis.  The  assessment  will
    depend on the facts of each case. Given the accepted facts in this case
    by the Respondent and in light of the prevailing circumstances in  Iraq
    relevant to this Appellant, in my judgement, the question of whether he
    is entitled  to  international  protection  must  be  answered  in  the
    affirmative.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Date 18 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

