






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/06292/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 27 April 2018                           |On 11 May 2018                   |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                 Mr a g l r
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Popal of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  He was born on 21 June  1986.
    The appellant appealed against  the  respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum dated 21 June 2017.

 2.  Judge  A  Kelly  (the  judge)  dismissed  the  appeal  in  a  decision
    promulgated on 5 January 2018.  Judge Kelly did not find the  appellant
    to be a credible witness regarding events in Sri Lanka or that he would
    be at risk on return.

 3. The grounds claim the judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility
    in terms of his account of his detentions after 2010 contained material
    errors.  In particular:

      a) The judge failed to have regard to the contents of the  appellant's
         substantive interview when concluding that there were discrepancies
         in his account between that given at  screening  and  subsequently.
         The judge failed to take into account that at  the  outset  of  his
         substantive interview, the appellant drew to the attention  of  the
         interviewing officer, the fact that  there  were  mistakes  in  the
         screening interview.

      b) In any event the  detentions  in  2011  were  not  central  to  the
         appellant's claim.  See grounds at [7].

      c) The judge failed to have regard to  the  background  evidence  with
         regard to the 2015 detention.  See grounds at [8].

      d) The judge's finding that it was highly unlikely that the  appellant
         would have been able to fly out of Sri Lanka without difficulty was
         at odds with GJ Sri Lanka CG [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  where  the
         Upper  Tribunal  accepted  evidence  that  it  is  possible  for  a
         seriously wanted person to travel through the airport  and  out  of
         the country without difficulty.

 4. The grounds take issue with the judge's findings  with  regard  to  the
    reports of Dr Martin and Dr Dhumad.  As regards Dr Martin's report, the
    judge approached assessment of the same on the basis  that  it  was  of
    limited assistance given it did  not  establish  that  the  scars  were
    caused in the manner claimed by the appellant and at the time  claimed.
    In such cases, no scarring report would be of assistance.   As  regards
    Dr  Dhumad,  the  judge  arguably  erred  because  she  criticised  the
    appellant for obtaining a report a month before the hearing.  The judge
    found that the appellant was motivated in part by a  desire  to  obtain
    evidence to bolster his appeal which the grounds claimed showed a  lack
    of fairness and the appearance of a lack of impartiality on the part of
    the judge.  In any event, Dr Dhumad's report was not the  only  medical
    evidence before the judge.

 5. Whereas the Secretary of State accepted  the  documentation  from  ICRC
    regarding the appellant's detention, the judge erred in concluding that
    it could not be relied upon.

 6. Notwithstanding that the judge had before her a determination regarding
    the appellant's brother's successful asylum claim allowed in 2014,  she
    made no reference to the same.

 7. Given the aforesaid,  the  grounds  claim  that  it  follows  that  the
    assessment of risk on return was also flawed.



 8. Judge Andrew granted permission on 26 February 2018.   She  said  inter
    alia:

         "I am satisfied that there is an arguable error of law in that  the
         judge does not appear, in his decision, to have taken note  of  all
         of the evidence before him.  In particular he does  not  appear  to
         have taken into account the  background  evidence  in  relation  to
         those who have been rehabilitated being re-arrested.   In  addition
         the judge appears to have taken no note of the guidance  in  GJ  in
         relation to those flying from the airport.  The judge has also  not
         considered paragraph 339K of the Rules.  No account appears to have
         been taken of the familial connection with the appellant's  brother
         who, it has been accepted, was a former LTTE member  and  has  been
         granted protection in the United Kingdom.  The judge has not  taken
         note either of the appellant attending demonstrations in the United
         Kingdom and whether this will place him at risk on  return,  taking
         into account his accepted background."

 9. The respondent filed and served a Rule 24 response on  19  March  2018.
    The Secretary of State took  the  view  that  the  judge  had  directed
    herself appropriately.  The judge had regard  to  the  salient  medical
    evidence before her and the grounds were merely a disagreement with the
    judge's findings on those issues.  It was clear that the judge followed
    GJ as she was bound to do.  It was largely unclear  why  the  appellant
    was of any adverse interest to the authorities some six years after the
    end of the civil war.  He could not reasonably be  perceived  to  be  a
    threat to the integrity of  the  unitary  state.   The  fact  that  the
    appellant's brother  was  granted  asylum  was  not  probative  of  the
    truthfulness of the appellant's claim.   The  decision  was  adequately
    reasoned and the conclusions of the judge were ones rationally open  to
    her on the evidence.

Submissions on Error of Law

10. Ms Popal relied upon the grounds.  In particular, she relied  upon  the
    factors the judge had  failed  to  engage  with  in   GJ.   Ms  Everett
    conceded the judge was obliged to engage with risk on return  in  terms
    of GJ but had failed to do so.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. GJ sets out the risk categories of  post-civil  war  returnees  to  Sri
    Lanka.

12. The judge was obliged to engage with the  risk  categories  of  GJ  and
    failed to do so.  Bearing in mind  the  appellant's  brother  had  been
    successful in an appeal the  judge  was  also  obliged  to  take  those
    circumstances as a starting point in  the  decision.   See  AC  Somalia
    [2005] UKAIT 00124.  Headnote:

         "This decision deals with the proper approach to the evidence of  a
         witness who, it is alleged on similar facts to those put forward by
         the appellant, has been granted refugee status.  The  fact  of  the
         grant is capable of carrying weight but the  grant  is  not  to  be
         equated with  an  Immigration  Judge's  determination  following  a
         hearing.  An Immigration Judge's decision is  likely  to  be  fully
         reasoned and made after the evidence in support  has  been  tested.
         In contrast a grant of status by the Secretary of State is often an
         administrative decision based only on the papers."




13. See also AS and AA Somalia [2006] UKAIT 00052.  Headnote:

         "The rule that a judicial determination stands as the determination
         of the issue between the parties does not govern  later  litigation
         between different parties. Accordingly, when  it  is  said  that  a
         previous determination of the claim or appeal of  another  claimant
         is of relevance in assessing a later claim by a  different  person:
         (1) the previous determination has no evidential value as such, but
         (2) its narrative content is to be taken as evidence  of  what  was
         said and done leading up to that determination;  (3)  the  Tribunal
         determining the later case is required to make its own decision  on
         the evidence before it; (4) no rule  of  general  law  or  practice
         supports the argument that the decision in an earlier claim  should
         bind or be regarded as part of the  evidence  in  an  appeal  by  a
         different person and therefore (5) the later  Tribunal  should  not
         regard itself as bound to follow a previous decision in respect  of
         another claimant or to make  a  decision  consistent  with  such  a
         previous decision; (6)  on  the  other  hand,  principles  of  good
         administration require that  decisions  should  not  be  needlessly
         divergent, so (7) the earlier  decision  should  be  treated  as  a
         starting-point, but (8) the Tribunal will not  hesitate  to  depart
         from that starting point in every case where the evidence  requires
         it."

14. I find that the judge materially erred in her decision for the  reasons
    set out above.


Notice of Decision

15. The judge's decision is set aside  in  its  entirety.   The  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

Anonymity direction continued.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 27 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
