
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06273/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 September 2018                        |On 05 November 2018           |


                                   Before

                           THE HONOURABLE LADY RAE
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

                                   mr m a
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Brown instructed by Harrow Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant claims to be a citizen of  Eritrea,  but  the  respondent
    considers him to be a citizen of Ethiopia.  He appealed to a  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal against the Secretary of State's decision of 21
    June 2017 refusing to grant him asylum or humanitarian  protection  and
    making a deportation order against him.

2.   It seems that the appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  in  February
    2005 and claimed asylum on the same day.  He claimed to  be  16  or  17
    years of age but an age assessment decided that he was  20  years  old.
    His asylum application was refused on 17 March 2005 and  he  lodged  an
    appeal which was dismissed on 28 June 2005.  The judge  who  heard  his
    appeal in 2005 did not accept the appellant's claim to be Eritrean.  At
    his screening interview he had  indicated  that  he  was  of  Ethiopian
    nationality.  It was only after the age assessment was  conducted  that
    he  corrected  his  date  of  birth  to  7  August  1984.   There  were
    significant discrepancies in his account and the judge found  these  to
    be major matters which affected  the  very  core  of  his  claim.   His
    account about military service was found  to  be  a  fabrication.   The
    judge found that he had fabricated an account of  military  service  in
    the hope of  persuading  the  authorities  to  accept  his  account  of
    Eritrean nationality.  He said he could speak Tigrinya but  was  fluent
    in Amharic.  The judge was satisfied  that  this  was  because  he  was
    Ethiopian and not Eritrean.

3.   It was common ground before the judge in  the  appeal  under  challenge
    today that if the Tribunal found that the appellant  was  genuinely  an
    Eritrean citizen then as a Pentecostal Christian and army  deserter  he
    would be at risk of persecution on return.   If  he  was  found  to  be
    Ethiopian then there was nothing to show he would be at risk  from  the
    Ethiopian authorities.

4.   The judge first  considered  whether  the  appellant  had  committed  a
    particularly  serious  crime  as  defined  in  section  72(2)  of   the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent considered him to have  been  convicted  of  a  particularly
    serious crime and to constitute a danger to the community of the United
    Kingdom.  The  judge  noted  the  appellant's  conviction  in  2012  of
    wounding with intent to do  grievous  bodily  harm  for  which  he  was
    sentenced to ten years' imprisonment.  It was not  disputed  that  this
    was a particularly serious crime as defined in section 72(2),  and  the
    judge went on after considering the evidence not to be  satisfied  that
    the appellant had rebutted the presumption that he constituted a danger
    to the community.  There is no challenge to this aspect of the  judge's
    decision.

5.   The judge went on to  consider  the  evidence  as  to  the  appellant's
    nationality.  He claimed that his asylum and human rights claim  should
    be reconsidered because he had provided new evidence which had not been
    before the judge in 2005, his birth certificate  from  Ethiopia  and  a
    letter from the Eritrean Community Centre dated 15 August 2017.

6.   As regards the latter, the judge attached little weight to  it,  noting
    what  was  said  about  how  the  community  centre  had  verified  the
    appellant's nationality based on their assessment of him.  There was no
    mention of him being involved with the community or that  he  had  been
    absent from the community for at least five  years  whilst  in  prison.
    The judge also considered it to be highly significant that no-one  from
    the  Eritrean  community  had  attended  the  hearing  to  support  the
    appellant.  The judge did not accept the appellant's claim that  senior
    members of the community would not come forward to give evidence on his
    behalf when he had come out of prison.

7.   As regards the Ethiopian birth  certificate  provided,  the  respondent
    was criticised by Ms Brown, who also appeared below, for not  producing
    the  original  and  not  giving  the  appellant   an   opportunity   to
    authenticate it.  The judge noted that the birth certificate  had  been
    issued on 21 November 1992 and that there was  no  logical  explanation
    for this.  The appellant thought that it was perhaps  something  to  do
    with his school registration and then suggested it might have something
    to do with the Ethiopian calendar.  The judge said that clearly if  the
    birth certificate had been issued prior to the Eritrean independence in
    1991 the nationality of his parents  on  the  birth  certificate  would
    obviously have been  Ethiopian  and  was  left  therefore  to  consider
    whether the reason it was dated after Eritrean independence was so  the
    nationality of his  parents  could  be  entered  as  Eritrean  for  the
    purposes of the appeal.  The judge was therefore not satisfied that  it
    was a genuine document and placed little weight on it.

8.   He considered the argument that the  appellant  had  been  accepted  as
    Eritrean by the Ethiopian Embassy, but it  was  pointed  out  that  the
    appellant had gone to the Embassy and claimed he was Eritrean  and  the
    birth certificate provided to the Ethiopian Embassy by  the  respondent
    stated that the  appellant's  parents  were  Eritrean.   The  Ethiopian
    officials at the Embassy would therefore naturally accept his claim  to
    be Eritrean.  The judge also noted the appellant's previous  conviction
    for using a false identity document in 2008 when he was in  prison  for
    fourteen days.  It was noted that even at the hearing the appellant had
    sought initially to deny that offence.

9.   The judge also did not find credible the  circumstances  in  which  the
    appellant claimed the birth certificate was obtained from Ethiopia.  He
    said that a stranger he met  in  Sheffield  happened  to  be  going  to
    Ethiopia and offered to obtain the birth certificate  for  him  stating
    that he knew someone who worked in the  Registry  who  could  do  this.
    This person did not attend court to give evidence.  The  appellant  had
    said he tried to trace  him  but  was  unable  to  do  so.   The  judge
    considered the explanation for this to be that the person did not exist
    or  that  he  had  obtained  the   birth   certificate   in   nefarious
    circumstances.  The judge therefore placed little weight on  either  of
    the documents belatedly produced by the appellant, as the judge put it,
    he found no reason to disagree with the earlier findings of  the  judge
    in 2005 that the appellant was Ethiopian and not Eritrean.  He went  on
    to consider the situation under the Immigration Rules and also  outside
    and found that there was no reliable Article 8 claim.  The  appeal  was
    therefore dismissed on all grounds.

10.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal against  this
    decision, first on the basis that it was not open to the judge  not  to
    accept that the birth certificate was genuine, bearing in mind that the
    evidence as evidenced by the GCID case record notes indicated that  the
    respondent had  understood  the  birth  certificate  to  be  a  genuine
    document, bearing in mind that the birth certificate had been submitted
    to the respondent  under  cover  of  a  letter  of  21  May  2007,  the
    conclusion that the date of 21 November 1992 on the  birth  certificate
    may have been entered for the purposes  of  the  appeal  was  therefore
    clearly unsustainable and simply wrong, and it was wrong  to  state  as
    the judge had that the appellant had been accepted as  an  Eritrean  by
    the Ethiopian Embassy: rather the Embassy had not accepted that he  was
    an Ethiopian national.

11.  Permission to appeal was granted on all grounds.

12.  At the hearing we explored with the representatives  whether  it  would
    assist and if it were possible for us to  examine  the  original  birth
    certificate.  Ms Brown's view, with which we agreed, was that it  would
    clearly be of assistance, but, Mr Deller having conducted an exhaustive
    search of the file and having made  telephone  enquiries  to  the  Home
    Office was unable to assist.  It seemed  clear  that  though  the  Home
    Office  file  still  contained  the  original  letter   sent   by   the
    representatives to  which  the  birth  certificate  was  attached,  the
    document provided was no longer on the file or to  be  found  elsewhere
    and therefore all we had was the photocopy in the bundle.

13.  Ms Brown relied on and developed the points  made  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and in particular in her skeleton argument.

14.  She argued that the judge  had  erred  in  concluding  that  the  birth
    certificate had been submitted for the purposes of the appeal.  In fact
    it had been submitted a long time before the appeal, in 2007.  It would
    be clearer to say that it was new in that it was an issue raised  after
    the earlier decision of the judge in 2005.  It was  an  error  of  fact
    affecting the credibility assessment.

15.  The next issue of concern  was  whether  the  Secretary  of  State  had
    accepted that the birth certificate was a genuine document.   Ms  Brown
    accepted that the term "original" did not mean that it was genuine.  In
    the context of what had happened in this case it seemed  the  Secretary
    of State was provided with an  original  document  and  treated  it  as
    genuine based on the Secretary of State's action in providing it to the
    Ethiopian authorities as a document on the basis of which the appellant
    could legitimately be removed from the United Kingdom.  If  he  thought
    it was false that the appellant was not entitled to it,  the  Secretary
    of State's action in presenting it to  the  Ethiopian  authorities  was
    questionable.  On that basis it was argued that it had been treated  as
    genuine.  The GCID case notes were also of relevance to this.  It was a
    protection claim and the standard of proof was  low  and  the  evidence
    supported what the appellant said about his nationality.  It was not  a
    forensic assessment by the caseworkers but there was no  indication  in
    the GCID notes of any concerns about the document which was said to  be
    an original.  The Secretary of State had  acted  as  though  it  was  a
    genuine document and applicable to the appellant in  presenting  it  to
    the Ethiopian authorities.

16.  There was also the point made at paragraph 10 of  Ms  Brown's  skeleton
    argument that at the very least the entries in the notes and actions of
    the respondent supported the contention that the birth certificate  was
    genuine and that it was referred to by the respondent as "an original",
    and secondly, if the respondent did not  believe  it  was  genuine,  it
    appeared that the respondent was  of  the  view  that  the  appellant's
    removal from the United Kingdom on a  document  to  which  he  was  not
    legitimately entitled.  The Secretary of State would  have  been  clear
    that the appellant would go to the Ethiopian Embassy and  claim  to  be
    Eritrean as the nationality was in dispute.  The Ethiopian  authorities
    had been sent the birth certificate and had  been  asked  to  issue  an
    emergency travel document and could not do so as they  did  not  accept
    that the  appellant  was  an  Ethiopian  national.   It  was  wrong  to
    criticise the appellant for this.

17.   As  regards  prejudice  to  the  appellant,  this   arose   from   the
    respondent's submissions made at the hearing before the judge being  in
    direct contrast to the notes in the GCID  case  record.   As  the  GCID
    record notes it appeared to indicate the respondent's acceptance of the
    birth certificate as genuine and there was no need to request the birth
    certificate, on the assumption that the respondent still had it in  his
    possession.

18.  As was pointed out at paragraph 22 of the skeleton, the  appellant  had
    complied with the emergency travel document process and done  all  that
    he reasonably could to substantiate his nationality as required by law.
     The GCID notes showed what has been said  by  the  Ethiopian  Embassy.
    The birth certificate was sufficient to discharge the burden  of  proof
    on the appellant as regards  his  nationality.   It  had  been  wrongly
    assessed by the judge.  He had done everything he reasonably  could  to
    establish his nationality.

19.  Finally, with regard to paragraph 17  of  the  skeleton  argument,  the
    judge had misstated the situation.  The appellant had never claimed  to
    be accepted as Eritrean by the  Ethiopians,  just  that  they  did  not
    accept he was Ethiopian and it was not for them to say whether  he  was
    Eritrean or not.  He could not be required to  assert  the  nationality
    the Secretary of State claimed he had.

20.  In his submissions Mr Deller argued  that  the  birth  certificate  had
    been booked in as an original document and he could only  speculate  as
    to what had been thought, but it seemed to be a clerical booking  of  a
    document, not an assessment that it was what it was claimed to be.  The
    2010 decision did not accept that the appellant was Eritrean.  It might
    be that the judge had misstated the purpose for which the document  was
    procured.  Plainly it was not provided for the purposes of  the  appeal
    before the judge.

21.  As regards the secondary question of why if the Secretary of State  did
    not accept it was a genuine document  it  was  issued  with  regard  to
    contact with the Ethiopian Embassy, Mr Deller could not say why but  it
    stood as a record of what the appellant said about his name and date of
    birth.  He could not say why it had  been  raised  with  the  Ethiopian
    Embassy.  It was difficult to see that it would have been  accepted  as
    genuine and then sent to the Ethiopian  Embassy.   All  the  indicators
    pointed away from the Secretary of State speaking with two  voices  and
    not accepting the appellant  as  Eritrean,  but  taking  administrative
    action accepting that he was.  It was accepted that  the  document  had
    not been provided for the appeal, but in order to  deal  with  problems
    arising from the earlier appeal and that seemed to be  what  the  judge
    might have meant.

22.  As regards ground 3, it was necessary to  assess  how  far  a  lack  of
    clarity or ambiguity on the part of  the  judge  was  material  to  the
    decision as a whole.  It was not right that the  Ethiopian  authorities
    had said the appellant was Eritrean, but this did not make  a  material
    difference.

23.  By way of reply Ms Brown acknowledged that with regard to  the  judge's
    assessment of the timing of the birth certificate that was  not  now  a
    main point.  The decision lacked  clarity  in  that  respect.   It  was
    important however  that  the  appellant  was  able  to  understand  the
    decision.  The  Secretary  of  State  was  equivocal  about  the  birth
    certificate and proper reasons were needed.

24.  As regards the failure to provide  a  skeleton  argument  the  Tribunal
    might wish to examine its powers under Rule 10 of the  Procedure  Rules
    in that respect.

25.  If the Tribunal agreed with Ms Brown and there was to be  a  rehearing,
    then Professor Campbell had  been  approached  and  would  be  able  to
    provide a report by early 2019.

26.  We reserved our decision.

27.  The judge properly took as his  starting  point  the  earlier  decision
    dismissing  the  appeal  and  not  accepting  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's claim.  There were two new pieces of  evidence,  the  birth
    certificate and the letter from the Eritrean Community Centre.

28.  We do not understand Ms Brown to launch a challenge  of  any  substance
    to the findings with regard to the letter from  the  community  centre.
    At  paragraph  45  of  his  decision  the  judge  fully  reasoned   his
    conclusions as to why he had placed little weight on  that  letter,  in
    particular noting the absence of any involvement  with  the  community,
    and lack of any reference to the appellant's absence for at least  five
    years whilst in prison, and the absence of any member of the  community
    to speak on his behalf, the  reason  for  that  absence  given  by  the
    appellant being found to lack weight by the judge.

29.  The key point therefore is the issue of the birth certificate that  the
    appellant produced in 2007.  It is common ground that if he is found to
    be Eritrean he is at risk on return and cannot be returned  to  Eritrea
    for international protection reasons.  Equally if he is properly  found
    to be Ethiopian he can be returned there since there  is  no  issue  of
    risk in Ethiopia.

30.  As can be seen from the above, we had concerns about the copy  document
    provided and unfortunately it has not been possible for the original to
    be produced by the respondent.  We are very grateful to Mr  Deller  for
    the care he  took  in  trying  to  ascertain  the  whereabouts  of  the
    original, and no blame can be attached to him in any  respect,  but  it
    is, to say the least, unfortunate that the Home Office appears to  have
    lost a document of significance which it has had in its possession  for
    some eleven years.

31.  The first concern that the judge had was  that  the  birth  certificate
    was issued on 21 November 1992, albeit that the appellant was  said  to
    have  been  born  on  8  July  1984.   The  appellant  had  contrasting
    explanations as to why it might have been issued when it  was  and  the
    judge's view that there was no logical explanation for that has  force.
    The judge speculated as to whether it was issued when it was because it
    postdated  Eritrean  independence,  but  that  can  be  no  more   than
    speculation.

32.  Another matter that weighed significantly with the judge was  the  fact
    that  the  circumstances  in  which  the  appellant  claims  the  birth
    certificate had been obtained from Ethiopia  were  regarded  as  highly
    improbable.  He would have had to accept the appellant's claim that  he
    had met a stranger who  happened  to  be  going  to  Ethiopia  and  who
    obtained the birth certificate for him but could no longer be contacted
    and was therefore not in attendance at the hearing.

33.  There has been criticism of the judge's wording at paragraph  48  where
    he said as follows: "In conclusion, as I have placed little weight upon
    either of these two documents lately produced by the appellant ...".

34.  It seems to us that although the wording there is  somewhat  ambiguous,
    it can be seen from the decision letter of  11  June  2010,  which  was
    before the judge, that the birth certificate was submitted  on  21  May
    2007.  We do not think it can properly be interpreted from the  judge's
    wording at paragraph 48 that  he  regarded  the  birth  certificate  as
    having been produced for the purposes  of  the  hearing,  as  has  been
    contended on the appellant's behalf.  The  word  "lately"  is  somewhat
    ambiguous, but in the context immediately addressed thereafter  of  the
    judge finding no reason to alter the findings of the  First-tier  Judge
    who heard the appeal in 2005, we are satisfied that he  meant  no  more
    than that the document had been produced subsequent to  that  decision,
    which is of course the case.

35.  Not unconnected to this is the estoppel issue raised by Ms  Brown.   It
    was an argument she raised in submissions  before  the  judge  and  has
    repeated before us.  It is based on the GCID notes which,  among  other
    things, contain  DD15,  a  reference  to  "original  birth  certificate
    returned to SYRC as subject can go on EUL", further references  to  the
    birth certificate at DD16 and the Ethiopian  Embassy's  willingness  to
    conduct an interview to confirm his nationality if he was  claiming  to
    be Ethiopian.  It was noted in the notes  that  the  birth  certificate
    stated the appellant's parents were from Eritrea, but it was issued  in
    Addis Ababa.  At D19  there  is  a  reference  to  the  original  birth
    certificate being forwarded as requested by proof of  delivery  system,
    and the point is also made that the Ethiopian authorities to  whom  the
    birth certificate was provided by the respondent  raised  no  issue  in
    respect of its authenticity or provenance.

36.  We agree  with  Mr  Deller  that  the  record  relating  to  the  birth
    certificate is no more than a clerical booking in of a document  rather
    than a considered evaluation.  We do not consider that the Secretary of
    State equivocally represented his acceptance of this as  proof  of  the
    appellant's nationality.  Our view on the point has not changed by dint
    of the fact that it was put forward  to  the  Ethiopian  Embassy  as  a
    document for consideration of the appellant's nationality as Ethiopian.
     The respondent did not accept the appellant's claim  to  be  Eritrean,
    and the judge had not accepted that in 2005.  Speculation is dangerous,
    and Mr Deller accepted it was not really possible to infer why  it  was
    in light of the  Secretary  of  State's  disbelieving  the  appellant's
    Eritrean nationality that a document in which it was said  his  parents
    are Eritrean was put to the Ethiopian Embassy at all.   It  is  however
    relevant at this point to bear in mind the matter noted by the judge in
    2005 that at his  screening  interview  the  appellant  said  that  his
    nationality was Ethiopian.  He has of course resiled from that position
    subsequently, but we have not seen anywhere any explanation as  to  why
    that information was given by him in the first instance.

37.  We must bring these matters together.  We  do  not  consider  that  the
    judge has been shown to have erred in law  in  his  assessment  of  the
    appellant's nationality.  He was entitled not to accept the credibility
    of  the  birth  certificate  as  a  document  purporting  to  show  the
    appellant's nationality as being Eritrean, bearing in mind his  history
    of untruthfulness, and a lack of satisfactory explanation of how it was
    the birth certificate was obtained and the lack of  explanation  as  to
    the date of issue of the certificate.  We do not consider that  he  was
    expressing the view  that  the  document  had  been  produced  for  the
    purposes of the hearing, and nor do we consider that his speculation as
    to the date towards the  end  of  paragraph  46  of  his  decision  was
    anything more than speculation and did not go to mar the quality of his
    reasoning overall.  We do not accept that the Secretary of State is  in
    any sense estopped from denying his assertion  that  the  appellant  is
    Ethiopian on the basis of what was said in the  GCID  notes  about  the
    birth certificate and its  proffering  to  the  Ethiopian  authorities.
    Accordingly, we do not accept that the judge has  been  shown  to  have
    erred in law in any respect with regard  to  his  findings  as  to  the
    appellant's nationality or otherwise.  Accordingly, we find no error of
    law in his  decision,  and  that  decision  dismissing  the  appeal  is
    maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of  his  comply  with  this  direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                  Date: 24th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen
