
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: pa/06365/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 January 2018                          |  On 25 January 2018             |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    M S J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Saldanha, Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 10 December 1990.   He
    first came to the United Kingdom with a  Tier  4  Student  visa  on  28
    September 2009 and was subsequently given further leave  to  remain  on
    that basis until 30 November 2017.  However, the college  at  which  he
    was studying, the London School of Law, had its licence  revoked  on  3
    June 2015, thus the Appellant's leave was curtailed  from  20  December
    2015.  The Appellant claimed asylum two days later on 22 December 2015.
    The basis of his claim is that whilst in Bangladesh he was involved  in
    the Awami League Party from 2007 but subsequently whilst in the  UK  he
    formed his  own  party  in  October  2015  called  the  People's  Voice
    Bangladesh.  He also returned to Bangladesh for a visit in  2014,  when
    he claims that he was followed and that he  would  be  at  risk  if  he
    returned due to his activities on social media in the form of blogs  on
    YouTube and Facebook posts.  The Respondent refused his application  in
    a decision dated 7 June 2016. The Appellant lodged an  appeal  in  time
    against that decision and his appeal came before Judge  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Hanbury for hearing on 1 June 2017.

 2. In a decision and reasons  promulgated  on  19  June  2017,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal, essentially on the basis that he did not find the
    Appellant's claims to be plausible and in any event he did  not  accept
    that the Appellant's blogging activities, whether before  or  after  he
    left Bangladesh, would put him  at  risk  either  from  the  Bangladesh
    government or individuals.  This latter reference is in relation to the
    fact that the Appellant is now an  atheist  and  takes  an  anti-Muslim
    stance.

 3. An application for permission to appeal was made to the Upper  Tribunal
    on the basis of four grounds.  The  first  ground  submitted  that  the
    judge had erred materially in law in failing to consider whether,  even
    if the Appellant had acted in bad faith, this would place him  at  risk
    on return to Bangladesh cf. Danian [2000] Imm AR 96  per  Lord  Justice
    Brooke. This relates to [25] of the decision where the judge held "I am
    not satisfied that the appellant is a frequent blogger but  if  he  has
    become one since he came to the UK this has been to generate an  online
    presence which he would not otherwise have had."

 4. The second ground asserted that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  take
    account of material evidence,  in  particular,  that  set  out  in  the
    Appellant's  bundle  of  his  online  activity  going  back  to   2012.
    Reference was made there to the detail of some of that  evidence  which
    includes the fact at page  315  of  the  Appellant's  bundle  that  the
    Information, Technology and Telecommunications Minister  in  Bangladesh
    had blocked the Appellant's facebook page, which had not been  referred
    to by Judge Hanbury and it was submitted had thus not  been  considered
    by the judge in rejecting the Appellant's fear of persecution  on  this
    basis.

 5. The third ground was concerned with  the  manner  in  which  the  judge
    approached  the  evidence.   It  is  the  case  that  regrettably   the
    Appellant's previous solicitors served a 750 page additional bundle  on
    26 May 2017 which was four days prior to the hearing on 1 June, however
    this had only been received by  the  Tribunal  the  day  prior  to  the
    hearing and by the Presenting Officer on the day of the hearing itself.



 6. At [6] of his decision the judge stated "given the size of  the  bundle
    and lack of a clear order I explained to Mr S later in the hearing that
    I would only consider those documents which I was specifically referred
    to".  Mr S's explanation for the late service of the documents was that
    he had been ill.  It is unfortunate that he did not seek permission  in
    advance to serve such a bundle so late.  However, ground 3 asserts that
    the judge then went  on  in  his  findings  to  give  consideration  to
    evidence to which he was not specifically referred and relied upon that
    evidence as part of his negative credibility assessment in  respect  of
    the Appellant (see e.g. [20]).

 7. The fourth ground of appeal took a point in respect of the findings  on
    consistency between the Appellant's interview and his oral evidence and
    noted that the asylum interview was conducted  through  an  interpreter
    and over Skype and that the error in any event was very minor  and  was
    not material to the basis of the claim given it confirmed when he  left
    the Awami League and did not relate to his activities as a blogger.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Robertson
    on 19 September 2017 in relation to grounds 1 to 3 on the basis:

         "It is not clear from the decision, given the Judge's  decision  to
         only consider evidence that he  was  specifically  referred  to  at
         paragraph [6], which of the evidence with regard to the Appellant's
         online activities  was  considered  by  the  Judge  and  which  was
         disregarded  in  his  assessment  of  risk  on  return.    If   the
         Respondent's  representative  was  unable  to  deal  with  all  the
         evidence provided on the day, in view of the size of the bundle, it
         was open to him to request an adjournment.  Permission to appeal is
         granted."

 9. The Rule 24 response dated 31 October 2017 states that the Home  Office
    are not able, due to a temporary resource  issue,  to  provide  a  full
    response but asserts that the grounds have no merit and  are  merely  a
    disagreement with the adverse outcome of the appeal, that the judge had
    considered all the evidence available and came to a conclusion open  to
    him on the evidence.

     Hearing

10. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Mr Saldanha on behalf
    of the Appellant. He relied on his grounds of appeal and also  took  me
    through the evidence cited in those grounds of appeal, which  primarily
    stemmed from the Appellant's facebook account and the attitude  of  the
    Bangladeshi government towards those who seek to use social  media  for
    political means.

11. At [18] and [19] of the decision of the  First  tier,  the  judge  held
    inter alia as follows:

         "18.  The  Appellant  is  probably  a  politically  interested  and
             educated individual but I find he has an  inflated  perception
             of his own importance and he has not given a truthful  account
             of his political involvement."

         19.  Apart from a large number of uncollated documents printed  off
             the internet and Facebook the Appellant has provided little in
             the way of tangible evidence to back up his assertion  he  was
             regarded as a threat by the Awami League Party."

12. It was submitted that this finding was somewhat stark in that the judge
    was clearly saying there were a large number  of  documents  which  did
    provide tangible evidence in support of the appeal and the judge's self-
    direction at [6] is undermined by his finding at [19] and also at  [20]
    where the judge found that it was relatively easy to generate a profile
    online and he was sceptical as to whether  the  facebook  entries  were
    truly attributable to the Appellant. It was submitted that it  was  all
    the more incumbent on the judge to consider the material  evidence  and
    make clear findings on that evidence and the manner in which the  judge
    had approached the evidence was contrary to the relevant  jurisprudence
    cf. Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418  and  ML  Nigeria
    [2013] EWCA Civ 844 as well as [72] of the Practice Directions.

13. In her submissions, Ms Ahmad sought to rely  on  the  judgment  of  the
    House of Lords in AH Sudan [2007] UKHL 49 at [30] where their Lordships
    made reference to the expert Tribunal and the fact that such  decisions
    should be respected. She submitted that the judge did look at  all  the
    material evidence, including not only the facebook posts  at  [20]  but
    the news reports which were referred to by the judge at [25].  She also
    sought to rely on the decision of the Court of Appeal  in  Muse  [2012]
    EWCA Civ 10 at [33] in respect of the reasons and she submitted that it
    was not necessary to provide reasons for  every  finding  but  only  in
    respect of the main issues in dispute.   She  submitted  there  was  no
    satisfactory  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the  authorities   in
    Bangladesh are interested in the Appellant  or  that  he  has  a  well-
    founded fear of persecution from them.  She submitted the findings made
    by the judge at [25] were open  to  him  and  that  the  news  articles
    referred  to  therein  do  not  show  that  someone  with  anti-Islamic
    sentiments  has  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Bangladesh, but simply show that the authorities are monitoring certain
    bloggers.  She submitted there was no material error of law.

14. In his response Mr Saldanha stated it was clear with reference to  [30]
    of AH Sudan that there had been a misdirection in this case. The  judge
    had before him a 750 page bundle, but states that he is  not  going  to
    consider this evidence, however then later  goes  on  to  consider  the
    evidence in order to make a finding against the Appellant.  In  respect
    of the decision in Musa at [33] Mr Saldanha accepted that the judge  is
    not required to  address  every  piece  of  evidence  when  giving  his
    decision,  but  equally  it  was  not  acceptable  to  ignore  material
    evidence, particularly when there was a large amount of  such  material
    evidence.  He further submitted there may have been some  confusion  by
    the judge on the basis that in addition to the 750  page  bundle  there
    was also a short bundle of news reports separate from that bundle which
    appears to be that referred to at [25].

     Notice of Decision

15. I find there are material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hanbury, essentially for the reasons set out in  grounds
    1 to 3 of the grounds of appeal.  I accept the premise of ground  1  of
    the grounds of appeal and Ms Ahmed did not attempt to  argue  that  the
    decision of the Court of Appeal per Brooke LJ  in  Danian  is  anything
    other than binding. Thus even if a person who is a  refugee  sur  place
    has acted in bad faith, if his activities in the host country give rise
    to a risk of persecution on return, then he is a refugee regardless  of
    the fact the activities were carried out in bad faith.

16. It is clear from the judge's decision in this  case  that  despite  his
    findings at [20] and [25] that the Appellant had essentially created  a
    profile online in order to generate an asylum claim, he failed to go on
    to consider even in light of that finding whether this would cause  him
    to be at risk of persecution.

17. The judge went on at [25] to find there was  no  satisfactory  evidence
    that  the  authorities  in  Bangladesh  treat  dissenters  sufficiently
    harshly to justify a finding of persecution  and  that  the  Bangladesh
    police would attempt to protect the Appellant if he  was  subjected  to
    threats by non-state agents. The difficulty with this finding  is  that
    there was a large amount of evidence before the judge attesting both as
    to the Appellant's extensive activities on social media since 2012  and
    evidence in the bundle of what the judge referred to as the  bundle  of
    news reports of the murder of secular bloggers in Bangladesh: see,  for
    example, the article in the  Guardian  dated  7  August  2015  and  the
    article reported in the Telegraph on 22 October 2015 in relation  to  a
    different person entitled "Third secular blogger  hacked  to  death  in
    Bangladesh".

18. It would appear that,  due  to  the  late  service  of  the  background
    evidence and the extensive nature of that evidence, the judge failed to
    engage with this evidence sufficiently and to reach his findings on the
    Appellant's credibility in the light of that evidence,  some  of  which
    (see for example page 315) was specific to the Appellant and  the  fact
    that  his  facebook  account  had  been  blocked  by  the   Information
    Technology minister in Bangladesh.  In the light of  this  evidence,  I
    find that the error is material because had the Appellant's credibility
    been assessed in the light of this evidence, a different outcome  would
    have been possible.

19. For these reasons I find material errors of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  and I remit the appeal back  for  a  rehearing  de
    novo by a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hanbury.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:  Rebecca Chapman                     Date: 24 January 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman


