






Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/06436/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 30th January 2018                     |On 5th February 2018                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before


                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCCLURE


                                   Between


                          MOHAMMED ASIF MAROOFKHAIL
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Asanovic Counsel instructed by Lawrence & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant, Mr Mohammed Asif Maroofkhail date of birth  10th  August
    1989, is a citizen of the Afghanistan. No anonymity direction was  made
    previously. Having considered all the circumstances, I do not  make  an
    anonymity direction.

 2. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Carroll.

 3. The appellant first entered the United Kingdom in  September  2006.  He
    claimed asylum. Thereafter in a decision by the  respondent  dated  May
    2009 the respondent refused the appellant's claim. There was no  appeal
    against that refusal.

 4. On 23 May 2016 solicitors acting on behalf of the appellant submitted a
    fresh claim. That resulted in the decision of 3 June 2016 in which  the
    appellant's claim was refused.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision.

 5. The appeal appeared before First-tier Tribunal Carroll at Taylor  House
    on 19 July 2017. By decision promulgated on 31 July 2017 Judge  Carroll
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed against that decision. There are lengthy grounds
    of appeal submitted in the appeal bundle, including detailed grounds to
    the Upper Tribunal for leave to appeal.  By  decision  of  27  November
    2017 Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan granted permission to appeal.

 7. The detailed consideration of the Grounds of Appeal is  not  necessary.
    At the commencement of the hearing before me the representative for the
    respondent conceded that for the reasons set out  in  the  decision  of
    Upper Tribunal Judge Jordan and as set out in the Grounds of Appeal the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge there were material errors of
    law in the decision.

 8.  Initially  the  representative  for  the  respondent  maintained  that
    elements of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  could  be
    sustained, for  example  the  findings  of  fact  with  regard  to  the
    petitions set out at  paragraphs  26  and  28  of  the  judgement.  The
    representative for the appellant was asked in detail to point  out  the
    inadequacies within the assessment by the judge of the  evidence  which
    undermine the conclusions of fact reached.

 9. The appellant's representative in a careful a  very  structured  manner
    referred to the reports of the 2 experts, Dr Guistozzi  and  Mr  Zadeh,
    pointing out where the experts had specifically dealt with  aspects  of
    the petitions but the judge appears not to have taken  account  of  the
    evidence of the experts.

10. After due consideration it was accepted that the judge  had  failed  to
    take account  of  material  parts  of  the  experts'  report  and  that
    accordingly the findings of fact made could not stand.

11.  In light  of  the  concession  made  by  the  representative  for  the
    respondent, the only course is  for  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be set aside and for this matter to be remitted to be heard
    afresh at Taylor House by Judge other than Judge Carroll.




    Notice of Decision

12. I allow the appeal and remit the case for a hearing afresh in the First-
    tier Tribunal.

13. I do not make an anonymity direction.



Signed



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McClure

Dated 30th January 2018

