



                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06537/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : UTIAC Birmingham               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On  31 August 2017                        |On 5 September 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [g k]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford, instructed by Sultan Lloyd Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on [ ] 2001. He  arrived  in
the United Kingdom on 20 November 2015 and made an asylum  claim  which  was
refused on 15 July 2016. He appealed against that decision  and  his  appeal
was heard before the First-tier Tribunal and dismissed  in  a  determination
promulgated on 7 March 2017.

The  basis  of  the  appellant's  claim  is  that  he  fears  returning   to
Afghanistan as he escaped from the Taliban after being forced to  fight  for
them. In rejecting his claim, the respondent did not accept his  account  of
his involvement with the Taliban and considered that he would be at no  risk
on return.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss on 13 January  2017.  Judge  Juss  relied  on
discrepancies in the appellant's claim which he considered to undermine  his
credibility. He found that the appellant would be at no risk on  return  and
that his removal  from  the  UK  would  not  breach  his  human  rights.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


Permission to appeal was sought  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  on  grounds
challenging the judge's adverse credibility findings  and  his  findings  on
risk on return to his home  area  or  reasonableness  of  return  to  Kabul.
Permission was granted on 7 July 2017.

At the hearing before me, Ms  Aboni  relied  on  the  respondent's  rule  24
response supporting the judge's credibility findings but accepting  that  he
had failed to provide full details of the appellant's ability to  return  to
Afghanistan. After hearing submissions from Mr  Bedford  in  regard  to  the
judge's credibility  findings  I  decided  that  the  judge's  decision  was
unsustainable in all respects and had to be set aside.


Contrary to the principles set out in the recent case  of  AM  (Afghanistan)
[2017] EWCA Civ 1123 there is no indication in Judge  Juss's  decision  that
he gave any consideration  to  the  appellant's  age  and  vulnerability  in
assessing his credibility and in making the adverse findings  that  he  did.
On the contrary, he rejected  the  claim  on  the  basis  of  a  very  brief
assessment of the evidence at  [23]  and  failed  at  [24]  to  address  the
background evidence relied upon by the appellant's representative in  regard
to forced recruitment of children by the Taliban. In addition,  as  accepted
by the respondent, the  judge  gave  no  consideration  to  the  appellant's
ability to return either to his home area or alternatively  to  relocate  to
Kabul as a minor.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  judge  conducted  a  wholly
inadequate  assessment  of  the  appellant's  evidence  and   circumstances,
particularly considering his age, and that his conclusions simply cannot  be
upheld. Accordingly, the decision has to be set aside  and  re-made  in  its
entirety, with no findings preserved.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  with  no
findings preserved,  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b),  before  any
judge aside from Judge Juss.
Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 31 August
2017
