
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06035/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 19 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      A
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. Parties are as above, but the rest of this determination refers to them
    as they were in the FtT.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 26 January 2020, FtT Judge Bircher at  [29
    - 30] allowed A's appeal on asylum grounds; dismissed the  humanitarian
    protection claim; and allowed the human rights claim under article 3.

 3. The SSHD's appeal to the UT raises  only  one  challenge.   The  SSHD's
    decision  held  that  the  claim  did  not  fall  within  the   Refugee
    Convention.  The FtT did not deal with that issue, and did not identify
    within which Convention category the claim fell.

 4. The FtT granted permission on 24 February 2020.

 5. The UT issued a note and directions on 1  May  2020,  with  a  view  to
    deciding without a hearing (a) whether the FtT erred in law and (b)  if
    so, whether its decision should be set aside.

 6. Neither party has submitted that a hearing is required.

 7. The SSHD did not respond.

 8. In an email dated 29 May 2020,  the  appellant's  representatives  said
    that they had not received submissions from the SSHD, and asked for  an
    extension of time to respond.

 9. By a note and further directions, dated 28 September and  issued  on  6
    October, the appellant was given 21 days to  make  any  submissions  on
    whether the SSHD's grounds of appeal disclose error on a point of  law;
    if so, whether the decision of the FtT should be set aside; and  if  it
    is set aside, on the further procedure, if any  required,  and  on  the
    outcome sought.

10. The SSHD was given the same  period  during  which  to  submit  on  the
    outcome sought.

11. The UT indicated that at the end of that period,  whether  or  not  any
    responses were received, it would decide how to  proceed  further,  and
    might reach a final decision; which, in absence of response,  might  be
    to set aside the decision of the FtT,  on  the  basis  that  the  claim
    discloses no Refugee Convention category, and to substitute a  decision
    that the appeal, as brought to  the  FtT,  is  allowed  on  grounds  of
    humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds (article 3).

12. There is no response on file from the SSHD.

13. The appellant's response, filed on 28 October 2020,  acknowledges  that
    the FtT did not consider "the Convention reason", and submits  that  it
    was imputed political opinion, based on refusal to follow the order  of
    a  superior  in  the  peshmerga,  "albeit  outwith  the  scope  of  his
    employment".  Alternatively, it is suggested that  the  case  discloses
    that the appellant formed "part of a social group".

14. The UT may now resolve the case without a hearing, in terms of rules  2
    and 34.

15. The FtT overlooked the question whether the claim fell into  a  Refugee
    Convention category, which was raised  at  [24  -  25]  of  the  SSHD's
    decision, and was obvious.  The issue points to a different outcome, so
    this requires the decision of the FtT to be set aside.

16. The appellant makes only token efforts to identify a Refugee Convention
    category.  Pressure to become involved in diverting arms and ammunition
    to the black market does not involve either an imputation of  political
    opinion, or membership of a social group.

17.  The  appeal,  as  brought  to  the  FtT,  is  allowed  on  grounds  of
    humanitarian protection  and  on  human  rights  grounds  (article  3).



18. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Parties have  not  addressed  the
    matter in the UT.  Anonymity is preserved.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    13 November 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.    A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent.


2.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.    Where the person making the application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.    Where the person who appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.    A "working  day"  means  any  day  except  a  Saturday  or  a  Sunday,
Christmas Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.    The date when  the  decision  is  "sent'  is  that  appearing  on  the
covering letter or covering email.




