

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06313/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On: 6th December 2017               |On: 8th December 2017                 |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     TAN
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:           Mr Salam, Salam & Co Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mrs Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Vietnam, born in 1999. He  appeals  with
    permission[1] against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    McGinty) to dismiss his appeal on protection grounds.


    Anonymity


 2. This case concerns a young person who  was  a  minor  when  he  claimed
    asylum. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"




    Background and Matters in Issue


 3. The Appellant's claim was that he had been trafficked for  the  purpose
    of domestic  servitude,  having  been  imprisoned  and  ill-treated  in
    Vietnam, France and then the United Kingdom.  He had claimed to have  a
    well-founded fear of serious harm by the people who had trafficked  him
    or alternatively that as a minor without parental support in Vietnam he
    would be vulnerable to re-trafficking by others.

 4. In her letter of the 9th June 2016 the Respondent accepted that  as  an
    unaccompanied minor without adequate reception facilities in  his  home
    country the Appellant qualified for a grant of leave  under  paragraphs
    352ZC to 352ZF of the Rules. She did not however accept that he  was  a
    refugee or otherwise entitled to international protection. The crux  of
    the decision was that the Appellant's evidence was not worthy of belief
    and he had failed to establish that  he  had  been  trafficked  in  the
    circumstances  claimed.   As  the  claim  had  raised  issues   as   to
    trafficking a referral had  been  made  under  the  'National  Referral
    Mechanism' to the Competent Authority. On the 25th  November  2015  the
    Competent Authority had found no reasonable grounds to believe that the
    Appellant had in fact been trafficked. That  decision  has  never  been
    challenged.

 5. When the matter came before the First-tier Tribunal the Appellant  gave
    oral evidence in support of his appeal.   In a determination dated  the
    22nd December 2016 the Tribunal gave several reasons why that  evidence
    was rejected: in summary the account  was  found  to  be  inconsistent,
    implausible and lacking in detail. The Judge was not satisfied that the
    Appellant had been trafficked, that his father had  died  or  that  his
    mother had come to work in the UK when he was a young child.   It found
    it to be "far more likely that he came simply to the UK and was sent by
    his parents, who in my judgement are still alive, to the UK to meet his
    relative here".

 6. The Appellant appealed on several grounds, which  I  address  below.  I
    note that in granting permission  Judge  Finch  only  referred  to  one
    matter, which was to form the centrepiece of  Mr  Salam's  submissions:
    that was that the First-tier Tribunal Judge "failed to consider in  any
    detail whether the Appellant met the profile of a child  who  had  been
    trafficked from Vietnam in order to be exploited here".

 7. The appeal was opposed on all grounds by Mrs Aboni.



    Findings and Discussion

 8. The First-tier Tribunal unarguably gave careful  consideration  to  the
    claim advanced by the Appellant, and rejected the truth of that account
    for  several  good  reasons.  The  Appellant  had  given  significantly
    inconsistent evidence about material matters,  namely  how  he  escaped
    from his captors in  Vietnam,  how  he  escaped  when  in  France,  the
    circumstances of his transportation to the UK and whether  he  believed
    his mother to be in this country. His account of captivity and domestic
    servitude in Vietnam was found not credible for a lack  of  detail:  he
    had been unable to give the first name of the woman he claims  to  have
    lived with for some 4-5 years.   It was also found  to  be  implausible
    that he had met, quite by chance, a random relative walking around  the
    streets of Oldham.  I find that the Tribunal was entitled to reject the
    claim advanced for the reasons given.


 9. Judge Finch was nevertheless concerned that the First-tier Tribunal had
    failed to consider whether the Appellant "met the profile" of  a  child
    who had been trafficked from Vietnam. Before me Mr Salam suggested that
    there were three matters that, taken  together,  could  have  justified
    such a finding.  First there was the  fact  that  he  arrived  in  this
    country as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child. Second was the manner
    of his arrival, in a lorry with approximately 11 other young Vietnamese
    people (I should add to this the evidence recorded in the determination
    at paragraph 34 that the Appellant very quickly absconded  from  social
    services care provision). These matters had to be  read  together  with
    the uncontested country background material, set out at paragraph 25 of
    the determination, that Vietnam is a source country for the trafficking
    of children for the purpose of forced labour. These factors,  submitted
    Mr Salam, were sufficient to found a finding that whatever the truth of
    the account advanced by the Appellant, he was  nevertheless  reasonably
    likely to have been trafficked to this country.

10. I am prepared to put to one side the obvious difficulties in Mr Salam's
    case, namely the positive finding of fact by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    that the Appellant has been sent by his parents to live with a relative
    in this country, and the fact that the Competent  Authority  could  not
    even find reasonable grounds to suppose that he  had  been  trafficked.
    Taking the claim now advanced before me at its highest, I am unable  to
    find that the  alleged  omission  on  the  part  of  Judge  McGinty  is
    material.  Even if he should have found  that  the  Appellant  has  the
    profile of someone who was trafficked as a child, that is no longer the
    case. The Appellant is no longer a child. He is a healthy adult who, by
    his own evidence, has been working since he arrived in this country. He
    absconded from the care of social services and is  supporting  himself,
    albeit with the  assistance  of  his  relative  in  Oldham.   In  those
    circumstances I find it difficult to see why he would  be  at  risk  of
    serious harm if returned to Vietnam. The only potential  harm  that  he
    might  face  would  be  re-trafficking,  but  in  the  absence  of  any
    particular vulnerability - I reiterate that he is a healthy adult  male
    - I can see no reason why he cannot get a job and  support  himself  in
    Vietnam, just as he has done here.   The  country  background  evidence
    indicates that victims of trafficking are lured  abroad  by  offers  of
    lucrative jobs. If the Appellant has already been trafficked  in  those
    circumstances he can avoid re-trafficking by not seeking  work  abroad,
    but instead taking a job in Vietnam. I note that the unemployment  rate
    in Vietnam has averaged about 2% over the  past  year,  markedly  lower
    than it is here.

11.  As for the remaining ground I deal with it only briefly  since  I  was
    not addressed on it. Complaint is made about the fact that the Tribunal
    took account of s8 of the Asylum, Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants
    etc) Act 2004. There can be no  realistic  complaint  about  that.  The
    Appellant plainly did fail to claim asylum on his way to the  UK,  that
    being one of the examples given in the Act of the kind of  matter  that
    should diminish the weight to be attached to claim to hold a subjective
    fear of harm. The matters listed in the Act are not an exhaustive list;
    they are  examples.    The  Tribunal  was  plainly  entitled  to  treat
    absconding from social services care in the same way.

12. Accordingly I am not satisfied that there is an error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such that its  decision  should  be
    set aside.




    Decisions


14. There is no error of law and the decision is upheld.


15. There is an order for anonymity.




                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           6th December 2017
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was granted on the 5th July 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge
Finch


