
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06647/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 27th August 2019                  |On 3rd September 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     FA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jagadesham, instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant  in
this determination identified as FA.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this  direction  could  give
rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Herwald dismissed FA's appeal  against  a
         decision of the SSHD refusing him international protection.  I  set
         aside that decision, by consent, no  findings  preserved,  on  25th
         September 2018.

      2. There were delays in listing the resumed hearing to take account of
         an application by FA's claimed partner's application for permission
         to appeal the dismissal of his appeal to the Court of Appeal.

      3. Having set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal, s.12(2)  of
         the TCEA 2007 requires me to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal with directions or remake it for myself.

      4. The Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration
         and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states:

             '7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
             proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case
             to the First-tier  Tribunal,  unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
             satisfied that:

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.'

      5. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
         assign the function of primary fact finding to the Upper  Tribunal.
         In the instant appeal full fact-findings is  required,  and  it  is
         thus appropriate for this appeal to be remitted to  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to be heard afresh, no findings preserved.

    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal to  be
    heard afresh.

    Anonymity

    I continue the anonymity order (pursuant to rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


     Date 27th August 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
