
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06740/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th June 2019                     |On 17th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                  MR A M B
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge O'Brien, promulgated on 13th July 2018, following  a  hearing  at
    Birmingham  on  27th  June  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Ethiopia, and was  born  on  14th
    January 1996.  The appeal against the decision of the Respondent  dated
    16th May 2018, refusing his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339 of HC 395.

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim was that he was a supporter of the
    political group PG7, an organisation that he began to support after his
    father's involvement with PG7, and after his father was taken  away  by
    the authorities in May 2015.  He claims to have suffered  ill-treatment
    on account of this himself.

 4. At the hearing before me on 7th June 2019, there was agreement  between
    Mr Mills, appearing on behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, and
    Mr Howard, appearing on behalf of the  Appellant,  that  there  was  an
    error of law.  However, Mr Mills  submitted  that  the  error  in  this
    regard, notwithstanding  the  extensive  Grounds  of  Appeal  from  the
    decision below, was only in relation to one particular point.  This was
    to do with the judge's failure to make a finding on the question of the
    father's involvement politically.  The Appellant himself had been found
    to be a person who lacked all credibility.  However,  that  in  itself,
    did not mean that the background evidence in relation to  his  father's
    involvement with PG7, had also implicitly been found to be  lacking  in
    credibility.  Therefore, only Ground 4 of the  Grounds  of  Application
    was accepted.

 5. For his part, Mr Howard submitted that Ground 3 was  equally  important
    because the judge had failed to give proper regard  to  the  Article  8
    considerations, and the fact that the Appellant  could  have  succeeded
    under paragraph 276ADE and under Article 8 ECHR.   There  had  been  no
    finding by the judge in relation to Article 8 either.

 6. Given the consensus between the parties before me, I need  only  decide
    whether there is an error in relation to one particular  matter  before
    allowing the appeal.  I do so on the basis that in this case there  was
    extensive background evidence that the Appellant's father was  involved
    with PG7.  This arises earlier on in in the determination of the  judge
    below who observes that:-

         "It  was  not  accepted  [by  the  Secretary  of  State]  that  the
         Appellant's father had been arrested as a member of  PG7.   At  his
         screening interview, the Appellant had merely said that his  father
         was a politician but had not mentioned his arrest or detention ..."
         (paragraph 7).

 7. Thereafter, in coming to his conclusions, the judge  had  observed  how
    "The Appellant claims that his father was involved  with  PG7  and  was
    taken by the authorities  in  May  2015"  (paragraph  32).   There  is,
    however, as Mr Mills has pointed out,  no  express  finding  about  the
    veracity of the father's involvement as claimed by the Appellant.  This
    in turn would have impacted upon the judge's eventual  conclusion  that
    "the Appellant has given inconsistent explanations for  why  he  was  a
    supporter rather than a member of PG7" (paragraph 33).

 8. I conclude that evidence will need to be heard again on the role of the
    father with PG7 and an express finding made in that regard.  This being
    so, the appropriate course of action is to remit this  matter  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal to be heard again in its  entirety,  with  such
    positive findings there are, to be retained on behalf of the Appellant.

Notice of Decision

 9. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law (see Section 12(1) of TCEA  2007)  such  that  I  set
    aside the decision of the original judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
    follows.  This appeal is  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    pursuant to Practice Statement 7.2(b) of the Practice Direction, to  be
    heard by a judge other than Judge O'Brien in Birmingham.

10.  An anonymity direction is made.

11. This appeal is allowed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 12th July 2019


