
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06179/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019              |On 20 February 2019             |
|                            |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    F. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, instructed by Halliday Reeves
                    Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iran, entered the  UK  illegally  and  then
    claimed asylum on 6 November 2017. His protection claim was refused  on
    30 April 2018. His appeal against the decision to refuse him protection
    status was heard, and allowed on Article 3 grounds only, by decision of
    First tier Tribunal Judge Moran, promulgated  on  23  July  2018.  That
    decision  followed  a  hearing  at  which   the   Respondent,   without
    explanation or application for an adjournment, was  unrepresented.  The
    asylum ground of appeal was dismissed.
 2. The Respondent was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    by decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Lambert of 21 August 2018. The
    grant was made  on  only  one  of  the  two  grounds  advanced  in  the
    application. That challenge focused upon whether the Judge had erred in
    concluding that a Kurd, who was of no previous interest to the  Iranian
    authorities, would be questioned about his previous activities in Iran,
    if returned to Iran as a failed asylum seeker, so that  his  past  non-
    political criminal activity would come to light, so that there  was  no
    adequate basis for the conclusion that the Appellant faced a real  risk
    of a breach of his Article 3 rights.
 3. Neither party applied in writing under Rule 15(2A) for further evidence
    to be admitted in the remaking of the decision, should the decision  of
    the First tier Tribunal be set aside.
 4. The Appellant lodged no Rule 24 response to the  grant  of  permission,
    and also lodged no cross-appeal (whether within or out of time).  Thus,
    no matter the arguments Ms Cleghorn sought to advance, the dismissal of
    his asylum appeal is unchallenged.
 5. Thus the matter comes before me.


Renewed grounds?
 6. Mr Diwnycz confirmed that the Respondent did not seek  to  advance  the
    first ground. He accepted the criticisms that had been made  of  it  by
    the Judge who granted permission to appeal.
 7. There is therefore no challenge by either party to any of  the  Judge's
    findings of primary fact. The Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  had
    been engaged in the smuggling of cigarettes and general goods from time
    to time in Iran, but found that the Appellant had never  been  involved
    in the smuggling of alcohol, drugs, or, any political materials [26-7].
    The Judge rejected the claim that the Appellant's  criminal  activities
    had come to the attention of the Iranian authorities.
 8. Save for his claim to have been a smuggler the Appellant did not  claim
    to have ever engaged within either Iran or  the  UK  in  any  political
    activity,  or  any  other  activity  that  would  be  perceived  to  be
    politically motivated, or, a pursuit of Kurdish rights generally.


Error of law?
 9. The Respondent's challenge is therefore a  simple  one.  The  Appellant
    failed to establish that he had any reason to  leave  Iran  unlawfully,
    because he was unable to establish that he had ever come to the adverse
    attention of the Iranian authorities; his evidence of  having  done  so
    was rejected as a fiction. He had admitted to having been issued with a
    passport in Iran. If in truth he retained possession of  that  passport
    (despite his claim to have lost it en route to the UK), then  he  could
    demonstrate with ease that he had left Iran legitimately.  Even  if  he
    had told the truth when he had claimed to have lost his passport, there
    was no reason why he could not seek from the Iranian  authorities,  the
    issue of a replacement whilst in the UK.
10. Moreover, the Appellant had not established that records were not  kept
    by the Iranian authorities of the grant of exit visas. Thus he had  not
    shown that he would be unable to demonstrate  that  he  had  left  Iran
    legitimately. He had had no reason to do so, and there was therefore in
    the circumstances  of  his  fabricated  account,  any  reason  why  the
    Tribunal should infer that he had done so.
11. Thus, it was argued, the prospect of risk of harm upon return had to be
    assessed on the basis the Appellant  would  simply  be  processed  upon
    return as having the following characteristics;
          i) a male Kurd,
         ii) who was a failed asylum seeker,
        iii) who was returning from the UK, and,
         iv) who had failed to  attract  any  adverse  attention  from  the
             Iranian authorities as a result of either  his  activities  in
             Iran or the UK.
12. The available country evidence, and country guidance,  did  not  permit
    the Judge to reach a  conclusion  that  such  an  individual  would  be
    detained and questioned at the airport upon return to Iran in order  to
    ascertain whether they had engaged in any criminal activity within Iran
    prior to their departure.
13. Nor was there a real risk that the  questioning  the  country  guidance
    suggested he would be likely to be subjected to upon return would  mean
    he faced a real risk of having to disclose his past criminal activity.
14. To the extent that the Judge had been persuaded  to  assume  that  this
    would be the case, there was no proper  evidential  basis  for  such  a
    finding, and it was not therefore one that was open to him; HB  (Kurds)
    Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430. Accordingly his assessment of the risk factors
    that applied to the Appellant was materially flawed; the assessment was
    however one that could be undertaken  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  without
    remittal, and if undertaken would necessarily lead to the dismissal  of
    the Article 3 appeal.


The Appellant's response
15. Ms Cleghorn initially disputed that  the  Appellant  had  ever  held  a
    passport,  until  his  admission  to  this  effect  was  drawn  to  her
    attention, along with the relevant finding by the Judge [A2 Q1.8] [13].
    There was no answer  to  Mr  Diwnycz's  point  that  if  in  truth  the
    Appellant retained possession of that passport (despite  his  claim  to
    have lost it en route to the UK), then he could demonstrate  with  ease
    that he had left Iran legitimately. Even if he had told the truth  when
    he had claimed to have lost his passport, there was no  reason  why  he
    could not seek from the Iranian authorities, the issue of a replacement
    whilst in the UK.
16. Ms Cleghorn  accepted  that  the  Judge  had  rejected  as  untrue  the
    Appellant's account of why he had left Iran, and was unable to identify
    any reason why in those circumstances the Appellant needed to leave, or
    had left, illegally. There was no answer to Mr  Diwnycz's  point  about
    exit visas. Accordingly there was no reason for the Tribunal to  assess
    the risk the Appellant would face upon return to Iran on the basis that
    he would be perceived to have left illegally.
17. Ms Cleghorn then suggested that the Appellant might not have  performed
    military service in Iran, although his witness statement  had  made  no
    such claim, and his appeal had never been advanced on the basis that he
    was a draft evader. Asked to identify any previous suggestion that  the
    Appellant had not performed military service, she pointed to the denial
    at the screening interview that the Appellant had been a member of  the
    national armed forces [A6 Q5.2].  The  difficulty  with  this,  as  she
    acknowledged, is the unchallenged objective evidence that young men are
    called up for eighteen months national service at the age of  18  (they
    can volunteer to undertake their service from the age of 16), and  that
    those who are draft evaders can have any existing driving  licence  and
    passport cancelled; CPIN; Iran; military service v1 October 2016 #4.5.1
    & #7.2.4. It followed that in my  judgement  there  was  no  evidential
    basis that would have legitimately allowed the Tribunal to find, or  to
    infer, that the Appellant had failed to perform national  service,  or,
    that he is perceived by the Iranian authorities to be a  draft  evader.
    The Judge made no such finding, and he was entirely correct not to have
    done so.
18. It is quite clear  from  the  available  country  information  that  an
    individual who had performed military service would  have  been  issued
    with the consequent military service completion card [#6.3.1]. Even  if
    this had subsequently been lost  the  Iranian  authorities  would  hold
    records of its issue. The legitimate alternative to performing military
    service is of course to obtain a legitimate  certificate  of  exemption
    from service, or, when  legislation  from  time  to  time  permits  the
    practice to "buy out" of the obligation for service, but in either case
    the individual would also be able to establish upon return to Iran that
    they had done so. In neither case would the individual be perceived  as
    a draft evader.
19. Ms Cleghorn then focused upon the questioning that the Appellant  might
    face upon return to Iran, and in so doing she relied  upon  a  skeleton
    argument. Although this  was  drafted  after  the  promulgation  of  HB
    (Kurds) Iran CG [2018] UKUT 430, it failed to engage with  the  content
    of HB, or even to acknowledge its existence. Indeed she went so far  as
    to argue that HB was of no assistance, since it  did  not  examine  the
    particular position of an ex-smuggler. I regret  that  I  cannot  adopt
    such a cavalier approach to such recent country guidance,  particularly
    given that the Upper Tribunal took evidence from both  Professor  Joffe
    and Dr Enayat, upon the approach taken by the  Iranian  authorities  to
    Kurds who would correctly be perceived upon return to be failed  asylum
    seekers.
20. Central to Ms Cleghorn's argument, as advanced, was that the  Appellant
    would not be perceived by the Iranian authorities to be simply a failed
    Kurdish asylum seeker. Pressed  upon  the  evidential  basis  for  this
    proposition,  she  was  unable  to  identify  one.   On   the   Judge's
    unchallenged findings, this was a man who had left  Iran  without  ever
    having come to the adverse attention of the Iranian authorities. He had
    not claimed to have done anything in the UK to come to their  attention
    either, and thus any intelligence led enquiries into his activities  in
    advance of his return to Tehran would have identified  no  grounds  for
    concern beyond his ethnicity.
21. Ms Cleghorn's argument also assumed that the Appellant, as one who  was
    perceived to be a failed asylum seeker, would be detained  upon  return
    to  Tehran  airport  and  questioned  in   circumstances   that   would
    necessarily mean a breach of his Article 3 rights. There is  no  proper
    foundation for that assumption to be found in either HB or  in  AB  and
    Others (internet activity-state of evidence) Iran CG [2015]  UKUT  257,
    or, in SSH and HR (Illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran  CG  [2016]
    UKUT 308. Had matters been otherwise, every Iranian  national  able  to
    demonstrate that they would be perceived to be a failed  asylum  seeker
    upon return, would have been bound to succeed in an  Article  3  claim.
    That has not been the Tribunal's approach  to  date,  and  it  did  not
    become the Tribunal's approach as a result of HB.


Conclusions
22. Upon return to Iran, it is  common  ground  that  the  Appellant  would
    (correctly) be perceived by the Iranian authorities to be  a  Kurd  who
    had unsuccessfully claimed asylum in the UK.
23. The Appellant had not come to the  adverse  attention  of  the  Iranian
    authorities whilst he previously lived in Iran, and nothing he has done
    since will have drawn him to their adverse  attention  either.  He  has
    never had any engagement in politics or Kurdish rights  movements,  and
    he has never advanced a case based upon association within the UK  with
    others who have done so. It was not suggested that interrogation of any
    social media accounts (whether maintained by himself or  others)  would
    give rise to any grounds for concern about him.
24. Thus the Iranian authorities' intelligence enquiries into the Appellant
    prior to his return to Iran would have disclosed no adverse interest in
    him, because he has done nothing to give  rise  to  such  interest.  If
    asked directly, upon return to Iran, the Appellant would truthfully  be
    able to confirm that  he  had  never  been  engaged  in  any  political
    activity either within, or outside Iran. However  suspicious  generally
    they may be of Kurds, the Appellant has failed demonstrate  any  reason
    why the Iranian authorities would conclude he was not telling the truth
    about this.
25. The Appellant would either be able  to  produce  his  original  Iranian
    passport, or, he would have been able to  provide  sufficient  accurate
    biographical information to the Iranian authorities (with  the  support
    of his family  in  Iran)  to  have  allowed  the  issue  to  him  of  a
    replacement passport in the UK. There is  no  proper  evidential  basis
    that would permit the Tribunal to infer that he  would  necessarily  be
    required to travel to Iran upon an emergency travel document or laissez
    passer.
26. If he were able to produce his original  passport  there  was  also  no
    proper evidential basis to  permit  the  Tribunal  to  infer  that  the
    Appellant would be likely to be perceived by the Iranian authorities as
    one who had left Iran illegally. Even if he was required to travel upon
    a replacement passport there was no proper evidential basis  to  permit
    the Tribunal to infer that the Appellant would be unable to satisfy the
    Iranian authorities that he had been issued with an exit  visa  in  the
    past.
27. As an Iranian national  travelling  upon  his  own  original  passport,
    endorsed with an exit visa, who has never come to the adverse attention
    of the Iranian authorities, the mere fact that the Appellant  would  be
    perceived to be a Kurdish failed asylum seeker returned  from  the  UK,
    does not upon the current country guidance  suggest  that  he  will  be
    detained and questioned at all. He might be asked to sign a declaration
    to the effect that he regretted making a false claim to asylum  abroad,
    but even on the basis of Dr Enayat's evidence in HB there is no  reason
    why he should be reluctant to do so [HB Annexe B #11-2, #50].
28. If travelling upon a replacement passport,  that  necessarily  did  not
    have the original exit visa endorsed in it, because  the  original  had
    truthfully been lost, the Appellant might be questioned about why  that
    was the case; BA. However he would be able to demonstrate that  he  had
    been accepted for the issue of a replacement passport, and he would  be
    able to give accurate details of when the exit visa used to leave  Iran
    had been issued to him. Ultimately Ms Cleghorn accepted  that  even  if
    this questioning were to occur it would not give rise to a real risk of
    a breach of his Article 3 rights.
29. Thus Ms Cleghorn's argument ultimately rested upon the assumption  that
    the Iranian authorities would have some reason to detain the  Appellant
    and question him about his activities in Iran prior to  his  departure,
    so as to lead to the disclosure of his criminal activity. I can see  no
    proper evidential basis for that assumption on the  evidence  that  was
    accepted by the Judge. There is no support to be found within HB for an
    assumption that the questioning of  the  Appellant  would  be  so  wide
    ranging.
30. Indeed, I would venture that paragraph 4  of  the  summarised  guidance
    offered by HB is actually inconsistent with the Appellant's  case.  If,
    the mere fact of being a returnee of Kurdish ethnicity with or  without
    a valid passport, and even if combined  with  illegal  exit,  does  not
    create a risk of persecution  or  Article  3  ill-treatment,  then  the
    Appellant has to demonstrate that there is a real risk that the breadth
    of the routine questioning of a returnee without  any  adverse  profile
    will require him to disclose his past criminality.
31. The evidence offered by Professor Joffe  as  summarised  by  the  Upper
    Tribunal in HB [Annexe B #97] did suggest that the Iranian  authorities
    might assume that a smuggler was involved in  political  activity,  but
    fell well short of establishing that a Kurdish returnee travelling upon
    his own passport, with no adverse profile, would be questioned in  such
    a way as to require disclosure of such activity in the past.
32. In the circumstances I am satisfied that, for the reasons given  above,
    the Judge did fall into error in his approach to the Article  3  claim.
    The decision can, and should, be remade upon the basis of  the  Judge's
    own core findings. Neither party has applied under Rule 15(2A) for  the
    Upper Tribunal to consider  new  evidence.  There  is  no  good  reason
    offered as to why the Upper Tribunal  should  waive  that  requirement.
    Moreover,  the  key  findings  of  primary  fact  by  the   Judge   are
    unchallenged by the parties and in my judgement they are sufficient  to
    permit the decision to be remade. It follows that I dismiss the  appeal
    on Article 3 grounds.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appeal  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Article 8 grounds is not challenged  before
    me, and is therefore confirmed.

DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal to allow the appeal on  Article
    3 grounds which was promulgated on 23 July 2018 did involve the  making
    of an error of law that requires the  decision  to  be  set  aside  and
    remade.


    The appeal is dismissed.


Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.

Signed





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes


Dated 15 February 2019
