
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SC-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06170/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely on Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 March 2021                      |On 17 March 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     e j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr A Gilbert, Counsel, instructed by Oliver & Hasani
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State with permission against one
    aspect of the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cockrill  ("the
    judge"), promulgated on 27 February 2020,  by  which  he  allowed  EJ's
    appeal against the refusal of his protection and human rights claims.

 2. The appeal was allowed both on Refugee  Convention  ("the  Convention")
    grounds and with reference to Articles 3 and 2 ECHR.

 3. In summary, EJ's claim was as follows.  He had been  a  lawyer  working
    for what in effect was the government legal  service  in  Albania.   He
    also had connections with a political party (the Socialist Movement for
    Integration Party).  In 2014 EJ was  dealing  with  a  particular  case
    involving the registration of a large amount of  land.  The  individual
    seeking to register that land, K, was a prominent businessman.  EJ  was
    of the  view  that  K  had  acted  dishonestly  in  obtaining  relevant
    documentation in respect of the registration  of  the  land.   EJ  took
    action to refuse the application to register the  land.   Unhappy  with
    this decision, K sought to use his influence to get EJ  dismissed  from
    his job.  EJ sought assistance from his political party.

 4. In June 2017 the general election in Albania saw the party  with  which
    EJ was associated lose power.  Shortly thereafter EJ was dismissed from
    his job.  K then instigated legal proceedings against EJ.  Some  months
    after his dismissal EJ was threatened and then, in  November  2017,  he
    was the victim of an attempt on his life by way of a drive-by shooting.
     When he reported this to the  police  they  declined  to  provide  any
    assistance.  EJ, his wife and child left Albania and came to the United
    Kingdom shortly thereafter.  EJ  asserted  that  in  October  2018  the
    police had been asking after his whereabouts.   It  transpired  that  a
    former colleague had in fact been killed in December 2018.

 5. In refusing the protection and human rights claims,  the  Secretary  of
    State accepted that EJ was a lawyer and that he had been shot at  as  a
    result of his involvement with K. However, it was not accepted that  he
    was at risk on return to Albania.  Significantly for  the  purposes  of
    the appeal before me, the Secretary of State concluded that EJ's  claim
    did not disclose a reason under the Convention.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. On appeal, EJ put his case forward on the basis that  he  had  taken  a
    political stance to uphold the rule of law and that this constituted  a
    reason under the  Convention.   The  judge  found  EJ  to  be  entirely
    credible (see [32]) and that the supporting evidence produced could  be
    relied on.  An expert report was accorded  "considerable  weight"  (see
    [33]).  The judge found that corruption was "endemic"  within  Albania,
    that EJ could not obtain effective protection from state agencies,  and
    that state actors had in fact become potential  persecutors  and  would
    actively seek to pursue him on  behalf  of  K.   [34]  of  the  judge's
    decision reads as follows:

         "In trying to see the best way in which the appellant's  case  fits
         the appropriate legal framework, I recognise that the 1951  Refugee
         Convention does not sit particularly satisfactory with  this  case.
         The Convention reason as given by Counsel is  anti-corruption/mafia
         state and that is possibly the best way of analysing it in relation
         to the 1951 Convention.  The short  point  is  that  the  appellant
         wanted to uphold the rule of law.  He was simply trying to  do  his
         duty at the registry by  not  complying  with  the  bullying  of  a
         powerful individual to push through the registering of  a  plot  of
         land to which he was not entitled because  documents  that  he  had
         produced were considered to be unreliable and false.  The burden is
         on the appellant to prove his claim for asylum with the standard of
         proof being commonly expressed as  a  real  risk  or  a  reasonable
         degree of likelihood."

 7. At [35] the judge went on  to  conclude  that  even  if  there  was  no
    Convention reason, EJ would nonetheless be at risk of being killed  and
    subjected  to  ill-treatment  contrary  to  Articles  2  and   3   ECHR
    respectively.



The grounds of appeal

 8. The Secretary of State drafted her grounds on a very narrow basis.  The
    sole contention stated therein is that the judge "failed  to  identify"
    the Convention reason applicable to EJ's case.  There was no  challenge
    to findings of fact or the conclusion that EJ was entitled  to  succeed
    in respect of Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Haria  on
    24 April 2020.

10. Subsequent to this a Rule 24 reply was  filed  on  EJ's  behalf.   This
    contended that the Convention reason was actual  or  imputed  political
    opinion and that there was a necessary nexus between what EJ  had  done
    and the motivation of those wishing him harm.



The hearing

11. At the hearing before me Mr Walker  confirmed  that  the  Secretary  of
    State was not challenging the findings of fact or the conclusions under
    ECHR.  Instead, the narrow attack was based on what Mr Walker described
    as the judge's attempt to "shoehorn" EJ's case into the Convention.  Mr
    Walker pointed out that the term "political opinion" did not feature in
    [33] or [34] of the judge's decision.

12. For EJ, Mr Gilbert submitted as  follows.   There  was  ample  evidence
    before the judge to show that corruption within the Albanian state  was
    indeed endemic.  This was relevant to the actions of the police or  any
    other state actor working in collusion with K.   Mr  Gilbert  submitted
    that even if specific state actors were motivated at least in  part  by
    personal greed (perhaps the payment of bribes), this was not  fatal  to
    EJ's argument on the existence  of  a  Convention  reason.   The  state
    actors had been  operating  within  the  context  of  a  corrupt  state
    apparatus.  State power would be employed in order to persecute EJ  and
    that a material reason for this  would  be  EJ's  politically-motivated
    stance, namely that he saw it as his duty as a  lawyer  to  uphold  the
    rule of law.  It was not simply a personal view.  EJ had expressed  his
    stance as a political opinion himself in  his  own  evidence,  evidence
    which had been accepted by the judge.  It was accepted that in order to
    succeed EJ had to show both that K would seek to do him harm  and  also
    that K had used his influence to engage the "services" of state actors.
     Whilst EJ's association with a specific  political  party  was  not  a
    stand-alone basis of the existence of the Convention reason, it  was  a
    relevant element.  Mr Gilbert submitted that it was of note that:

          i) EJ had been a legal officer under the previous government  and
             had links to a particular political party;

         ii) That when initially threated with dismissal he had sought  the
             assistance of his political party;

        iii) That he was dismissed from his job after his party lost  power
             following the 2017 general election.

         iv) EJ had been threatened some months after he was dismissed.

13. It was submitted that  mixed  motivations  on  the  part  of  potential
    persecutors was permissible and that this was a case not  about  simple
    criminality but involved state corruption as well.

14. In reply, Mr Walker recognised the force in the final point put forward
    by Mr Gilbert.



Decision on error of law

15. As I announced to the  parties  in  summary  form  at  the  hearing,  I
    conclude that, on the particular facts  of  this  case,  there  are  no
    material errors of law in the judge's decision.

16. I recognise that he did not expressly use the term "political  opinion"
    in [33] or [34], but of course his decision must be read as a whole and
    the substance of what is said will almost always be more important than
    the form.  It is clear enough that EJ's case was  put  forward  to  the
    judge on the basis of a Convention reason of political opinion and,  in
    all the circumstances, I am satisfied that the substance and effect  of
    what is stated in  [34]  is  sufficient  to  show  that  this  was  the
    Convention reason applied by the judge.

17. The question  then  arises  as  to  whether  political  opinion  was  a
    permissible Convention reason.

18. In my judgment it was.  "Political opinion" should, in my judgment,  be
    interpreted broadly so as to provide  effective  protection  under  the
    Convention.  In this I am supported by the views of Professor  Hathaway
    in his seminal work The Law of Refugee Status (2014,  2nd  Edition,  at
    pages 415-419). In recognising that cases involving an  individual  who
    seeks to stand up for the rule of law may present challenges, Professor
    Hathaway notes that, "in a politicised  context  where  corruption  and
    criminal behaviour are endemic ... there  is  no  simplistic  dichotomy
    between opposition  to  criminal  activity  and  the  expression  of  a
    political opinion."  He goes on to state, "... "the critical importance
    of the specific facts of the particular case" and  the  historical  and
    socio-political context of the society in question are  determinative."
    In this regard, he takes the view that the "strongest type of  case  is
    one in which the applicant has "stood up for  law  and  order"  in  the
    context of a corrupt system..."  A number of decided cases  from  other
    common law jurisdictions are cited in support of this analysis.

19. I have also considered a leading domestic authority  on  the  scope  of
    "political opinion", Gomez [2000] INLR 549.  An  important  element  of
    the Tribunal's erudite analysis was that in cases  concerning  criminal
    activity and possible political opinion (actual or imputed), everything
    will depend on the particular facts relating  to  both  the  individual
    claimant and the country in which the risks are  said  to  have  arisen
    (see, for example, paragraph 47).

20. On the facts of the present case, it is  sufficiently  clear  that  the
    judge, having found EJ to be credible (including his evidence  that  he
    deemed his stance on the rule of law to constitute a political  opinion
    the country information relating to  endemic  corruption  in  Albania),
    concluded that the position  taken  by  EJ  was  not  simply  a  purely
    personal preference or desire, but involved, at  least  to  a  material
    extent, a political position: it went to the heart of  his  role  as  a
    lawyer who deemed it to be a duty to uphold the rule  of  law  for  the
    benefit of his country.  I am also satisfied that the judge  had  taken
    the view that EJ's position would be seen to be political by  K  and/or
    the authorities with whom he  (K)  was  colluding.   Not  only  was  EJ
    associated with a political party (and one which has lost power in  the
    June 2017 elections), but in  the  context  of  a  state  riddled  with
    corruption it was open to the judge to in effect (if not  expressed  in
    terms) conclude that the fight against that corruption  was  deemed  to
    have taken on a political colour.  It was irrelevant whether  an  anti-
    corruption standpoint was a specific objective of the  political  party
    with which EJ was associated.

21. In addition to the existence of an opinion that  was  in  fact,  or  at
    least deemed to be, political,  a  nexus  between  that  view  and  the
    motivations of the potential persecutors must be established.

22.  In  this  case,  the  problems  originally  emanated  from  a  private
    individual K, who ostensibly did not represent a  particular  political
    party or standpoint.  It  may  be  said  that  if  K  had  acted  alone
    throughout, a causal link would be  difficult  to  show.  However,  his
    collusion with state actors who, on the judge's  finding,  then  became
    potential persecutors, brought into the equation  at  least  a  partial
    political motivation. As discussed previously, EJ's stance on upholding
    the rule of law was politicised by virtue of the situation in  Albania.
    When bearing in mind the lower  standard  of  proof  and  the  need  to
    interpret the Convention so as  to  provide  effective  protection,  it
    would have been open to the judge to have expressly found the necessary
    nexus to exist.

23. I acknowledge that the judge's  conclusion  on  the  Convention  reason
    issue is not as detailed as it might have been (although the grounds of
    appeal do not refer to an absence of reasoning). Having  said  that,  I
    have referred already to the importance of looking at the substance  of
    decisions. It was rationally open to the judge to conclude, as a matter
    of substance, that the Convention was engaged and that EJ's appeal fell
    to be allowed on that basis as well as under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.



Anonymity

24. I have maintained  the  anonymity  direction  made  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. This is a case involving a protection claim and it  has  been
    found that EJ is in need of international protection  from  both  state
    and non-state actors in Albania. Further, he is in the  United  Kingdom
    with his wife and their child. An anonymity direction is appropriate.



Notice of decision

25. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of law and it shall stand.

26. The Secretary of State's appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  therefore
    dismissed.



Signed   H Norton-Taylor                              Date: 10 March 2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor


