
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06589/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely by Skype for Business |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|At Cardiff Civil Justice Centre      |                                     |
|On 15 October 2020                   |On 26 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms M Butler, instructed by Migrant Legal Project
(Cardiff)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  respondent  (SB).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State, for convenience I
    will refer to the  parties  as  they  appeared  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal: appellant (SB); respondent (Secretary of State).

Introduction

 3. The appellant is a citizen of Pakistan who  was  born  on  27  November
    1990.

 4. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom  on  23  May  2011  with  a
    student visa valid until 25 October 2012.  That leave was curtailed  on
    21 May 2013 but she was granted further leave as a  Tier  4  ((General)
    Student) on 21 August 2013 valid until 20 March  2015.   On  22  August
    2014, her leave was again curtailed to expire on 26 October 2014.

 5. On 23 September 2014, the appellant  claimed  asylum.   That,  together
    with her son's application for asylum, was refused on 31 July 2015.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 8 February 2016, Judge C J Woolley dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    on all grounds.

 7. On 9 March 2018, the appellant lodged further  submissions  which  were
    refused on 18 July 2018.  That decision was reconsidered  and,  on  16
    June 2019, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

 8. The  appellant  again  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   In  a
    determination sent  on  20 November  2019,  Judge  Lever  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

 9. The Secretary of State sought permission to  appeal.   On  30  December
    2019 the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Woodcraft) granted  the  Secretary  of
    State permission to appeal.

10. On 28 January 2020, the appellant filed a rule 24 reply in response  to
    the grant of permission.

11. The appeal in the Upper Tribunal was initially listed on 2 April  2020.
    However, because of the COVID-19 crisis, that listing was vacated.

12. On 17 March 2020, the appellant filed a  supplementary  rule  24  reply
    having now seen the Secretary of State's grounds of appeal.

13. On 2 April 2020, the UT issued directions, in the light of the COVID-19
    crisis, indicating a provisional view that the issues  of  whether  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision involved an error of law and whether  it
    should be set aside could be determined without a hearing.  The parties
    were invited to make submissions both on the substantive issues in  the
    appeal and also on whether the appeal  should  be  determined,  on  the
    error of law issue, without a hearing.

14. Following submissions received from the  parties,  the  Upper  Tribunal
    issued further directions that the appeal should be listed for a remote
    hearing by Skype for Business.

15. That hearing was listed on 15 October 2020.  I was based in  the  Civil
    Justice Centre and Ms Butler, who  represented  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Howells, who represented the Secretary of State joined the  hearing  by
    Skype for Business.  The appellant  also  attended  through  Skype  for
    Business.

The Judge's Decision

16. Before Judge Lever, the appellant maintained her claim  for  asylum  on
    the basis that it had previously been rejected by Judge Woolley in  her
    appeal in 2016.  She claimed to fear her  family  as  she  had  married
    outside her family in 2012 in  the  UK  and  had  since  been  divorced
    through an Islamic divorce.  She had then,  again  in  the  UK,  had  a
    relationship with another man with whom she  had  a  son.   She  feared
    reprisals and ostracism  from  her  family  and  society  generally  in
    Pakistan.

17. In his determination, Judge Woolley had rejected the appellant's  claim
    to be at risk on that basis.

18. At para 14 of his  determination,  Judge  Lever  took  Judge  Woolley's
    decision in 2016  as  his  "starting  point  under  the  principles  of
    Devaseelan.".  Then,  at  paras  15-19,  Judge  Lever  dealt  with  the
    appellant's claim on that basis before him as follows:

         "15. Essentially the fresh evidence while running to many pages  is
             based on the Appellant's mental health which  in  turn  it  is
             suggested will enhance the risk  and  problems  faced  by  the
             Appellant on return to Pakistan.  It is  also  said  that  the
             child [M] also displays problems,  although  it  may  be  that
             given his age and circumstances they are  directly  linked  to
             his mother's mental state, attitude and circumstances.   There
             is no suggestion so far as  I  can  see  that  one  should  be
             removed or allowed to stay contrary to the fate of the  other.



         16.  It is also clear within the evidence that since arrival in the
             UK the Appellant has not returned to Pakistan so there are  no
             fresh circumstances  that  have  directly  impacted  upon  the
             Appellant by further time spent in that country.

         17.  I have also  noted  that  the  Appellant's  witness  statement
             October 2019 and I find no  reference  there  to  any  further
             communications or threats or incidents directly or  indirectly
             affecting the Appellant and emanating from Pakistan.

         18.  In terms of Devaseelan the following are the key findings made
             by Judge Woolley following the appeal hearing in February 2006
             (sic) when the Appellant did not give evidence.   It  is  also
             clear  that  in  reaching  his  decision  Judge  Woolley   had
             available and considered a country expert report  prepared  by
             Dr Daryn which he described  as  'a  very  full  and  reasoned
             expert report', paragraph 34.  KA CG [2010] UKUT  [2016],  and
             SM [2016] UKUT 00067.  He noted that the facts  in  this  case
             were similar to the situation in SM which whilst  not  country
             guidance reaffirmed KA.

         19.  Judge Woolley had compared and contrasted the findings  in  KA
             [2010] with the expert report of Dr Daryn.  He found no  basis
             for departing from KA and proceeded to look at the evidence in
             terms of answering the three  pertinent  questions  raised  in
             that case.  Firstly he found that the Appellant did  not  come
             from a rural area but  a  relatively  sophisticated  city  and
             found that honour killing was not entrenched or  prevalent  in
             that area.  Secondly he found no risk from her husband or [the
             man with whom she had a relationship in the UK]  as  both  men
             had essentially disappeared from her life.  I  find  no  fresh
             evidence to dissuade me from that finding.   I  also  conclude
             from all the evidence available that the judge was correct  to
             identify the Appellant coming from a  wealthy  family  with  a
             reasonably liberal attitude towards women.  He concluded  that
             the reality was that her family, rather than posing  a  direct
             threat to her had essentially ostracised her.  In other  words
             wanted nothing further to do with her and would  not  seek  to
             help or assist her.  Although the Respondent sought  to  argue
             against that in the refusal letter I find that to  be  a  safe
             and  clear  finding  and  there  is  no  fresh  evidence  that
             dissuades me from departing from that finding."

    As will be plain, Judge Lever  found,  as  had  Judge  Woolley  in  the
    previous appeal, that the appellant was not at risk from her family  as
    a  result  of  her  marriage  outside  the  family  and   her   further
    relationship in the UK and the birth of a son out outside marriage.

19. Judge Lever then went on to  deal  with  the  remaining  issue  in  the
    appeal.  At paras 20 and 21, Judge Lever  identified  those  issues  as
    follows:

         "20.     The remaining issue therefore  is  whether  the  Appellant
             could return and  relocate  outside  of  the  family  home  in
             Pakistan given her situation as a lone female  with  a  child,
             together with her current  mental  condition  as  outlined  in
             various documents that essentially form the core of the  fresh
             evidence.

         21.  The issue therefore is whether given the Appellant's  personal
             circumstances  whether  the  risk  and  level  of   protection
             available in other parts of Pakistan means that  it  would  be
             reasonable or unduly harsh for her to relocate."

20. There, it is plain that,  the  judge  went  on  following  his  adverse
    finding in para 19 to consider whether the appellant  could  internally
    relocate within Pakistan.

21. At paras 22-26, the judge dealt with the issue of whether it  would  be
    "unreasonable" or "unduly harsh" for the appellant to  relocate  within
    Pakistan.  The judge said this:

         "22. The previous judge had found it not to  be  unduly  harsh,  in
             that she could access women's refuge centres  and  because  of
             her  education  she  would  be  able  to  live   by   herself,
             particularly in a city.  That appears to  be  the  basis  upon
             which her appeal was dismissed and was in accordance  with  as
             the judge found the  reasoning  within  KA  and  SM.   It  was
             accepted by the previous judge and I agree, that on return she
             would have no support from her family or any male guardian.

         23.  I have looked carefully at country material and in  particular
             the not insignificant amount of  medical  evidence  concerning
             the Appellant's current position and to a lesser  extent  that
             of her child.

         24.  Each case has to be determined on its  own  facts,  in  Januzi
             when considering internal relocation the  inquiry  was  to  be
             directed it said at the situation of the Appellant nor did  it
             require conditions to reach the Article 3  level.   It  is  on
             that basis and I now  consider  the  Appellant's  position  in
             light of that core fresh evidence, namely the medical  matters
             raised.

         25.  I find the following based on all material available:

             '(1) I find in line with Judge Woolley that the Appellant  has
                  been ostracised by her family and could not look  to  them
                  to provide support.

             (2)  I do not find she has a male guardian  available  to  her
                  within Pakistan.

             (3)  I find no threat emanates from either her  ex-husband  or
                  [the man with whom she had a relationship in the UK], both
                  of whom seem to have disappeared.

             (4)  In terms of relocation when looking at the  situation  of
                  the Appellant I do find that it would be unreasonable  and
                  unduly harsh in her  current  circumstances.   She  has  a
                  small child and her current medical condition is such that
                  she is I would regard a vulnerable woman, particularly one
                  returning alone to a country such as Pakistan.  I find  it
                  most likely  that  she  will  be  dependent  upon  women's
                  shelters which is not necessarily an ideal  situation.   I
                  have noted evidence that a male child above the age  of  5
                  may be removed from a mother to be brought up by either  a
                  family or male guardian, rather than the mother.  There is
                  no obvious male in Pakistan who would seek  to  test  that
                  system by removing the child from the  mother  but  it  is
                  perhaps to a lesser extent a further ingredient within the
                  mix of the Appellant's circumstances.

             (5)  I accept as Judge Woolley found  that  the  Appellant  is
                  well educated and KA and SM seem to make  the  distinction
                  between a poorly educated woman dependent upon family  for
                  support and an older or educated  or  financially  solvent
                  woman.  The Appellant is 30.  There is no  evidence  of  a
                  good financial position nor any family that she could turn
                  to  for   such   financial   support.    Accordingly   the
                  distinction that was made in KA and SM and appears  to  be
                  the central feature in the findings made by Judge  Woolley
                  is her education.  However I  do  not  find  that  a  good
                  education is necessarily a  guarantee  of  employment  and
                  financially stability.  In terms  of  the  Appellant  when
                  looking at the medical records and reports that have  been
                  provided, I find that her mental health currently is  such
                  that it may well significantly detract from her ability to
                  put  her  education  to  good  use  in  terms  of  finding
                  employment and financial stability.  It would also not  be
                  a task necessarily assisted by her having to look after  a
                  young child  who  may  continue  to  exhibit  some  mental
                  difficulties and behavioural problems.  In  some  respects
                  the overall position  of  the  Appellant  in  the  current
                  circumstances as I assess it would  place  her  in  a  not
                  dissimilar situation to the poor uneducated woman  without
                  financial support referred to within KA and SM.  I do  not
                  find the relatively poor provision  of  mental  health  in
                  Pakistan necessarily assists the Appellant's position.   I
                  also note the respondent's CPIN regarding  the  manner  in
                  which children born out of wedlock are treated  concerning
                  registration with the National Database  and  Registration
                  Authority and potential  difficulties  thereafter  in  her
                  gaining access to medical facilities.

         26.  In all the circumstances and applying the appropriate standard
             of proof in these cases I find just, that the  fresh  evidence
             linked  with  the  reasons  behind  the   dismissal   of   the
             Appellant's claim in 2016 are such that it would in my view be
             unduly harsh for the Appellant to relocate within Pakistan  in
             all the circumstances that now present.  I find that as a lone
             female  with  a  young  child  given  all  the   circumstances
             described that she does  form  part  of  a  particular  social
             group."

22. The judge at para 27 went on to allow the appeal on asylum grounds.

The Secretary of State's Submissions

23. Mr Howells focused the grounds of appeal on two main issues.

24. First, Mr Howells submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  make  any
    finding as to whether the appellant was at risk in her home  area.   He
    submitted that the judge had found at para  25(3)  that  there  was  no
    threat from the appellant's ex-husband or the man with whom she had had
    a relationship with in the UK.  He submitted that the judge had gone on
    to consider internal relocation and the impact upon  the  appellant  of
    her circumstances in other parts  of  the  Pakistan  and  that,  whilst
    ostracisation and discrimination could amount to persecution, the judge
    had made no finding that she would face persecution on that basis.

25.  Secondly,  Mr  Howells  submitted  that  the  judge  had  inadequately
    reasoned, or speculated upon, a number of matters in finding  that  the
    appellant could reasonably and without undue harshness relocate  within
    Pakistan.  Mr Howells submitted that  the  judge  had  failed  to  give
    adequate reasons for departing from Judge  Woolley's  finding  in  2016
    that internal relocation was an option.   Mr  Howells  relied  on  four
    points.

      i) the judge had speculated on whether the appellant's  mental  health
         would affect her ability to pursue employment given  her  education
         in para 25(5);

     ii) the judge had been wrong to discount the availability of shelter or
         refuge accommodation for the appellant in para 25(4).  The  judge's
         comment that it was not an "ideal situation"  did  not  equate  her
         circumstances being unduly harsh or it being unreasonable  for  her
         to live in such circumstances;

    iii) in relation to the availability of shelter or refuge accommodation,
         having recognised in para 25(5) that there was no obvious  male  in
         Pakistan who would seek to remove the appellant's child  from  her,
         the judge was wrong to take into account as a  "further  ingredient
         within the mix of the appellant's  circumstances"  that  there  was
         evidence that male children above the age of  5  might  be  removed
         from their mother and brought up by either a family member or  male
         guardian.

     iv) the judge had taken into account  the  impact  of  the  appellant's
         mental health but  had  failed  to  consider  the  availability  of
         treatment for her in Pakistan  as  set  out  in  the  Secretary  of
         State's Decision Letter at pages 17 and  18.   Whilst  he  accepted
         that the level of treatment might not be comparable to  that  which
         the appellant receives currently in the UK, there was no reason why
         she could not access mental  health  facilities  and  treatment  in
         Pakistan.

26. Consequently, Mr Howells submitted that the judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant could not internally relocate was unsustainable.

27. Finally, in response to the appellant's supplemental rule 24 reply,  Mr
    Howells accepted that the appellant was entitled to rely upon Art 8  if
    unsuccessful in her international protection claim.  He  accepted  that
    had been raised as a ground of appeal before Judge Lever and the  judge
    had not considered Art 8.

The Appellant's Submissions

28. In response, Ms Butler sought to uphold the judge's findings.

29. First, Ms Butler submitted that the judge had implicitly found  in  the
    appellant's favour in respect of the risk to her in her own  home  area
    arising from her circumstances as a returning lone woman.  However  she
    accepted that she could not point to a specific paragraph or finding by
    the judge in his determination.  She submitted,  in  effect,  that  the
    judge  had  determined  that  issue  in  the  appellant's  favour  when
    considering her circumstances on return within the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.

30.  Secondly,  Ms  Butler  submitted  that  the  judge's  finding  in  the
    appellant's  favour  on  internal  relocation  was  sustainable.    She
    submitted that the judge had given adequate reasons for departing  from
    Judge Woolley's finding based, essentially,  on  the  medical  evidence
    relied upon before Judge Lever.  She referred  me  to  the  psychiatric
    evidence in the report of Dr Jayawickrama dated 14  October  2019.   In
    particular, she relied upon paras 79 onwards of that report,  including
    para 82 (setting out the appellant's symptoms), paras 84 and 85 setting
    out her support and treatment needs, para 88  concerning  her  reliance
    upon support from professionals, family and friends and  the  community
    in Bristol, para 90 in relation to the appellant's  limited  resilience
    and adaptability to change and  paras  92-93  concerning  the  risk  of
    deterioration in her health, including risk of self-harm  and  suicide,
    if she did not receive adequate treatment and support.  In addition, Ms
    Butler relied upon two letters relating to the appellant's  son,  M  at
    pages 20 and 22 from his primary  school  and  nursery  school.   Those
    letters refer to M's behavioural problems  and  mental  health  issues,
    including anxiety and stress.

31. Ms Butler submitted that that was good evidence to  depart  from  Judge
    Woolley's  findings.   It  was  sufficient  radically  to   alter   the
    conclusion  whether  it  was  reasonable  or  not  to  relocate  within
    Pakistan.

32. In relation to the specific points raised by Mr Howells, Ms Butler made
    the following submissions.

33. First, she submitted that Judge Lever's statement in para  25(5),  that
    the appellant's good education did not necessarily provide a  guarantee
    ofo employment and financial stability, had to be seen in  the  context
    of what Judge Lever said about the impact  of  the  appellant's  mental
    health on her ability to seek employment in Pakistan.

34. Secondly, Ms Butler submitted that the judge was entitled  to  find  in
    para  25(5)  that  the  availability  of  women's  shelters   was   not
    necessarily "ideal".  She took me  to  the  relevant  decisions  in  KA
    (domestic violence - risk on return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216  (IAC)
    and SM (lone women - ostracism) Pakistan [2016] UKUT 0067  (IAC).   She
    pointed out that the country guidance demonstrated that  shelters  were
    in short supply and only a stop gap in any event.  Further,  the  cases
    demonstrated that a woman may be separated from her child  (aged  5  or
    above) on entering a shelter.  She referred me to SM at [61]  and  [62]
    and KA at [241] which linked the  issue  to  whether  a  shelter  would
    accept a woman with a child aged 5 or above.  Ms Butler submitted  that
    it was not about whether a child of that age might be taken by a father
    or family member away  from  the  appellant,  but  rather  whether  the
    shelter would accept a woman with a  child  of  that  age.   Ms  Butler
    submitted that what Judge Lever said in para 25(4) had to  be  seen  in
    the light of that country guidance.

35. Also, Ms Butler submitted that Judge Lever had not ignored the evidence
    of the appellant's mental health.

36. Finally, Ms Butler relied upon Art 8 of the ECHR.  She  submitted  that
    had not been considered by Judge Lever and, to the extent that  it  was
    necessary for the appellant to rely upon Art 8, she was entitled to  do
    so.

Discussion

37. The first issue is whether the judge erred in law by failing to make  a
    finding that the appellant had established a real risk  of  persecution
    or serious ill-treatment in her  home  area.   The  issue  of  internal
    relocation would not otherwise arise.

38. At paras 19 and 25(3), Judge Lever concluded that  there  was  no  good
    reason to depart from Judge Woolley's finding that  the  appellant  had
    failed to establish that she was at risk from her ex-husband or the man
    with whom she had had a relationship in the UK.  That  finding  is  not
    challenged by the appellant now.  It cannot be the basis of her  asylum
    claim.

39. Mr Howells accepted that, if established to  a  sufficient  level,  the
    appellant's circumstances, derived from her being ostracised by society
    or discriminated against as a lone woman  with  a  child  born  out  of
    wedlock, could establish a real risk of persecution  or  serious  harm.
    I accept that submission.  However, as Mr Howells' submitted, the judge
    did not  go  on  to  make  that  finding  based  upon  the  appellant's
    circumstances.

40. Despite Ms Butler's spirited defence of Judge Lever's reasoning, it  is
    plain to me that he moved from his adverse finding in relation  to  any
    risk from the appellant's ex-husband, family or the man with  whom  she
    had a relationship in the UK, to deciding whether the  appellant  could
    reasonably and without undue harshness relocate within Pakistan.

41. The judge's reasoning in relation  to  internal  relocation  cannot  be
    understood as implicitly  including  a  finding  that  the  appellant's
    circumstances rose to the required level to  establish  persecution  or
    serious harm.

42. When referring to Judge Woolley's earlier findings,  Judge  Lever  only
    referred to his  finding  in  relation  to  the  claimed  risk  to  the
    appellant from her husband, family, etc.  Judge  Woolley  also  made  a
    specific finding at paras 52-54 that the appellant was not at  risk  on
    return as a member of a PSG based upon her circumstances  and  applying
    the country guidance decision of SM.

43. At paras 20-26, Judge Lever  only  considered  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation - what he described as the "remaining issue" - and  whether
    internal relocation would be reasonable and not unduly harsh.  At  para
    24, the judge correctly, in the context of internal  relocation,  noted
    that it was not necessary that the  appellant's  circumstances  in  the
    place of relocation should "reach the Article 3 level".  As  the  judge
    said in para 24,  it  was  "on  that  basis"  that  he  considered  the
    appellant's  circumstances  in  the  subsequent   paragraphs   of   his
    determination.  Plainly, the  judge  considered  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's circumstances in the context of internal relocation without
    considering  whether  those  circumstances  amounted  to  serious  ill-
    treatment contrary to Art 3 which would, in practical terms, equate  to
    persecution  and  serious  harm  for  the  purposes   of   asylum   and
    humanitarian protection.

44. As a result, in failing to make a finding whether there was a real risk
    of persecution or serious ill-treatment to the appellant  derived  from
    her circumstances on return as a lone woman with a child  born  out  of
    wedlock, the judge materially erred in law in allowing  her  appeal  on
    asylum grounds.

45. Turning to the issue of internal relocation,  it  will  be  helpful  to
    begin with the country guidance set out in the case of SM by  reference
    to the judicial headnote as follows:

         "(1) Save as herein set out, the existing country  guidance  in  SN
             and HM (Divorced women - risk on return)  Pakistan  CG  [2004]
             UKIAT 00283 and in KA and Others (domestic violence - risk  on
             return) Pakistan CG [2010] UKUT 216 (IAC) remains valid.

         (2)  Where a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her home
             area for a single woman or a female head of  household,  there
             may be an internal relocation  option  to  one  of  Pakistan's
             larger cities, depending on the family, social and educational
             situation of the woman in question.

         (3)  It will not be normally be unduly harsh  to  expect  a  single
             woman or female  head  of  household  to  relocate  internally
             within Pakistan if she can access support from family  members
             or a male guardian in the place of relocation.

         (4)  It will not normally be unduly harsh for educated, better off,
             or older women to seek internal relocation to a city. It helps
             if a woman has qualifications enabling her  to  get  well-paid
             employment  and  pay  for  accommodation  and   childcare   if
             required.

         (5)  Where a single woman, with or without children, is  ostracised
             by family members and other sources of possible social support
             because she is in an irregular situation, internal  relocation
             will be more difficult and whether it is unduly harsh will  be
             a question of fact in each case.

         (6)  A single woman or female head of household  who  has  no  male
             protector or social network may  be  able  to  use  the  state
             domestic violence shelters for a short time, but the focus  of
             such shelters is  on  reconciling  people  with  their  family
             networks, and places are in short  supply  and  time  limited.
             Privately run shelters may be more flexible, providing  longer
             term support while the woman regularises her social situation,
             but again, places are limited.

         (7)  Domestic violence shelters are available for women at risk but
             where they are used by women with children, such  shelters  do
             not always allow older children to enter and stay  with  their
             mothers.  The  risk   of   temporary   separation,   and   the
             proportionality  of  such  separation,  is  likely  to  differ
             depending on the age and  sex  of  a  woman's  children:  male
             children may be removed from their mothers at the age of 5 and
             placed in an orphanage or a madrasa until the family situation
             has been regularised (see KA  and  Others  (domestic  violence
             risk on return) Pakistan  CG  [2010]  UKUT  216  (IAC)).  Such
             temporary separation will not always  be  disproportionate  or
             unduly harsh: that is a question of fact in each case.

         (8)  Women in Pakistan  are  legally  permitted  to  divorce  their
             husbands  and  may  institute  divorce  proceedings  from  the
             country of refuge, via a third party  and  with  the  help  of
             lawyers in Pakistan, reducing the risk of family reprisals.  A
             woman who does so and returns with a new  partner  or  husband
             will have access to male protection and is  unlikely,  outside
             her home area, to be at  risk  of  ostracism,  still  less  of
             persecution or serious harm."

46. As will be clear, in SM the UT was principally concerned with the issue
    of internal relocation.

47. At para (2), the Upper Tribunal premised its country  guidance  on  the
    situation of where "a risk of persecution or serious harm exists in her
    home area for a single woman or female head  of  household",  and  then
    went on to state that whether internal relocation to one of  Pakistan's
    larger  cities  is  an  option  depends  on  the  "family,  social  and
    educational situation of the woman in question".

48. At para (3), the UT noted that it would "not normally" be unduly  harsh
    to expect a single woman to relocate internally  if  she  could  access
    support from her family or a male guardian in the place of  relocation.
    That does not arise in this appeal as Judge Lever (as had Judge Woolley
    in the earlier appeal) found that the appellant had been ostracised  by
    her family.

49. At para (5), the UT went on  to  state  that  a  single  woman  who  is
    "ostracised by family members and  other  sources  of  possible  social
    support", will find internal relocation more difficult and  whether  it
    is unduly harsh will be a question of fact.

50. At paras (6) and (7), the UT considered the  availability  of  shelters
    for single women who have no male protector or social network.

51. At para (6), the UT noted that such shelters may  be  available  for  a
    "short time" and that "the focus of such  shelters  is  on  reconciling
    people with their family networks".  The UT also noted that places  are
    "in short supply and time limited".

52. At para (7), the UT noted that such shelters are available for women at
    risk but that where they have children "such  shelters  do  not  always
    allow older children to enter and stay with  their  mothers".   The  UT
    went on to note that "male children may be removed from  their  mothers
    at the age of 5 and placed in an  orphanage  or  a  madrasa  until  the
    family  situation  has  been  regularised".   Whether  such   temporary
    separation will be disproportionate or unduly harsh is  a  question  of
    fact.

53. The UT in SM (at paras [61]-[62]) adopted the approach of the UT in the
    earlier decision of KA citing paras [236]-[242] and paras  (iii),  (vi)
    and (vii) of the headnote in KA:

         "61. Dealing with the availability of shelters, and whether it  was
         unduly harsh for internal relocation purposes to  expect  women  to
         use them, the KA Tribunal said this:

             "236.    We wish to emphasise, however, that what emerges very
             strongly from the Safe to Return? report is  that  it  is  not
             sufficient simply to consider the issue of internal relocation
             by reference to  whether  there  are  available  and  adequate
             centres/refuges. Focus has to be not only on the provision but
             the general position women who make use of such  centres  will
             find themselves in the longer term.

             237. ... So whilst we think the Safe to Return?  report  draws
             helpful attention to the  need  to  look  at  the  longer-term
             situation such women face, we do not find  that  the  evidence
             contained in this report or the other sources  helps  us  very
             much in forming a  clear  picture  of  how  women  victims  of
             domestic violence who have made use  of  women's  centres  and
             refuges then resolve their difficulties in  terms  of  finding
             places to live and work. The Safe  to  Return?  report  argues
             that the position is that in general such women end  up  being
             forced to return to their  abuser  husbands/families  or  face
             serious exploitation.  But  there  is  very  little  empirical
             evidence cited in support of these broad generalisations  and,
             given the numbers of women said  to  use  these  services,  we
             would have expected, if the general position  was  that  these
             centres/shelters  routinely  failed  to  end  the   cycle   of
             oppression the women who turn to them face,  that  would  have
             been evident in the form of more reported cases in  the  press
             or in the  Pakistan  Human  Rights  Commission  report  or  in
             available cases studies. Nevertheless, the uncertain state  of
             the evidence makes it imperative in our  view  that  decision-
             makers pay particular regard to how they think the  individual
             applicant/appellant will be able to  manage  getting  on  with
             their lives after they have left the centres/refuges.

             238. We need to consider further to what extent other  factors
             such as class, age, culture, tribe, religion etc  can  further
             modify the position of women victims of domestic violence.

             239. It  is  fairly  clear  that  women  who  have  their  own
             financial means  or  access  to  financial  help  from  family
             members or friends or who are  well-educated  or  professional
             women  are  likely  to   be   able   to   secure   residential
             accommodation. We accept the observation made by the  Safe  to
             Return? authors that possessing a class status higher  up  the
             social ladder does not mean that such women do not still  face
             discrimination and a degree of stigmatisation.  However,  even
             the authors themselves accept that  if  women  have  financial
             means they can in general survive (see 6.15) and the  evidence
             is lacking to indicate that such women are in  general  unable
             to cope with such difficulties; although clearly some  do  not
             cope and some may even find they have lost  more  than  poorer
             women (7.5.1) .

             240. On the other hand, concerning age, it would  appear  that
             most centres/refuges do not adequately cater for the needs  of
             young girls on their own ( Safe to Return?,  6.10)  and  young
             adult women are likely to find it more difficult to live alone
             than others (we note that  is  also  the  view  taken  by  the
             Canadian IRB in December 2007).

             241. Another important variable concerns women who  have  male
             children over five. From the Safe to Return?  research,  taken
             together with other materials, we  are  satisfied  that  women
             with boys over five may not be able to find a centre or refuge
             that will allow them to live together; the boys above this age
             are placed  in  orphanages  or  madrassahs  in  the  area.  As
             described by the Safe to Return? report:

                  "[On] admittance the mother is informed of this policy and
                  has to then make a  choice  of  being  with  her  sons  or
                  accepting a place at the shelter. If the woman chooses  to
                  enter the shelter her  sons  are  referred  to  the  local
                  madrassas or orphanages. This practice has not taken  into
                  consideration the impact this has on the children who  may
                  have been a witness to the violence. Apart from the trauma
                  of separation from their  mother  the  children  may  have
                  specific psychological needs  because  of  their  previous
                  experiences in their homes".

             242. We do not say that such arrangements are  necessarily  to
             be  seen  as  making  the  mother  and  her  son's  relocation
             unreasonable, only  that  this  may  be  a  factor  which  has
             considerable significance when considering the  reasonableness
             of internal relocation."

         62.  We adopt and rely upon that analysis of Safe to Return? The KA
         Tribunal concluded, so far as  relevant  to  the  present  enquiry,
         that:

             "iii. The Protection of Women (Criminal  Laws  Amendment)  Act
             2006  ("PWA"),  one  of  a  number  of  legislative   measures
             undertaken to improve the situation of women  in  Pakistan  in
             the past decade, has had a significant effect on the operation
             of the Pakistan criminal law as it affects  women  accused  of
             adultery. It led to the release  of  2,500  imprisoned  women.
             Most sexual offences now have  to  be  dealt  with  under  the
             Pakistan Penal Code (PPC) rather than under the more  punitive
             Offence  of  Zina  (Enforcement  of  Hudood)  Ordinance  1979.
             Husbands no longer have power to register a First  Information
             Report (FIR)  with  the  police  alleging  adultery;  since  1
             December 2006 any such complaint must be presented to a  court
             which will require sufficient grounds  to  be  shown  for  any
             charges to proceed. A senior police officer has to conduct the
             investigation. Offences of adultery (both zina liable to  hadd
             and zina liable to tazir) have been  made  bailable.  However,
             Pakistan remains a heavily patriarchal society and  levels  of
             domestic violence continue to be high. ...

             vi. The guidance given in SN and HM (Divorced women - risk  on
             return) Pakistan  CG  [2004]  UKIAT  00283  and  FS  (Domestic
             violence - SN and HM - OGN) Pakistan  CG  [2006]  UKIAT  00023
             remains valid. The network  of  women's  shelters  (comprising
             government-run shelters (Dar ul-Amans) and private and Islamic
             women's  crisis  centres)   in   general   affords   effective
             protection for women victims of  domestic  violence,  although
             there are significant shortcomings in the  level  of  services
             and treatment of inmates in some such centres. Women with boys
             over 5 face separation from their sons.

             vii. In assessing whether women victims of  domestic  violence
             have a viable internal relocation alternative, regard must  be
             had not only to the availability of such shelters/centres  but
             also to the situation women will face after  they  leave  such
             centres."

54. It is clear from SM and KA that the appellant has to be  treated  as  a
    person who would have no family support  on  return  to  Pakistan  and,
    assuming she was at risk in  her  home  area,  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation will be more difficult, given that she has a child, than  if
    she were able to  access  family  support  in  the  place  of  proposed
    relocation (see para (5) and (3) of the headnote in SM).  The issue  is
    one of fact based upon the evidence.

55. In this appeal, therefore, the appellant's options were  either  to  be
    economically  active  and  support  herself   and   provide   her   own
    accommodation or, if she were not, to seek  support  in  a  shelter  or
    refuge as contemplated in SM and KA.

56. I will deal first with the two points made by Mr Howells in relation to
    Judge Lever's reasoning in para 25(4) in respect of the availability of
    shelters.

57. Given what was said in SM that the availability of shelters was  short-
    term and focused on a period of time  when  reconciliation  was  sought
    with an individual's family, and that such places were in short  supply
    (see para (6) of the headnote in SM), there was nothing speculative  or
    unreasonable in the judge's comment that the provision of shelters  was
    "not necessarily an ideal situation".

58. Further para (7) of SM points out that male  children  may  be  removed
    from their mothers at the age of  5  and  placed  in  an  orphanage  or
    madrasa, rather than allowed to live with them in  a  shelter.   Whilst
    Judge Lever may have focused more on whether there was  a  male  family
    member available who wished to remove the appellant's child, the  point
    remains that the country  guidance  would  place  the  appellant  in  a
    dilemma either to give up her child and live in a shelter or to  remain
    with her child and not have access to a shelter.  In my judgment, Judge
    Lever was entitled to take this  situation  into  which  the  appellant
    would be placed  based  upon  SM  in  his  assessment  of  whether  the
    appellant would have available accommodation through a shelter.

59. For those reasons, therefore, I reject those two specific points relied
    upon by Mr Howells as demonstrating any error of  law  in  the  judge's
    assessment.

60. Turning now  to  the  appellant's  alternative  -  namely  whether  the
    appellant given her education would be able to be  active  economically
    and so support herself including obtaining accommodation - that  was  a
    relevant factor following SM.  But, SM does not draw a  hard  and  fast
    line  between  educated  single  women  and  those  who  are  not.   It
    recognised that educated single women may be in a  better  position  to
    obtain employment than those who are not (see paras (4) and (5) of  the
    headnote in SM).

61. Judge Woolley had reached the conclusion that the appellant's education
    would allow her to  find  employment  and,  therefore,  put  her  in  a
    position where she could support herself and  her  son.   Before  Judge
    Lever,  the  appellant  relied  upon  new  medical  evidence   of   the
    appellant's mental health and the circumstances of M, her  son.   Judge
    Lever correctly recognised that was the appellant's case  at  paras  15
    and 24 of his determination.

62. Ms Butler took me to the relevant passages in Dr Jayawickrama's  report
    in which the appellant's mental health is  considered,  including  that
    she shows symptoms associated with PTSD  and  suffers  from  depression
    and, at times, suicidal thoughts and  self-harming.   The  report  also
    refers to the potential deterioration  in  her  health,  mental  health
    without the support she currently has in the  UK  and  if  she  is  not
    receiving adequate treatment.  On that latter issue, the report  refers
    to the appellant saying that she was  taking  sertraline  which  is  an
    antidepressant (see para 38 of the report).

63. It was undoubtedly relevant to take into account any  impact  that  the
    applicant's mental health, or indeed her son's  behavioural  and  other
    problems, might have upon her ability  to  live  and  be  employed  and
    therefore be self-supporting in Pakistan.  This was evidence that post-
    dated Judge Woolley's decision.

64. There was, undoubtedly, evidence of an impact, at least without support
    or adequate treatment.  The judge referred  to  the  evidence,  without
    giving any detail, in his determination (see, for example, paras  6,  7
    and 15).  At para  25(5),  Judge  Lever  stated  that  the  appellant's
    "mental health currently" is  such  that  it  may  well  "significantly
    detract from her ability to put her education to good use in  terms  of
    finding employment and financial stability".  He also referred  to  the
    impact of M's "mental difficulties and behavioural problems".

65. Reading the determination as a whole, it is not clear how  Judge  Lever
    concluded that the appellant's mental health would have such an  impact
    on her ability to live and be employed.  The judge did  not  deal  with
    the evidence, which was clearly relied upon  by  the  respondent,  that
    medical treatment  needed  by  the  appellant  would  be  available  in
    Pakistan.  Mr Howells drew my attention to the evidence set out in  the
    respondent's decision  letter  at  pages  17-18.   That  evidence,  for
    example, refers  to  certain  anti-depressant  drugs  being  available,
    including sertraline which is the  medication  the  appellant  told  Dr
    Jayawickrama she was taking.  That evidence also notes that "a  lot  of
    the healthcare is privatised".  There was (and is), therefore, an issue
    of the  appellant's  ability  to  access  any  treatment  which  is  in
    principle available.  Judge Lever did not refer to this evidence  other
    than, in para 25(5), to note "the relatively poor provision  of  mental
    health in Pakistan".

66. In my judgment, Judge Lever failed to grapple with the  evidence,  both
    from Dr Jayawickrama and from the respondent as to the availability  of
    treatment in Pakistan, when he found that the appellant's mental health
    would affect her ability to  use  her  education  in  order  to  obtain
    employment as contemplated in SM.  A fuller assessment of that evidence
    might well affect what, if any, impact the  appellant's  mental  health
    would have and whether internal relocation would be unduly harsh or not
    reasonable.

67. Consequently, although I reject Mr Howells' submissions in relation  to
    the judge's reasoning concerning shelters in  Pakistan,  I  accept  his
    submissions that the judge failed properly to deal  with  the  evidence
    concerning the mental health of the appellant (and also concerning  M's
    circumstances) in assessing whether the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    obtain employment if she  internally  relocated.   It  follows,  in  my
    judgment, that the judge erred in law, to the extent I have  indicated,
    in concluding that the appellant could internally relocate.

68. Consequently, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum grounds cannot stand and I set it aside.  The decision  must  be
    remade in relation to the appellant's  international  protection  claim
    and also in respect of Art 8 of the ECHR.





Decision

69. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal to allow the appellant's appeal
    on asylum grounds involved  the  making  of  an  error  of  law.   That
    decision cannot stand and is set aside.

70. Whether the appeal should be retained in the Upper Tribunal or remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal was a matter upon which, if the error of law
    were established, Mr Howells indicated that he was neutral.  Ms  Butler
    initially invited me to remake the decision in the Upper  Tribunal  but
    ultimately indicated that she had no strong views, other than,  as  the
    appeals process had been ongoing for some time, she  was  anxious  that
    the appeal should be reheard as soon as practicable.

71. There remain significant factual issues which must be determined on the
    evidence.  The Art 8 claim has yet to be determined  at  all.    Having
    regard to the extent of fact-finding  required  and  para  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, I am satisfied that  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is that it should be remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal for the appellant's international protection claim  and  claim
    under Art 8 to be re-made.

72. The findings of Judge Lever in relation to the appellant's claim  based
    upon a risk from her ex-husband, family or the individual with whom she
    had a relationship in the UK (at paras 19 and 25(3))  are  unchallenged
    and are preserved.  I also consider that Judge Lever's findings in para
    25(1) and (2) are unaffected by any error of law and those findings are
    also preserved. Otherwise, it will be for the judge,  on  remittal,  to
    make relevant findings on the evidence.

73. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for the  decision  to
    be re-made as I have indicated by a judge other than Judge  Lever  (and
    Judge Woolley).


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             20 October 2020
