
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06028/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 19 March 2018                        |On 05 April 2018                    |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Miss K L
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Diwnyciz, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Soltani, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant (hereafter the Secretary  of  State  or  SSHD)  brings  a
    challenge with permission to the decision of First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)
    Judge Caskie sent  on  16  August  2017  allowing  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter the claimant) against the decision  made  by  the
    SSHD on 12 June 2017 refusing her claim for  international  protection.
    The claimant is a national of Afghanistan and is a Sikh.

2.   The SSHD's grounds allege that the judge gave  inadequate  reasons  for
    departing from TG and others (Sikhs persecuted) (CG)  [2015]  UKUT  595
    (IAC).  It is  also  contended  that  the  judge's  reasons  contain  a
    contradiction as regards whether the claimant would  face  destitution.
    It is submitted that the only findings for allowing this  appeal  refer
    to the individual financial  circumstances  of  the  claimant  and  her
    family, namely being in receipt  of  NASS  support  and  the  numerical
    reduction of Sikhs in Afghanistan.

3.   The grounds  also  state  that  the  judge  allowed  the  appeal  under
    paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration Rules "but no separate  reasons
    have been given".

4.   I received helpful submissions from both representatives.

5.   I find no material error of law in the judge's decision.

6.   First of all (and as Mr Diwnyciz conceded) the suggested  contradiction
    in the judge's findings is the result of nothing more than  an  obvious
    slip or typing error.  The clear purpose of  paragraph  29  read  as  a
    whole and in light of the preceding paragraphs was  to  find  that  the
    claimant would be  unable  to  access  sufficient  resources  to  avoid
    destitution.

7.   Leaving aside for a moment  whether  the  judge's  reasons  involved  a
    departure from country guidance, they  were  clearly  in  my  judgement
    sufficient to warrant the  conclusion  that  the  claimant  would  face
    persecutory risk on return, notwithstanding such  return  would  be  as
    part of a family unit.  The judge did  not  find  that  there  was  one
    factor  or  reason  on  its  own  that  demonstrated  a  real  risk  of
    persecution on return; rather the judge  considered  the  likely  harms
    would reach this threshold when considered cumulatively. Three  factors
    were taken  into  account.   There  was  first  of  all  the  low-level
    discrimination and harassment facing  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  generally
    (see paragraph 29).  There was secondly the very substantial  reduction
    in the Sikh population indicated  in  the  Home  Office's  own  Country
    Information Report.  At paragraph 26 the judge stated:

         "26. It is clear  that  the  Sikh  population  in  Afghanistan  has
             continued to decline significantly, where apparently  reliable
             sources, certainly sufficiently reliable to be referred to  in
             the Secretary of State's Country Information Report,  indicate
             figures as low as 1,350 Sikhs in Afghanistan.  In  June  2016,
             the position of the Sikh community is clearly a perilous  one,
             with their extinction as a minority group in Afghanistan being
             foreseeable and predictable.  Whilst  other  sources  indicate
             that in 2017, there was a combined Hindu and  Sikh  population
             of less than 7,000, and in the same year another estimate  for
             the same population group of around 3,000. The  decline  since
             TG was issued is a stark one. "

8.    A   third   factor   concerned   the   claimant's   likely   financial
    circumstances.  It being sixteen  months  since  Judge  Manchester  had
    dismissed the mother's appeal (on 25 April 2016, in which the  claimant
    was a dependant), it was open to the judge for  the  reasons  given  to
    consider that the family's financial circumstances  had  changed.   The
    judge heard evidence from the appellant and was  entitled  to  conclude
    that the family no longer had assets in Afghanistan, was now reliant on
    NASS support and could  not  rely  on  dwindling  Gurdwara  support  in
    Afghanistan.

9.   Taken cumulatively these facts clearly sufficed to  amount  to  a  real
    risk of persecution or serious harm.

10.  The only remaining question,  then,  is  whether  the  judge  erred  in
    departing from country guidance.  In  focus  here  is  what  the  judge
    stated at paragraph 32:

         "32. In reaching this decision I am of  course  departing  from  an
             existing country Guidance case.  The recent evidence indicates
             by means of  reliable  evidence  a  significant  deterioration
             since TG was issued.  I consider there is a proper  evidential
             foundation for departing from TG."

    My response to this question is twofold.  First,  even  taking  it  for
    granted that the judge did depart from the country guidance, I consider
    it was open to him to do so.  The country information he  relied  on -
    the Home Office country information - did  not  consist  solely  of  a
    statement of position; the document cited various  sources  post-dating
    TG detailing the aspects in which the Sikh population had declined  and
    weakened.  It must also be  borne  in  mind  that  in  all  the  recent
    Tribunal country guidance cases  on  Sikhs  in  Afghanistan  there  has
    always been an abiding concern that if the  numbers  of  Sikhs  dropped
    below a critical mass, there was the prospect of group persecution.

11.  In any event, I am with Ms  Soltani  in  her  submission  that  despite
    portraying her decision as a departure from country guidance,  she  did
    not in fact do so.  Her assessment is consistent with an application of
    the guidance given in TG.  The judge did not seek  to  rely  merely  on
    "the cumulative impact of discrimination" (head note (ii)).  The  judge
    carried out  a  fact-sensitive  assessment,  having  regard  to  likely
    financial circumstances, the family's difficulties  in  pursuing  their
    remaining traditional pursuit as shopkeepers/traders; and the inability
    of Gurdwaras to provide support (see head note (iii)).

12.  The judge's assessment is perhaps open to the criticism  that  she  did
    not address the issue of internal relocation, even though the SSHD  had
    in her refusal decision.  But that was not a point  relied  on  in  the
    grounds, nor did Mr Diwnyciz seek to revive it before me.

13.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law in allowing the appeal on protection grounds.

14.  For completeness, I see no legal error either in the  judge's  decision
    that the claimant also stood to succeed on Article 8 grounds.  The only
    challenge raised by the SSHD to that decision was that it relied on the
    reasons given for refusing the protection claim.  In my  judgment  that
    is not so: paragraph 31 is a distinct treatment of the  issue  of  very
    significant obstacles to integration and was entirely within the  range
    of reasonable responses.

15.  For the above reasons:


    The judge did not err in law and her decision to allow the  appellant's
    appeal on protection and human rights grounds shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed:                                 Date: 3 April 2018
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




