
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/06224/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 November 2017                        |On 8 November 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                 Anser IQBAL
                        (no ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Munira, Counsel instructed by Dr. Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 26 July 2017 of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Eldridge which dismissed the appellant's appeal  against
    the refusal of his asylum and human rights claim.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant is  a  national  of
    Pakistan who gives his date of birth as 1 January 1982.  The  appellant
    was granted a multi visit  visa  valid  from  1  August  2006  until  1
    February 2007.  He overstayed that visa and on  13  November  2007  was
    encountered whilst working  illegally.   He  was  served  with  notices
    indicating his liability to removal and was detained.  He was  released
    on temporary admission three days later but immediately absconded.

 3. The appellant did not come to the attention of  the  authorities  again
    until he was encountered by Immigration Officers on 16 April 2017.   He
    was again served with  documents  indicating  his  illegal  status  and
    liability to removal.  He was again detained.   On  21  April  2017  he
    claimed asylum.

 4. The asylum and human rights claim was refused on 13 June 2017  and  the
    appeal came before Judge Eldridge for a hearing on 26  July  2017.   In
    his decision, Judge  Eldridge  at  [13]-[16]  refused  to  adjourn  the
    hearing for the appellant to obtain legal  advice.   At  [39]-[45]  the
    judge found that the appellant's claim to fear mistreatment  on  return
    was not made out.

 5. The basis of the appellant's claim was that there was a dispute over an
    area of land left to the appellant by his father.  The dispute  started
    in 2003.  When the appellant's relatives learned that the appellant had
    inherited the land they indicated that they wished to  own  it  and  in
    2004 arranged for the appellant's brother and cousin to be murdered  by
    other community members.  They were able to do  so  because  they  were
    rich and influential.  The appellant was abroad at this time  and  told
    another brother to report the murders which  he  did  and  an  FIR  was
    lodged at a police station.  The police did not follow  up  the  matter
    however, instead recording a false  allegation  against  the  appellant
    that he had arranged for the individuals who wanted his land to be shot
    in the legs. This resulted in an FIR being lodged against the appellant
    and his brothers in November 2004.  An arrest warrant  was  issued  for
    the appellant and all of his brothers.

 6. As a result of the fear of further harm from the individuals who wanted
    the land and of being arrested by the authorities,  the  appellant  and
    his surviving brothers left the country.  Before leaving, the appellant
    went to live with a cousin for four months and then in Hyderabad for  a
    year with a friend and ultimately in Islamabad for five  months  before
    coming to the UK on the visit visa.  During  this  period  he  did  not
    experience any problems from the people he feared or  the  authorities.
    Albeit these events occurred before he came to  the  UK  in  2006,  the
    appellant maintained that he did not claim asylum on arrival  or  until
    2017 as he was too afraid and did not know the system.

 7. The First-tier Tribunal found at [37] that the  appellant's  claim  did
    not disclose a Refugee Convention reason.  At [39] the judge found that
    the appellant could be expected to have provided some of  the  evidence
    mentioned in his case such as the FIR lodged  against  his  family  but
    could not do so despite his account showing contact with  relatives  in
    Pakistan. He was also found to have given contrary accounts of  whether
    an arrest warrant was issued.

 8. Further, at [42] the judge noted that the appellant made no mention  of
    any problems in Pakistan when he was  first  arrested  in  2007  having
    overstayed his visit visa.  He only claimed after his arrest  in  April
    2017 after being served with removal documents. It was  also  found  at
    [42] that he had  given  contradictory  evidence  about  having  family
    members in Pakistan.  At [43] the  judge  placed  weight  on  the  very
    significant delay in claiming asylum.  At [44] the judge concluded that
    the appellant was not at all credible, had not been involved in a  land
    dispute and did not face harm for any reason on return to Pakistan.

 9. The main ground of appeal was that the appellant had  not  had  a  fair
    hearing as the First-tier Tribunal should have adjourned in  order  for
    him to obtain legal advice. This was the only ground addressed in  oral
    submissions.

10. The written grounds also maintained  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    "flawed as he failed to give adequate or sufficient reasons to make the
    adverse credibility findings".  The grounds at paragraph 3 objected  to
    the finding that the appellant had not provided evidence which he could
    be expected to have obtained,  for  example  the  FIR.  The  claim  was
    supported by  country  evidence  of  such  disputes  in  Pakistan.   At
    paragraph  5  the  grounds  object  to  the  judge   relying   on   the
    discrepancies in the appellant's interviews maintaining that this  also
    breached the appellant's right to a fair and just hearing.  Paragraph 6
    of the grounds again reverts to a  challenge  against  the  credibility
    findings stating that they were "erroneous".  The grounds here  concede
    that there were discrepancies in the evidence but then go on  to  state
    that "the real question is as to whether there (sic) risk  of  life  if
    the appellant is removed to Pakistan".   Paragraph  7  of  the  grounds
    states that the appellant's removal would not be proportionate.

11. Other than the challenge to the First-tier Tribunal proceeding with the
    hearing and no adjourn for legal advice, I can deal with the  remaining
    grounds relatively briefly.  They  are  unparticularised  disagreements
    with or attempts to reargue the case that  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  They do not set out arguable errors  of  law  challenge  and
    fail to engage with the specific reasoning given by the  judge.   Where
    the appellant claimed asylum only after being here  illegally  for  ten
    years, after absconding for 10 years and after being  arrested  and  in
    light of the accepted discrepancies between his accounts on key  issues
    such as the existence of an arrest warrant, it was manifestly  open  to
    the FTTJ here to refuse the appeal for credibility reasons.  The  judge
    sets out those reasons in clear and detailed terms at [39]-[45] and  it
    is simply  unarguable  that  those  reasons  are  anything  other  than
    rational and adequate.  Where  the  grounds  challenge  the  Article  8
    findings at [49]-[51], the immigration history set out above shows that
    the appellant was wholly incapable of qualifying for  leave  under  the
    Immigration  Rules,  that  his  private  life  weighed  little  in  any
    assessment outside the Rules and that, without more, nothing could have
    led the judge to grant leave outside the Immigration Rules.

12. The only matter requiring any real  scrutiny  in  the  grounds  is  the
    argument that the judge should  have  adjourned  the  hearing  for  the
    appellant to obtain legal representation. The First-tier Tribunal Judge
    sets out the decision relating  to  the  adjournment  at  [13]-[16]  as
    follows:

         "13. On receipt of the notice of appeal, the Tribunal arranged  for
             a  substantive  hearing  date  of  24  July  2017,  when   the
             proceedings came  before  me.   The  Appellant  wrote  to  the
             Tribunal on 21 July 2017 requesting an adjournment so that  he
             could  instruct  a  solicitor  and  said   that   an   initial
             appointment  had  been  arranged  for  the  afternoon  of  the
             scheduled  hearing.   This  application  was   considered   by
             Assistant Resident Judge Easterman who declined  the  request.
             He was of the opinion that the  Appellant  had  known  of  the
             decision since 15 June 2017 at the latest and that he had  had
             since then to arrange representation.

         14.  The Appellant renewed this application orally  to  me  on  the
             morning of the hearing.   He  said  that  he  had  arranged  a
             solicitor on 20 July 2017 but that person  had  'turned  down'
             his case.  He had been given the details of another solicitor,
             who would not answer the phone to him and finally a third name
             had been given to him and an appointment made.

         15.  Mr Lumb opposed the application on behalf of  the  Respondent.
             He reminded me that between five or six weeks had  passed  the
             decision  was  served  on  the  Appellant  and  there  was  no
             indication of whether or when any lawyer would be able to take
             full instructions.  He reminded me that the Appellant  was  in
             detention and submitted that it assisted no-one  to  encounter
             further delay.

         16.  Essentially, there was nothing put before me that had not been
             considered by Judge Easterman.  I agreed with  his  reasoning.
             I had regard to the provisions  of  Rule  2  of  the  Tribunal
             Procedure Rules 2014.  I considered that the case could justly
             and properly be disposed of by the Appellant giving  evidence.
             He had already given a full account to the Respondent  and  he
             could supplement that in (sic) on any matter he wished.  There
             was nothing to indicate that he would ever be represented  and
             I had regard to the scarce resources of the Tribunal  and  the
             Respondent."

13. The First-tier Tribunal also set out at [26]-[28] the approach he  took
    to the hearing after he decided to proceed:

         "26. At the very beginning of the hearing I ensured that there  was
             good  and  effective  communication  between  the  interpreter
             provided and the Appellant.  The language was  Urdu.   I  then
             dealt with his request for an  adjournment  as  a  preliminary
             issue  and,  as  I  have  stated  already,  I   refused   that
             application.  I had already explained that I assist (sic)  the
             Appellant in the conduct of the appeal by asking him a  number
             of questions, all of which would be aimed at enabling  him  to
             give a full  account  of  his  fears  and  his  claim  and  to
             supplement whatever he had said in interview.   He  reiterated
             that he did not feel he could add to what was stated in  those
             interviews because he was not represented  and  he  also  said
             that he had said everything in interview anyhow.

         27.  My Record of Proceedings shows that one way or another I asked
             him five times whether he wished to give evidence  to  me  and
             how that might benefit him but also that if he did so he would
             be liable to be asked questions on behalf of  the  Respondent.
             On each occasion he said he did not want to give evidence.   I
             asked him for the sixth time to listen carefully to all I  had
             to say and repeated that if he did not give evidence I have to
             judge the case on the papers alone.  I told  him  he  was  not
             obliged to give evidence but he could be assisted by  me.   He
             told me (sic) understood this and he replied 'no -  I  do  not
             wish to give evidence'.

         28.  No person in the Appellant's position can be compelled to give
             evidence  and  I  was  satisfied  he  had  taken  an  informed
             decision.  Accordingly I proceeded to the next  stage  of  the
             hearing. "

14. In my judgement the First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err  in  refusing
    to adjourn the hearing in order  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  legal
    representation.  It is not a requirement that an  appellant  has  legal
    advice. As the First-tier Tribunal judge indicated at [26], judges  are
    trained  and  experienced  in  assisting  unrepresented  appellants  to
    present their cases.  As stated in [13], the appellant had had since at
    least 15 June 2017 to find legal advice for his appeal. I note that  he
    had provided information suggesting that he had a meeting with a lawyer
    on the afternoon of the hearing.  This is not  the  same  as  a  lawyer
    indicating to  the  Tribunal  that  they  had  formally  taken  on  the
    appellant's case and the First-tier Tribunal did not err in stating  at
    [16] that it was unclear that he would be represented if an adjournment
    was granted.

15. There is also the wider context in that the appellant sets out a  claim
    relating to events that occurred before he came to the  UK  and  which,
    according to his account, specifically led to him coming to the  UK  in
    order to avoid harm.  Following his evidence, he  has  known  since  he
    came  to  the  UK  in  2006  that  he  might  want  to   obtain   legal
    representation to support a protection claim and has had since then  to
    obtain documents in support of his case.

16. Further, the appellant had the opportunity to address the discrepancies
    in his evidence, his concerns about the interview record and so  on. He
    declined to take up that opportunity;  see  [26]-[28].  The  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge acted with conspicuous fairness in the  conduct  of  the
    hearing,  including  not  drawing  an  adverse   inference   from   the
    appellant's decision not to give oral evidence  but  focussing  on  the
    various accounts that were before him.

17. The test set out in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418
    (IAC) is:


         "If a Tribunal refuses to accede to an  adjournment  request,  such
         decision could, in  principle,  be  erroneous  in  law  in  several
         respects: these include a failure to take into account all material
         considerations; permitting immaterial  considerations  to  intrude;
         denying the party concerned a fair hearing; failing  to  apply  the
         correct test; and acting irrationally.  In practice, in most  cases
         the question will be whether  the  refusal  deprived  the  affected
         party of his right to a fair hearing.  Where an adjournment refusal
         is challenged on fairness grounds, it  is  important  to  recognise
         that the question for the Upper Tribunal is  not  whether  the  FtT
         acted reasonably.  Rather, the  test  to  be  applied  is  that  of
         fairness:  was there any deprivation of the affected party's  right
         to a fair hearing? See SH (Afghanistan) v Secretary  of  State  for
         the Home Department [2011] EWCA Civ 1284."

18. The appellant here was not deprived of the right to a fair hearing  for
    the reasons set out above. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not err in
    refusing the adjournment request.

19. For these reasons I do not find an error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.

Signed   [pic]                          Date 6 November 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt


