
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06708/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15 October 2020                   |On 02 November 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SKINNER


                                   Between

                                     S S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty instructed by Sutovic & Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant is a national of Iran.  He appealed to  a  Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of  20
    June 2019 refusing protection and human rights claims.

2.   The judge dismissed his appeal, but subsequently the  appellant  sought
    and obtained permission to appeal against that decision, and  following
    a hearing on 4 December 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge Allen found errors of
    law in the judge's decision such that it was necessary to  a  rehearing
    on the points of error.

3.    Subsequently  the   appellant's   representatives   put   in   written
    submissions to the Secretary of State as a consequence of  the  country
    guidance decision in PS [2020] UKUT 0046  (IAC),  handed  down  in  the
    meantime, arguing that the appeal should in effect  be  conceded.   The
    Secretary of State did not respond to those submissions.

4.   At the hearing before us we had those  submissions  together  with  the
    appellant's pre-hearing note that had been provided under cover  of  an
    email of 8 October 2020.

5.   It is not necessary for us to  say  much  about  the  issues  since  in
    effect Mr Walker, entirely properly, on  behalf  of  the  Secretary  of
    State conceded the appeal.

6.   Mr Moriarty in brief submissions to us focused on paragraphs  3  and  4
    of the headnote to the country guidance in PS, bearing in mind that the
    appellant had been found to be a genuine convert  to  Christianity  and
    that he could not be expected to lie  about  his  conversion.   It  was
    clear from paragraph 3(ii) of the headnote that if the  claimant  would
    in fact conceal his faith it was necessary to consider why, and if  any
    part of his motivation was a fear of such persecution the appeal should
    be allowed.  The appellant had said to  the  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal that he would not conceal his faith.  In  any  event,  it  was
    clear from paragraph 4 of the headnote that the  appellant  would  face
    risk at the point of return.  He would be at risk if  he  divulged  the
    basis of his claim or if he remained silent out  of  fear  as  to  what
    would happen to him.

7.   We stated in light of Mr Walker's acceptance that  the  witnesses  were
    all credible and that the case fell within the  scope  of  the  country
    guidance, that the appeal was to be allowed and that we  would  provide
    brief reasons subsequently, which we now do.

8.   We are satisfied, in light of the finding before  the  judge  that  the
    appellant is a genuine convert to Christianity and that  he  cannot  be
    expected to  lie  about  his  conversion,  bearing  in  mind  also  the
    credibility of the witnesses, that the appeal falls to  be  allowed  in
    line with the guidance that we now have from PS.  We note  that  it  is
    clear from the judge's  findings,  for  example  paragraph  56  of  his
    decision the appellant's involvement with two churches in  London  goes
    beyond mere attendance and suggests that he has found a real  community
    in the church that he attends and is a follower of  Christian  beliefs.
    It is also accepted there that the appellant has regularly prayed  with
    Ms Newsome and Mr Bailey and that he turns up early, follows his  Bible
    and provides assistance at the church  and  that  he  was  prepared  to
    discuss his faith only with those whom he had got to know well and whom
    he trusted and that he would be likely to conduct  himself  in  a  very
    similar way on return to Iran.

9.   It is clear from the evidence  that  the  appellant  is  someone  whose
    conduct would fall  directly  within  the  guidance  in  PS  and  as  a
    consequence his appeal is allowed under the Refugee Convention.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]

Signed                                           Date     28 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen



