
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06798/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2019                   |On 5 February 2019                   |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    R. H.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Cleghorn, Counsel, Halliday Reeves & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant is a national of Iran who entered the UK unlawfully on an
unknown date, and made a protection claim on 27 November 2017 claiming to
be a child. His application was refused on 20 May 2018, and the Respondent
also refused to accept his claimed age.

The Appellant's appeal against that refusal came before the First-tier
Tribunal at Bradford, when it was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
Caswell. The appeal was allowed in a decision promulgated on 4 July 2018.

The Respondent's application for permission to appeal the decision was
granted by First tier Tribunal Judge Alis on 8 August 2018 on the basis it
was arguable that the Judge's approach to the age assessment was flawed,
because she had failed to engage with all of the concerns raised by the
social workers who had spoken to the Appellant and assessed him to be an
adult.

There has been no application to adduce further evidence pursuant to Rule
15(2A) and there has been no response to the grant of permission by way of
Rule 24 Notice. Thus the matter comes before me.

Before me Mr Diwnycz pointed to paragraphs 14-15 of the decision and noted
that they did not accurately reflect the contents of a detailed and lengthy
age assessment of some twenty pages. He argued that as a result the
criticisms of that age assessment offered by the Judge were therefore
unsafe, as was her conclusion that the Appellant was the age he claimed to
be. Those errors went in turn to the core of the question of whether he had
given a credible account of who he was, and, his reasons for leaving Iran.

Ms Cleghorn accepted that there was no evidence before the Judge which
would have allowed her to conclude that young Iranian men were as a general
rule more hirsute or physically developed than their British counterparts.
Ultimately she also accepted that the report expressly noted that it was
important to bear in mind that different ethnicities would develop at
different ages [p1] - although the Judge had read the report as omitting
any such recognition, as indeed she initially had too. Ms Cleghorn also
accepted that the Judge had been wrong to find that the Appellant had been
given no opportunity to deal with the age assessment prior to the hearing
of the appeal. The report recorded that the authors had discussed their
findings and reasons with the Appellant on the occasion of the assessment,
some six months earlier. They had also recorded that they had provided him
with a written copy of their assessment. The assessment was also referred
to in the reasons given for the refusal of the protection claim, and there
was no suggestion that the Appellant's legal advisers had tried and failed
to obtain a copy in advance of the hearing. The Appellant and his legal
advisers had therefore had ample time to reflect upon the assessment, and
to consider whether they wished to obtain any expert evidence to deal with
either his physical maturity, or, the account he had offered to the social
workers of how he knew his date of birth when he claimed to be both
illiterate and innumerate.

The authors of the age assessment were on the face of it experienced social
workers, who had prepared a 20 page report recording their enquiries on the
day of the assessment, their findings, and the reasons for their overall
assessment of the Appellant's age. That report was inevitably a mixture of
evidence of both primary fact concerning what they were told and what they
saw, and also opinion evidence as to whether they considered the Appellant
was telling the truth about his age. In my judgement the Judge failed to
recognise that the evidence of primary fact they offered was unchallenged
before her. The Appellant did not dispute that he had said what had been
recorded. That error was compounded by her failure (as set out above) to
engage accurately with the content of the report. It was further compounded
by a failure to treat the opinion evidence as that offered by persons who
should be treated by the Tribunal as being expert in dealing with children.
Thus in my judgement the Respondent makes out the complaint that the Judge
erred in her approach to the report, with the consequence that she failed
to give to the age assessment the weight that it deserved.

In my judgement the proper approach to be taken by the Tribunal to evidence
of this sort is that set out in TF and MA v SSHD [2018] CSIH 58, since the
evidence offered by a Pastor upon whether an individual genuinely holds a
particular religious faith is clearly an analogous mixture of evidence of
primary fact and opinion evidence offered by an individual who should be
treated by the Tribunal as having expertise in the field upon which that
opinion evidence is offered.

In circumstances such as this, where it would appear that the relevant
evidence has not properly been considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the
effect of that error of law has been to deprive the parties of the
opportunity for their case to be properly considered by the First Tier
Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.
Moreover the extent of the judicial fact finding exercise required is such
that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is appropriate that the
appeal should be remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of
the Practice Statement of 13 November 2014.

To that end I remit the appeal for a fresh hearing by a judge other than
First tier Tribunal Judge Caswell, at the North Shields Hearing Centre. A
Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required. Both parties have today, wisely,
indicated an intention to file and serve further evidence in relation to
Iranian birth certificates and identity cards, when they are issued, and
what details they contain. In addition the Appellant proposes to seek his
own independent age assessment.  To allow for those steps to be taken the
appeal will be listed at North Shields on the first available date after 1
March 2019.









DECISION


    The Decision of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on 4 July
    2018 did involve the making of  an  error  of  law  that  requires  the
    decision upon the asylum appeal to be set aside and remade.


    Accordingly the appeal is remitted  to  the  First  Tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing de novo, with the directions set out above.










Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 25 January 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

[pic]
