
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA069952016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 June 2017                           |On 10 July 2017                   |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR

                                   Between

                                     RM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Butterworth of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of India born  in  March  1986.   She  first
    came to this country on 24 March 2007 as  a  student.   Her  leave  was
    extended until 27 October 2014.  She applied for asylum on  10  October
    2014.  This application was refused on  17  April  2015  and  following
    judicial review proceedings the respondent maintained her  decision  to
    refuse the claim on 20 June 2016.

2.   The appellant appealed and her appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 5 January 2017.

3.   The judge summarised the appellant's claim in paragraphs  4  to  14  of
    her determination.  The appellant's problems began in 2009 when she had
    married her ex-partner in this  country  without  the  consent  of  her
    parents.  While he had told the appellant that he was Hindu it  emerged
    after she had accepted his marriage proposal that he was in fact  Sikh.
    He had said it would be quicker to get a Sikh wedding but  the  couple,
    he said, would have a Hindu wedding in  due  course.   This  had  never
    happened and only on her wedding night had her ex-partner informed  her
    that he was in the United Kingdom without leave.  The appellant had not
    previously asked him about his immigration status.

4.   The appellant's parents  were  against  the  marriage  and  would  have
    nothing more to do with her and while she had maintained  some  contact
    with her mother her father had abandoned  her  altogether.   There  had
    been problems with the marriage from the outset and the judge describes
    the controlling and abusive behaviour which grew  worse  when  pressure
    was brought to bear upon the appellant to have a baby.  The appellant's
    daughter was born in July 2012.  The abuse continued and  following  an
    incident in September 2014 the police were called and  the  appellant's
    ex-partner was taken away by the police.   The  appellant  had  made  a
    witness statement but had taken no further action as she had  told  the
    police she was not willing to go to court to give evidence against him.
     The appellant's partner had threatened the appellant a week later  and
    had telephoned her parents threatening to destroy the appellant's life.
     Her ex-partner's family members had  also  made  threats.   They  were
    claimed to be very influential people.  No  further  threats  had  been
    made since September 2014 and the appellant had not heard from her  ex-
    partner since 2014.  Her family continued to live in the  family  home.
    The appellant believed she was safe from her ex-partner in  the  United
    Kingdom as he was the subject of a non-molestation order issued by  the
    family court.  However, the appellant believed she would be at risk  in
    India and her ex-partner's family were dangerous people who would  have
    the ability to locate her.   She  suffered  from  depression  and  took
    antidepressant medication.  Apart from  the  appellant  the  First-tier
    Judge heard evidence from Miss SS, who had travelled to India to attend
    her brother's wedding.  She had offered to visit the appellant's family
    while she was there.  However, the appellant's brother had  closed  the
    door in her face.  Miss SS had said that her own brother had driven her
    to the appellant's family home on a three or four  hour  journey.   The
    witness had seen the appellant's ex-partner in the street  in  Southall
    since the separation but they had never spoken.

5.   The judge correctly addressed herself on the  burden  and  standard  of
    proof and confirmed that the order in which she had set out her reasons
    did not alter the fact  that  she  had  considered  the  whole  of  the
    evidence before reaching her decision.

6.    The  judge  records  her  findings  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    credibility as follows:

         "32. I did not find the appellant to  be  a  credible  witness.   I
             found a number of aspects of her account to  be  inconsistent,
             vague and implausible and, on the  totality  of  the  evidence
             before me, I concluded that she had fabricated her account  in
             order to bolster a false claim for asylum.   Whilst  I  accept
             that she may have been married to her ex-partner and that  the
             marriage may not have been a happy  one,  she  has  failed  to
             satisfy me that she  has  given  a  truthful  account  of  the
             history of their relationship and the alleged threats that  he
             and his family have meted out on her and her family.


         33.  I find it unlikely that he would have been able to deceive her
             about his faith in the manner she alleges.   As  two  educated
             people, it would have been apparent to the appellant  that  he
             was  not  Hindu.   I  do  not  accept  that   her   ex-partner
             accompanied the appellant to  Hindu  temples  prior  to  their
             marriage in some sort of effort to dupe her.  In  response  to
             question 86 of her asylum interview, the  appellant  said  she
             never asked him why he started practicing Sikhism and going to
             the Gudarwa.  I find such a lack of curiosity in  an  educated
             woman such as the appellant implausible given  that  this  was
             the man she had agreed to marry.


         34.  The appellant also said that  she  had  never  asked  her  ex-
             partner what his immigration status was  and  whether  he  had
             leave to remain in the United Kingdom.   Again,  I  find  this
             incredible.   As  an  educated  woman  who  had  made  several
             immigration applications herself in the past, I do not believe
             that she would not have enquired of her husband-to-be what, if
             any, right he had to be in the country.


         35.  The appellant describes being the victim of regular emotional,
             physical and sexual abuse during her marriage.  She said  that
             she never told anyone about this at the time.  I note that  it
             was less than a month before she attended the asylum screening
             unit to make her asylum claim that she first made a  complaint
             to the police that she had suffered domestic abuse.  The  non-
             molestation order  was  issued  just  three  days  before  the
             appellant attended the screening asylum unit.   The  appellant
             has failed to satisfy me that the alleged abuse took place  at
             all and that her complaint was  not  instead  motivated  by  a
             desire to bolster her asylum claim.  I take into account  that
             non-molestation orders can  be  obtained  on  the  word  of  a
             complainant alone and the issuing of such an  order  does  not
             establish that the behaviour alleged in fact took place.   The
             district judge issued the order without having had the benefit
             of hearing the appellant being cross-examined  or  of  hearing
             any evidence at all from her ex-partner,  who  was  not  given
             notice of the hearing.


         36.  Furthermore, the appellant said that she would  not  agree  to
             give evidence against her ex-partner in  the  criminal  courts
             because she believed that her daughter  needed  both  parents.
             Given that her ex-partner is someone who  she  says  beat  and
             raped her throughout their marriage,  who  had  threatened  to
             kill her, and who had tried to  'sell'  their  daughter  to  a
             friend, I find it implausible that the  appellant  would  wish
             this man to play any future role in her  daughter's  life  and
             that she would refuse to give evidence against  him  for  this
             reason.  I also find her claim that her daughter needed the ex-
             partner to be in her life to be at odds with her claim that at
             around this time she was  reporting  him  to  the  immigration
             authorities for allegedly attempting  to  enter  into  a  sham
             marriage with a Polish lady in order to secure leave to remain
             here.  If the appellant was, bizarrely, of the view  that  her
             daughter needed her ex-partner in her life, she  would  hardly
             take steps to get him removed from the  country  by  reporting
             him to the immigration authorities.


         37.  The appellant claims that the person she and her daughter  are
             at risk from is her ex-partner.  However, he is in the  United
             Kingdom, not India.  In these circumstances, she would  surely
             feel safer returning to India than living a  relatively  short
             distance from him in Slough.  The appellant suggested that she
             feels safe in this  country  because  her  ex-partner  is  the
             subject of a non-molestation order which  was  issued  by  the
             family court on 7th October 2014.  However, at question 153 of
             the asylum interview, the appellant said that  the  order  had
             not yet been served upon her ex-partner.  Furthermore, if  the
             appellant genuinely believed that  her  ex-partner  wished  to
             kill her and had the capability to do so, and to  locate  her,
             the existence of a non-molestation order would not afford  her
             sufficient protection.  If he were determined to  murder  her,
             the existence of a court order that might  result  in  a  mere
             five years' imprisonment if breached would not deter him."


7.   The judge considered a psychiatric report  by  Dr  T  George,  who  had
    examined the appellant on 7 December 2016.  The  doctor  had  concluded
    that the appellant was suffering from PTSD and depression.  In relation
    to this report the judge stated as follows:

         "Medical evidence such as this must be considered in the round.  In
         determining how much weight to attach to this  report,  I  bear  in
         mind that Dr George has based her findings on a single meeting with
         the appellant and that she did not have before her the  appellant's
         GP records.  She also appears to have based  her  findings  on  the
         assumption that the appellant has been truthful about her  personal
         circumstances although I note the remarks  made  by  Dr  George  at
         paragraph 16.11 of  her  report,  in  which  she  states  that  her
         findings are  also  based  upon  her  observation  of  a  patient's
         demeanour and body language."


8.   The judge also took into account that the appellant had not  previously
    sought help for any mental health issues from her GP and the fact  that
    the  report  "was  prepared  privately  for  the  specific  purpose  of
    supporting her asylum claim".  The judge further noted that as  at  the
    date of the appeal hearing the appellant had not furnished her GP  with
    a copy of the report or sought any further medical help.

9.   Although the appellant had claimed that her  ex-partner's  family  were
    people of influence with the means to trace her  throughout  India  she
    had not been able to give any specific details of what the  family  did
    and had simply said at interview: "I do not know about details but  his
    father got his own business and  his  brother  works  somewhere."   The
    judge explains why she found it difficult to reconcile the  appellant's
    evidence with the evidence of Miss SS in paragraph 39 of her  decision.
    Miss SS had been unable to throw any  light  on  the  question  of  the
    alleged influence of the appellant's ex-partner's family.

10.  The judge makes it clear that she did  not  accept  that  Miss  SS  had
    given a truthful account, finding  it  most  unlikely  that  she  would
    undertake a six or eight hour round trip to the appellant's family home
    where it was claimed the appellant's  brother  "had  already  allegedly
    indicated to her in a phone call that they would not engage with  her."
    Furthermore she had never chosen to confront the appellant's ex-partner
    when she had seen him in Southall and the judge also commented that  it
    would seem to be unnecessary for Miss SS to undertake "such a long  and
    predictably unfruitful journey when the appellant herself was in  touch
    with her family."  The judge found that the witness had fabricated  her
    evidence "in a misguided effort to support her friend's asylum claim."

11.  The judge considered that the appellant's claim to be at risk from  her
    ex-partner was undermined by the fact that he had not  in  fact  harmed
    her and nor had his family.  The appellant had confirmed that  her  ex-
    partner's family had never visited the appellant's family home  despite
    knowing where they lived and having previously visited  them  when  the
    appellant's daughter was born.

12.  The determination continues as follows:

         "42. For all the reasons set out above, I am not satisfied that the
             appellant is at risk of  harm  from  her  ex-partner  or  from
             members  of  his  family.   Nevertheless,  I  have  considered
             whether she may be at risk of persecution or serious  harm  by
             the mere fact that she would be returning to India as a single
             mother.  I find that she would not be.  I do not  accept  that
             the appellant would be returning to India without  any  family
             support.  I find that the appellant has been  untruthful  over
             the nature and degree of the contact that she has had with her
             family since coming to the United Kingdom.  On the  one  hand,
             she says that her father abandoned her  as  a  result  of  her
             decision to enter into an inter-faith marriage  with  her  ex-
             partner in 2009.  On the other  she  states  that  her  father
             financially supported her studies and  provided  her  with  an
             affidavit in November 2014 to support  her  asylum  claim.   I
             note that in her witness statement the appellant  claims  that
             her father only supported her studies between 2007  and  2009.
             However, she had not adduced any evidence to corroborate  this
             assertion or to show how she was able to support  herself  and
             satisfy the strict requirements for  obtaining  student  leave
             after this time without her father's help.


         43.  During her oral evidence,  the  appellant  said  that  she  no
             longer had any contact at all with her  own  family  and  that
             this was as a result of her father's  death.   She  said  that
             since he died, her brother had become head of the  family  and
             he had prohibited her mother and  other  family  members  from
             contacting  her.   The  appellant   has   provided   a   death
             certificate which states that her father died on  30th  August
             2016.  I am not satisfied that this document can be relied on.
              The appellant claims to have had no contact with  her  family
             since September  2014.   When  asked  how  she  obtained  this
             certificate, she said that she had a friend who was  close  to
             her family and this friend had obtained it for her.  I find it
             unlikely that her family would agree to give  a  copy  of  the
             death certificate to assist the appellant if they had  severed
             contact with the appellant.  Under the principles  established
             in the case of Tanveer Ahmed it is for the appellant  to  show
             that this document can be relied on.  She has failed to do so.
              I consider  it  likely  that  the  appellant  has  fabricated
             details of her father's death and her brother's response to it
             in an effort to support  her  untruthful  claim  that  she  no
             longer has any contact with her family.


         44.  The appellant said in her asylum interview that she maintained
             contact with her mother throughout  her  stay  in  the  United
             Kingdom albeit that she says that their contact was limited to
             enquiring after each other's well-being.   For  reasons  given
             above, I do not accept that the appellant has told  the  truth
             about  her  inter-faith  marriage  with  her  ex-partner   and
             therefore I do not  accept  that  her  relationship  with  her
             parents soured as a result of  this  event.   Furthermore,  as
             stated above, I am not satisfied that the  appellant's  father
             is in fact deceased.  However, if he is so, I am not persuaded
             that the appellant's mother and brother have  severed  contact
             with her.  I find that she and her child would be able to turn
             to rely on them for support and accommodation just as she  has
             done in the past.


         45.  I have read with care the expert report of Dr Gil Daryn  dated
             9th February 2016.  However,  much  of  the  contents  of  the
             report are generic in nature and do not  specifically  address
             the appellant's circumstances.   Furthermore,  the  report  is
             premised on the basis that the appellant would be returning to
             India with no family to support her on her return and that she
             has told the truth about the circumstances leading up  to  the
             making of her asylum claim.  But I do not accept  this  to  be
             the case.  I find that she remains in contact with her  family
             and that they continue to support her  and  would  do  on  her
             return.  I also take into account the  fact  that  she  is  an
             educated woman who has undertaken employed work in  both  this
             country and in India.  I also take into account that  although
             she is a single woman the appellant has not  been  accused  of
             adultery.


         46.  In light of  her  circumstances  as  a  whole,  I  reject  any
             suggestion that the appellant and her child would be destitute
             or would suffer discrimination in India  reaching  persecutory
             levels or serious harm."


13.  The judge then found that the removal of the  appellant  would  not  be
    disproportionate, taking into account Section 117B of the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002.   There  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her integration into India for the purposes  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi).

14.  In relation to the medical issues the judge stated as follows:

         "Whilst she may suffer from depression, I find that the severity of
         any mental health problem falls  far  short  of  that  required  to
         amount to a 'very significant obstacle' or to engage Articles 3  or
         8.  She is not currently taking any  medication  or  receiving  any
         counselling or other input from any mental health specialist.   For
         the  purposes  of  Section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
         Immigration  Act  2009,  it  is  in  the  best  interests  of   the
         appellant's young child to return with her to India where  she  can
         enjoy the full rights of her Indian citizenship and the benefit  of
         growing up close to other extended family members."


15.  The judge accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  Grounds  of
    appeal against the decision were settled by Counsel who had represented
    the appellant before the First-tier Judge  (not  Mr  Butterworth).   In
    ground 1 it was argued that the judge had erred in finding in paragraph
    33 that the appellant's claim that  she  did  not  know  her  husband's
    status in the UK was implausible whereas  in  the  appellant's  witness
    statement she had said that her ex-partner had "also  misled  me  about
    his immigration status in the UK.  He led me to  believe  that  he  was
    here legally and only told me he was not on our  wedding  night."   The
    evidence that the appellant did not know her husband was  not  lawfully
    in the UK was evidence she had always maintained throughout.

16.  In ground 2 it was argued that the finding in  paragraph  37  that  the
    appellant's husband could still kill her if he  wished  to  was  of  no
    assistance and was an indication of the judge's position on the appeal.
     The judge was to assess the appeal based upon the evidence before  her
    and not based  upon  what  had  not  yet  happened.   The  finding  was
    irrational and unreasonable.  The judge had failed to take into account
    the medical evidence and reference was made to paragraph 16.11  of  the
    psychiatric report.  The grounds state:

         "Whilst any assessment of credibility is in the domain of the judge
         hearing the appeal, the judge can be assisted in the  consideration
         of this question, in part,  or  not,  by  the  examination  of  the
         evidence from an expert witness.  It is clear  the  judge  did  not
         consider a significant part of the report, as part of the evidence,
         to the extent the determination is flawed and ought not to stand."


    It was argued that the judge had not considered the objective  evidence
    about marriage and divorce and  it  was  clear  that  divorce  was  not
    recognised in the Sikh religion in  India.   The  appellant  could  not
    escape from her abusive ex-partner and his family and there had been no
    real consideration of this  aspect  of  the  objective  material.   The
    decision was irrational.


17.  Permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The
    respondent filed a reply on 30 May 2017 in which it was submitted  that
    the grounds were no more than an expression of  disagreement  with  the
    judge's decision.  The appeal rested on credibility and the  judge  had
    given  adequate  reasons  for  the  findings.   The  finding  that  the
    appellant could return to  her  family  and  not  be  at  any  risk  of
    reprisals from her in-laws was fatal to the claim.

18.  Counsel relied on his skeleton argument lodged on the date of  hearing.
    Apart from  the  appellant's  original  bundle  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal a supplementary bundle was lodged but It was not  argued  that
    the determination was flawed in law by reference to that bundle.

19.  Counsel submitted that it was clear that the  appellant  had  discussed
    her ex-husband's immigration status with her husband and he had lied to
    her regarding his status.  The judge had made a mistake which  amounted
    to a mistake of fact. The judge  had  made  no  conclusions  about  the
    findings by Dr George.  She had made no  findings  as  to  whether  the
    appellant suffered depression or any psychiatric illness or whether she
    was a vulnerable witness.  Counsel  acknowledged  that  the  vulnerable
    witness point did not feature in the grounds.  Dr George had  diagnosed
    PTSD and had applied the Istanbul Protocol.  The doctor had  considered
    the possibility  that  the  appellant  might  have  been  feigning  her
    symptoms.  While there was no need to give reasons on every  point  the
    report had been a lengthy one.  Reference in the skeleton argument  was
    made inter alia to Mibanga v Secretary of State [2005] EWCA Civ  367  -
    the medical evidence should not artificially be separated from the rest
    of the evidence.  Conclusions should not be reached as  to  credibility
    without reference to the medical evidence.

20.  Counsel focused heavily on paragraph 37 of the decision.   He  referred
    to the report of Dr Daryn where it was stated that the police and other
    state authorities actually engaged in sexually assaulting those who had
    sought their protection.  In the UK she  would  be  protected  and  the
    judge had erred in taking matters against her in paragraph  37.   There
    were no divorce provisions for Sikhs.  If returned customary laws would
    apply and the judge had failed to consider the expert report.  Domestic
    violence was treated as a private family  matter.   The  Indian  police
    tended to promote reconciliation and failed female victims of violence.
     While she had the benefit of a non-molestation  order  in  the  United
    Kingdom she feared she could not escape in India where  attempts  would
    be made to reconcile her.  The judge had misunderstood the  appellant's
    case in paragraph 37.

21.  Mr Bramble submitted that the judge had not materially  erred  in  law.
    She had heard evidence at the hearing and had considered  the  evidence
    in the round.  Her decision had been founded on a number of matters and
    it had not been accepted that the appellant was a  victim  of  domestic
    violence.  The timing of the claim had been found  to  be  implausible.
    What the judge had said in paragraph  37  needed  to  be  seen  in  the
    context of the findings in the preceding paragraphs.

22.  The judge had considered the medical evidence and  while  she  had  not
    made an express finding in relation to whether the  appellant  suffered
    from PTSD the determination needed  to  be  considered  in  the  round.
    There had been no GP records.  The judge was best  placed  to  consider
    credibility.  No further medical help had been sought.   The  appellant
    had not taken  matters  further.   Reference  was  made  to  BK  (Risk,
    Adultery, PSG) India CG [2002] 03387.  The appellant would be returning
    with the support of her family as the judge had found in paragraph  42.
    The expert report had been premised on the understanding there would be
    no family to support the appellant.  However, the  appellant  had  been
    found not to be credible and she had the support of her family.

23.  At the conclusion of the submissions I reserved my decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the judge's determination  if  it
    was materially flawed in law. I also remind myself that the  judge  had
    the benefit of assessing  oral  evidence  and  made  clear  credibility
    findings.

24.  The first complaint in the grounds was that  the  judge  had  erred  in
    finding that the appellant had never  asked  her  ex-partner  what  his
    immigration status was.  This concerns paragraph 34 of the decision.  I
    note that in the preceding paragraph the judge had referred to question
    86 of the appellant's asylum interview and it may be the judge  had  in
    mind the answer the appellant gave to question 58.   In  that  question
    the appellant was asked whether she had asked  her  husband  about  his
    immigration status in the UK prior to  the  conversation  they  had  on
    their wedding night and the appellant had replied "no".  The  statement
    that she had been misled about her ex-partner's immigration status  and
    that he had led her to believe that he was here legally does not amount
    to the appellant stating in terms that she  had  asked  her  ex-partner
    about his  immigration  status.   The  appellant  goes  on  to  say  at
    interview that she was given the  impression  by  the  friend  who  had
    introduced her that he had status - see questions 61 and 62.  The judge
    was entitled to conclude that it was not credible that  she  had  never
    asked her ex-partner what his  immigration  status  was.   It  was  not
    incumbent on the judge to make express reference to what the  appellant
    said in her witness statement.  She does not say in  the  excerpt  from
    the witness statement relied upon that she had directly asked  him.  If
    she had done it would have been difficult to reconcile  with  what  she
    had said at interview.

25.  I do not find that what is said in paragraph 34 amounts to an error  of
    fact as contended in the skeleton argument, still less an error of law,
    let alone a material error of law.

26.  Although the grounds refer to paragraph 33 the focus of  the  challenge
    is on paragraph 34.  I see no  error  in  the  judge's  conclusions  in
    paragraph 33 in any event.

27.  Counsel focused heavily on paragraph 37 of the  judge's  determination.
    A distinction is drawn between what the appellant faces in  the  United
    Kingdom with a supportive police  force  and  the  position  in  India.
    However, as Mr Bramble submits, paragraph 37 needs to be  seen  in  the
    context of the preceding paragraphs where the judge had found that  the
    appellant had not satisfied her that the alleged abuse  took  place  at
    all and in fact was part of an attempt to  bolster  her  asylum  claim.
    The judge's use of the word "implausible" in paragraph 36 was perfectly
    justified.  Viewed as a whole,  the  judge's  decision  is  safely  and
    properly reasoned in my view.

28.  A point is taken on the approach to the psychiatric evidence.

29.  I have already commented that the judge makes it clear that  the  order
    in which she considered matters was not material and she had taken into
    account all the evidence in the round when reaching her conclusions.  I
    am not satisfied that she misdirected herself by making her findings in
    a vacuum and without regard to the medical evidence  -  see  Mibanga  v
    Secretary of State cited above.

30.  The judge acknowledged that the doctor had  found  that  the  appellant
    was suffering from PTSD and depression.   The  judge  was  plainly  not
    satisfied with this medical evidence, noting that medical evidence  had
    to be considered in the round.  She considered what  weight  she  would
    apply to it and sets out her approach in paragraph 38 and on  any  fair
    reading of that paragraph it is made abundantly clear that  the  weight
    that the judge was  able  to  give  to  the  report  was  low.   It  is
    acknowledged in the grounds that any assessment of credibility  was  in
    the domain of the judge hearing the appeal.  The  judge  makes  express
    reference to paragraph 16.11 of the  report  which  is  relied  on  the
    grounds. I do not find that it is made out that a significant  part  of
    the report was not taken into account by the judge.

31.  In ground 4 reference was made to risks on  return  if  permission  was
    granted on the previous ground.  In that context reliance was placed on
    BK (India).

32.  The judge disbelieved  the  appellant's  account  and,  as  Mr  Bramble
    submits, the issues of risk  on  return  needed  to  be  seen  in  that
    context.  The appellant would be returning on the judge's findings to a
    supportive family.  The appellant was also an educated  woman  and  her
    circumstances are not the same or indeed similar to  the  circumstances
    considered by the Tribunal in BK (India).  This is quite apart from the
    central conclusion made by the judge that the appellant was not at risk
    of harm from her ex-partner or from members of his family.

33.  I do not find that the judge did not give proper weight to  the  expert
    report by Dr Daryn.  She says that she found it generic in  nature  and
    it did not specifically address the appellant's circumstances.  It  was
    open to her to conclude that the appellant remained in contact with her
    family, who continued to support her.

34.  In paragraph 47 of her decision the judge deals  with  the  appellant's
    private and family life and considers the  issue  of  very  significant
    obstacles.  As I have said, the judge was criticised for  dealing  with
    the medical evidence as she did earlier on in her decision.  She  does,
    however, make it clear in paragraph 47 that while the  appellant  might
    suffer from depression the severity of any mental health  problem  fell
    far short of that required to amount to a very significant obstacle  or
    to engage Articles 3 or 8.  In my view she was entitled so to  conclude
    and her analysis of the medical evidence was  not  arguably  flawed  or
    inadequately reasoned in any material respect. The  vulnerable  witness
    point was not taken in  the  grounds  which  were  settled  by  counsel
    representing the appellant at the hearing. She  would  have  been  best
    placed to assess what points to take and a skeleton argument lodged  at
    the hearing is not the way to raise new grounds.

35.  Having carefully considered the arguments advanced I am  not  persuaded
    that the First-tier Judge erred in law as contended.

Notice of Decision

The judge's decision was not materially flawed in law.  I  direct  it  shall
stand.  The appeal is dismissed on asylum,  humanitarian  and  human  rights
grounds (Articles 2, 3 and 8).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.


Signed                                  Date 7 July 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal


