
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06761/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 14th January 2020                 |On 22nd January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                  Anwar [S]
                           NO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Khan (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Miss R. Pettersen (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First Tier Tribunal (Judge Dearden)  (FtT)  promulgated
    on 16th September 2019 in which the appellant's  protection  and  human
    rights claims were dismissed.



    Background

2.   The appellant's appeal on asylum and human rights grounds was based  on
    a fear of persecution in Pakistan from the authorities as a  result  of
    his membership of the MQM (Muttahida Qaumi  movement)  in  1999.     He
    claimed that he was arrested  and  then  detained  for  3  months.   He
    arrived in the UK in 2012 having obtained entry clearance as a  student
    Tier 4, and his wife and children  joined  him  in  2014.   All  family
    members are dependent on his claim; he has three children and a  fourth
    born in the UK, none of whom are "qualifying children."



Grounds of appeal

3.   In grounds of appeal  the  appellant  argued  that  the  FtT  erred  by
    failing to take into account a  witness  statement  from  his  wife  as
    evidence  in  support  of  his  asylum  appeal.   The  FtT  refused  an
    application for an adjournment requested because she was  in  the  late
    stages of pregnancy and unable to travel.  The  FtT  decided  that  the
    witness statement could stand as evidence [10].

4.   The FtT failed to consider Article 8 ECHR and only scant reference  was
    given to the issues in relation to the interests of the children [37  &
    38].



Permission to appeal

5.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was granted  by  FTJ  G
    Wilson who considered that the FtT's failure to deal with Article 8 was
    arguably a material error in law.  All grounds raised were arguable.



Submissions

6.   At the hearing before me Mr Khan, representing the appellant,  expanded
    on the grounds of appeal and argued that the failure to  refer  to  the
    wife's witness statement as evidence  was  a  material  error,  as  her
    account supported the appellant's claim for asylum.  The FtT failed  to
    consider any of the evidence under Article 8 in particular  the  length
    of residence and the fact that the children were in  education  in  the
    UK.

7.   In response Miss Petterson, for the respondent, contended  that  whilst
    the FtT had erred by failing to consider issues under Article 8 in  any
    detail and failing to give adequate reasons, it was not material, given
    that the children were not "qualifying", there was no evidence  of  any
    exceptional circumstances and no evidence to show that there was family
    or private life in the UK.

8.   I indicated my preliminary view  that  the  Article  8  error  was  not
    material.  I asked Mr  Khan  to  make  submissions  with  reference  to
    evidence that he wished to be included in my consideration before I  re
    made the decision.

9.   Mr Khan emphasised that the children had formed links  and  friendships
    at school and had been in education in the UK for 6 years.



Discussion and conclusion

10.  I found that there was an error of law in the decision of  the  FtT  in
    its failure to properly consider and assess Article 8  issues.   It  is
    unclear whether parts of the decision were in fact missing as there was
    a gap in the page left  blank  between  paragraphs  38  and  39,  which
    appeared on  the  next  page.   In  any  event  the  FtT  gave  limited
    consideration of Article 8 focusing solely on the best interests of the
    children and did not provide any further  reasoning  which  would  have
    left the appellant unclear as to why the appeal had failed.

11.  As indicated above I was satisfied that such as error was not  material
    given that there was no further evidence such  as  medical  matters  or
    evidence from the school before the FtT to  show  that  Article  8  was
    engaged. And none was provided by Mr Khan when given  the  opportunity.
    There was no detailed evidence provided by the appellant in his witness
    statement about Article 8 issues. I  am  satisfied  that  none  of  the
    children are qualified children; they have not live in  the  UK  for  7
    years or more. There  was  no  evidence  to  show  that  they  met  the
    Immigration Rules family or private life.  The appellant entered the UK
    in order to pursue studies and his family joined him.  It was  apparent
    to him that he had no basis for remaining in the  UK  once  his  asylum
    appeal had been determined and he had no  further  leave.   He  entered
    without any expectation for leave to be granted in future.  The  family
    would be returning to Pakistan as a unit and all spoke Urdu.  They  had
    family members in Pakistan and  the  appellant  had  been  educated  to
    university level and worked there as an accountant. He was a practising
    Muslim and would be able to re assimilate culturally  on  return.   The
    appellant's wife and children had no entitlement to remain  in  the  UK
    and were aged 11, 9, 4 years old and lived in the UK for 6  years.   It
    was in the best interests of the children given their  ages  to  remain
    with their parents and for the family to return as a unit to  Pakistan.
    There was no evidence to  counter  that  their  best  interest  lay  in
    remaining with their parents given their age.  They lived  in  Pakistan
    prior to 2014 and would be able to continue their education there; none
    had reached any  significant  stage  educationally  and  there  was  no
    evidence relied on to indicate that there were any problems in pursuing
    education in Pakistan.  There was some reference to medical issues  for
    the appellant who suffers from diabetes and high blood pressure.  There
    is adequate medical treatment available in Pakistan.

12.  In terms of the FtT's wife's statement, I am satisfied that  there  was
    no material error of law in the FtT's failure to make reference  to  it
    as evidence in the decision.  The FtT stated that it  would  take  into
    account the statement as evidence and attach appropriate  weight  [10].
    Clearly it would have  been  preferable  had  the  FtT  considered  the
    statement in the body of the decision, however, I am satisfied that  no
    material error in law arises. The witness statement  was  unsigned  and
    undated. The content adds nothing further to the evidence given by  the
    appellant.  The FtT has thoroughly considered  the  evidence  from  the
    appellant as to risk and found that evidence lacking in credibility and
    not consistent with the background material [34  (1)].   The  FtT  gave
    full consideration of the supporting  evidence  including  photographs,
    medical report and took into account the delay in making the claim  for
    asylum.

13.  There is no material error of  law  disclosed  in  the  decision  which
    shall stand.



Decision

14.  The appeal is dismissed.




                               Signed   Date 16.01.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






NO ANONYMITY ORDER
NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed   Date 16.01.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
