
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06750/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At Field House, London               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21st January 2020                 |On 16th March 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     JS
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               The Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr Oshunrinade, Samuel & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Zimbabwe born in 1977. He  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  N.
    Minhas) to dismiss his protection and human rights claims.

      Background and Matters in Issue


 2. The Appellant has been in the United Kingdom since September  1999.  He
    came initially as a student, but by 2003 was an overstayer. In 2009  he
    sought asylum. That  claim  was  refused,  and  his  subsequent  appeal
    against that decision dismissed. Further submissions were  rejected  in
    2013.   In March 2019 the Appellant made further representations  which
    were refused, but the Respondent did agree to treat them  as  a  'fresh
    claim' under paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules. This generated the
    right of appeal which brought the Appellant before Judge Minhas.


 3. His case before the First-tier Tribunal fell into two parts:

              i) The Appellant asserted a well-founded fear  of  persecution
                 in Zimbabwe arising from his sur place  political  activity
                 in the United Kingdom,  in  particular,  his  social  media
                 activity contra the ZANU-PF government in Harare;


             ii) He submitted that the refusal to  grant  him  leave  was  a
                 violation of his Article 8  right  to  family  and  private
                 life.  In  particular   the   Appellant   relied   on   his
                 relationships with his British wife and her son.


 4. The Tribunal found as follows:


              i) That the Appellant had no reasonable likelihood  of  facing
                 persecution  in  Zimbabwe.   Directing   himself   to   the
                 Devaseelan findings of the  Tribunal  in  2009,  the  Judge
                 noted that  the  Appellant  had  no  political  profile  or
                 involvement  prior  to  leaving  Zimbabwe.   Against   that
                 background  the  Judge  found  that  anti-ZANU   sentiments
                 expressed by the  Appellant  in  an  online  blog  and  via
                 'Twitter' were cynical ploys to bolster his  asylum  claim.
                 It was not accepted that he would present as  someone  with
                 significant MDC profile upon return to Zimbabwe;


             ii) That the Appellant has genuine and subsisting relationships
                 with  his  wife  and  step-son,  and  that  his  length  of
                 residence in the United Kingdom engages  the  private  life
                 limb of Article 8. There  would  be  an  interference  with
                 those Article 8 rights  should  the  Appellant  be  refused
                 leave to remain.  That interference would  nevertheless  be
                 justified and proportionate.

    The appeal was thereby dismissed.


 5. The Appellant now appeals the decision in respect of limb  (ii):  human
    rights grounds only. It is submitted that in reaching its  decision  on
    proportionality the First-tier Tribunal erred in law in  assuming  that
    it would be reasonable for the Appellant's step-son  to  relocate  from
    the United Kingdom to Zimbabwe with his mother  and  step-father.    In
    particular reliance is placed on the fact that the child is British.


    Discussion and Findings


 6. The First-tier Tribunal expressly accepted that the Appellant enjoys  a
    genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  his  step-son,  a
    British national now aged 11.   That being the case, the next  question
    was whether it would be 'reasonable' to expect that child to leave  the
    United Kingdom: s117B(6) Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.


 7. In its answer to that question I can discern in the  Tribunal  decision
    no consideration of the child's private life in the United Kingdom. Nor
    is there any  consideration  of  the  weight  to  be  attached  to  his
    nationality. That was a matter of clear relevance given the Home Office
    guidance  on  the  matter  describes   nationality   as   "particularly
    important" and says this:


         The  starting  point  is  that  we  would  not  normally  expect  a
         qualifying child to leave the UK. It is normally in a child's  best
         interest for the whole family to remain together,  which  means  if
         the child is not expected to leave, then the parent or  parents  or
         primary carer of the child will also not be expected to  leave  the
         UK.


    Family Policy Family life (as a partner or parent),  private  life  and
    exceptional circumstances (10th December 2019).


 8. I am satisfied that this omission was a significant one  which  renders
    the proportionality exercise incomplete. I therefore find  the  grounds
    to be made out. I set the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  insofar
    as it relates to the human rights aspect of the appeal.


 9. The First-tier Tribunal found that the Appellant arrived in the  United
    Kingdom in September 1999. There is nothing before me to indicate  that
    he has ever left the United Kingdom, and it is his evidence, apparently
    accepted by the First-tier Tribunal that  he  has  constantly  remained
    here since the day that he arrived. There  was  nothing  before  me  to
    indicate that there are any 'suitability'  reasons  why  the  Appellant
    should be refused leave to remain. On balance I am satisfied that as of
    today's date he meets the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii)  of
    the Immigration Rules:

         276ADE (1). The requirements to be met by an applicant for leave to
         remain on the grounds of private life in the UK are that at the
         date of application, the applicant:


         (i) does not fall for refusal under any of the grounds in Section S-
         LTR 1.1 to S-LTR 2.2. and S-LTR.3.1. to S-LTR.4.5. in Appendix FM;
         and


         (ii) has made a valid application for leave to remain on the
         grounds of private life in the UK; and


         (iii) has lived continuously in the UK for at least 20 years
         (discounting any period of imprisonment); or

10. I bear in mind that this is an Article 8 appeal. This rule relating  to
    private life, 276ADE(1), has been specifically approved  by  parliament
    to strike a fair balance between the rights of the individual  and  the
    rights of the state to control its own  borders.  Since  the  Appellant
    today meets the requirements of that rule it follows that the Secretary
    of State would hold it  to  be  disproportionate  to  refuse  leave.  I
    therefore find that the decision is unlawful  pursuant  to  s6  of  the
    Human Rights Act 1998 and the appeal must be allowed.


    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal in  respect  of  protection  is
    upheld. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  in  respect  of  human
    rights is flawed for error of law and is set aside.


12. The decision in the appeal is remade as follows: the appeal is  allowed
    on human rights grounds.


13. This is an appeal involving a British child. Having had regard  to  the
    guidance in the Presidential Guidance Note  No  1  of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders and Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I am concerned that identification of the Appellant could lead  to
    identification of the child, and that this would be  contrary  to  that
    child's best interests. Accordingly I consider it appropriate  to  make
    an order in the following terms:


        "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellants  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with  this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"
                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           21st January 2020
