
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06346/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 February 2018                           |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                   mr M A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Noor, Counsel, instructed by Deo Volente
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant a national of Pakistan has permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Hussain of the First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  dismissing
    his appeal on asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.



2.   The appellant's grounds as amplified by Mr Noor were essentially  four-
    handed.  It is contended that the judge erred

    (i)  in misapplying s.8 of the IA (TC)A 2004;


    (ii) in wrongly treating relevant matters as inconsistencies that  were
         not;


    (iii)    in  failing  to  take  into  account  relevant  documents,  in
         particular a letter from the appellant's cousin (who is a senator),
         from a security adviser to the senator and a political agent;  and


    (iv) in making findings contradictory to background information.

3.   I would state at the outset that  I  am  unimpressed  by  what  I  have
    numbered ground (ii).  It was not pleaded in the  written  grounds  and
    the points made by  Mr  Noor  under  (ii)  amount  in  my  judgment  to
    disagreements with the judge's findings of fact.  In the  event  it  is
    unnecessary for me to say more about ground (ii) because I am persuaded
    that grounds (i) and (ii) identify material errors of law.

4.   As regards ground (i), although the  judge  at  paragraph  27  directed
    himself correctly on the limited scope of s.8 (noting that it was  "not
    determinative of the overall credibility of the appellant's claim"), he
    appears to have treated the eighteen months' delay in  claiming  asylum
    as a matter that was intrinsically not just damaging to his credibility
    but "severely damag[ing]".  That assumption is  inconsistent  with  the
    authority of JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878 -  a  case  which  also
    involved a claimant in respect of whom the Tribunal had said that "very
    serious damage has been sustained to [the  claimant's]  credibility  by
    virtue of the operation of Section  8"  ([8]).   The  Court  of  Appeal
    concluded in that case that as a result of this approach  "there  is  a
    real risk that Section 8 matters were given a status and a  compartment
    of their own ...".

5.   I also consider  erroneous  the  failure  by  the  judge  to  give  any
    evaluation  of  the  aforementioned  documentary  evidence.   Like  the
    respondent, the judge was prepared to accept that the appellant was the
    son of an ex-senator of  the  Pakistan  parliament  named  Malik  Abdul
    Wahid.  The appellant relied, inter alia, on:  a  letter  from  Senator
    Hilal-ur-Rehman dated September  2016  confirming  that  the  appellant
    belongs to a reputable political family who would be  a  target  if  he
    returned; a June 2017 letter from the same senator to various  agencies
    and bodies  requesting special security measures;  and  a  letter  from
    Political Agent Mohmand Agency, May 2017, advising that  the  militants
    were planning to carry  out  terrorist  attacks  on  Senator  Jipap  Ur
    Rehman, Malik Bilal Rehman, Shell PSO and other oil depots and security
    force  personnel  and  that  security  precautions   were   in   order.
    Potentially  this  evidence  was  probative  of  the  risk  facing  the
    appellant in his home area as a member of a prominent political family.
     Of these documents the judge makes no mention.  It  was  incumbent  on
    him to address them and, if he did not find them  probative,  to  state
    his reasons.  His failure to  do  so  renders  his  assessment  of  the
    evidence unsafe.

6.   I will not address ground (iv) except insofar  as  it  seeks  to  argue
    that the judge  erred  in  his  treatment  of  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation.

7.   Ms Isherwood highlighted the fact that the judge also made findings  in
    the alternative to the effect that even if he were at risk in his  home
    area the appellant could safely and reasonably  relocate.   She  argued
    that this finding was enough on its own and that if there was any error
    in the judge's treatment of the evidence relating to risk in  the  home
    area it was not material.  I agree with Mr Noor, however, that  whether
    or not the appellant could  safely  and  reasonably  relocate  depended
    crucially on the assessment of risks he would face in his home area and
    their nature and extent.  Hence, I do not accept that any errors on the
    judge's findings on risk in the appellant's home area were  immaterial.



8.   In the nature of the judge's errors as identified  above  none  of  his
    findings of fact  can  stand,  although  I note  that  the  respondent
    continues to accept the appellant is the son of ex-Senator Malik  Abdul
    Wahid.

9.   For the above reasons I conclude that:

    The judge materially erred in law.


    The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Hussain).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 15 March 2018
            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
