
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06756/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 June 2019                      |On 05 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   mr S F
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Stuart-King, Counsel instructed by J D Spicer
Zeb Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant, a male citizen of Afghanistan who claimed to  have  been
    born on 11 January 2001, appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  against
    the decision of  the  respondent  dated  4  July  2017  to  refuse  the
    appellant's asylum claim.  In a Decision and Reasons, promulgated on 10
    April 2019, Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Greasley  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal.  The  appellant  appeals  with  permission  on  the
    grounds that:

    Ground 1

      1) The judge erred in his assessment of the appellant's age;

      2) The judge erred in assessing risk on return.

Error of Law Discussion

 2. It was argued, in both the grounds and in oral submissions  before  me,
    that the judge erred in reaching the age assessment  he  did  that  the
    appellant was likely to be someone  who  was  aged  22  at  the  appeal
    hearing and not someone who had just turned 18 years of age.

 3. It was the argument on behalf of the appellant that the judge erred  in
    making findings without reference to any of the evidence.  However,  it
    was accepted by both parties before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  not
    disputed before me that the judge  did  not  have  any  age  assessment
    report before him to assist him (which the judge noted at  [36]).   The
    judge had already noted at [21] that neither party was in possession of
    any age assessment and both representatives were agreeable to the judge
    considering the appeal together with all the other  available  evidence
    and considering the age assessment accordingly.

 4. The judge correctly directed himself, including at [33] to [36], as  to
    how to properly consider the evidence and I agree with Ms Everett  that
    it was difficult to see what else the judge could have done.  I do  not
    agree that the judge's findings were made without reference to  any  of
    the evidence or that they were based solely on  appearance;  the  judge
    specifically directed himself in the earlier  paragraphs  that  it  was
    important to  consider  all  of  the  evidence  cumulatively  and  this
    included the appellant's evidence and that of his brother.   The  judge
    set out at [36] that he  took  into  consideration  all  the  oral  and
    documentary evidence including the oral evidence of the appellant, both
    in-chief and in cross-examination.  Having considered all the  evidence
    it was open to the judge to find as he did that the appellant was  more
    likely to be 22 rather than just turned 18.

 5. In any event, even if the judge was wrong, which I am not satisfied has
    been demonstrated, at [44] the judge went on  to  make  an  alternative
    finding that if the appellant had been born as he claimed on 11 January
    2001 and was now therefore just turned 18, the judge still concluded on
    the basis of all the evidence that he had not provided a consistent  or
    credible  account  of   events   in   Afghanistan   or   his   family's
    circumstances.  There was no material error under ground 1.

 6. In relation to ground 2 it was argued on behalf of the  appellant  that
    the judge's assessment of risk on return was flawed.  The grounds  were
    based  on  the  appellant's  vulnerability  and  the  fact  that   such
    vulnerability did not cease when an individual  becomes  an  adult  (RG
    (Automatic deport - Section 33(2)(a) exception) Nepal [2010] UKUT 273).
     The grounds were based  primarily  on  an  individual's  vulnerability
    given the appellant's relatively young age.   However,  Judge  Greasley
    took into consideration and assessed the appellant's evidence including
    making appropriate allowances for the fact that even though he was  now
    an adult he was still a young man and was still a  young  man  when  he
    first made his  asylum  claim.   It  was  clear  therefore  that  Judge
    Greasley had  in  mind  that  young  age  when  considering  return  to
    Afghanistan.

 7. There is no error in the judge's findings including  that  it  was  not
    accepted that the appellant had no family members  in  Afghanistan  who
    could assist him on return and  the  judge  specifically  rejected  the
    appellant's claims not to have  any  family  support  or  other  family
    network and found that he had not provided a truthful  account  of  his
    family circumstances.

 8. I disagree with Ms Stuart-King that it was incumbent on  the  judge  to
    set out exactly which family members the appellant had available to him
    when it was the judge's clear findings that he had a family  who  could
    assist him on return.

 9. Although not in the grounds, Ms Stuart-King relied on the recent  Court
    of Appeal decision in  AS  (Afghanistan)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  873  which
    remitted the country guidance in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG
    [2018] UKUT 00118 (IAC) including to consider whether  that  assessment
    required a consideration of its country guidance including in light  of
    the 2018 UNHCR guidelines  that  "given  the  current  security,  human
    rights and humanitarian situation in Kabul, an IFA/IRA is generally not
    available in the city".

10. The guidance in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2018]  UKUT  00118
    (IAC) is summarised as follows in the headnote:

         "Risk on return to Kabul from the Taliban


          i) A person who is of lower-level interest for the Taliban  (i.e.
             not a senior government or security services  official,  or  a
             spy) is not at real risk of persecution from  the  Taliban  in
             Kabul.


         Internal relocation to Kabul


         ii) Having regard to the security and  humanitarian  situation  in
             Kabul as well as the  difficulties  faced  by  the  population
             living there (primarily the urban poor but also IDPs and other
             returnees, which are not dissimilar to  the  conditions  faced
             throughout may other parts of Afghanistan); it  will  not,  in
             general be unreasonable or unduly harsh  for  a  single  adult
             male in good health to relocate to Kabul even if he  does  not
             have any specific connections or support network in Kabul.


        iii)  However,  the  particular  circumstances  of  an   individual
             applicant must  be  taken  into  account  in  the  context  of
             conditions in the place of relocation,  including  a  person's
             age, nature and quality of  support  network/connections  with
             Kabul/Afghanistan, their physical and mental health, and their
             language, education and  vocational  skills  when  determining
             whether a person falls within the  general  position  set  out
             above.


         iv) A person with a support network  or  specific  connections  in
             Kabul is likely to be  in  a  more  advantageous  position  on
             return, which may counter a  particular  vulnerability  of  an
             individual on return.


          v)  Although  Kabul  suffered  the  highest  number  of  civilian
             casualties (in the latest UNAMA figures  from  2017)  and  the
             number of security incidents is increasing, the proportion  of
             the population directly affected by the security situation  is
             tiny.  The current security situation in Kabul is not at  such
             a level as  to  render  internal  relocation  unreasonable  or
             unduly harsh.


         Previous Country Guidance


         vi) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation  to  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive remains unaffected by this decision.


        vii) The country guidance in  AK  (Article  15(c))  Afghanistan  CG
             [2012] UKUT 163 (IAC) in relation to the (un)reasonableness of
             internal relocation to Kabul (and other  potential  places  of
             internal relocation) for certain categories of  women  remains
             unaffected by this decision.


       viii) The country guidance in AA (unattended  children)  Afghanistan
             CG [2012] UKUT 00016 (IAC) also  remains  unaffected  by  this
             decision."


11. The Court of Appeal remitted the country guidance on  limited  grounds;
    permission was granted on only two grounds, refusing permission on  the
    three remaining grounds challenging the  Tribunal's  reasoning  on  the
    living conditions that returned asylum-seekers could expect to enjoy on
    return to Kabul.  The Court  of  Appeal  dismissed  the  second  ground
    before it as to whether the Tribunal had  misunderstood/misapplied  the
    principle that the conditions a returned refugee will  face  should  be
    considered in the context of the prevailing  country  conditions.   The
    appeal was allowed by the Court of Appeal on ground 1 in relation to an
    error in the Tribunal's finding as to the scale of the risk  of  injury
    to which residents of Kabul were exposed from 'security incidents', the
    Tribunal having erroneously recorded the risk of  casualties  as  being
    0.01% rather than 0.1% of the population (of  Kabul  province,  of  4.5
    million).  As identified in the Court of Appeal decision,  the  correct
    evidence still indicated that 99.9% of the population of Kabul province
    would not be casualties.

12. It is in the context of that background information and level  of  risk
    that the judge reached the sustainable findings he did  in  respect  of
    the return of this appellant as a failed asylum seeker.

13. I agree with Ms Everett that in this  particular  case  the  judge  had
    found the appellant not to be credible and had found that he had family
    in Afghanistan that he could return to.  Given that the  appellant  has
    been found to be an adult (and indeed would be regardless  of  the  age
    assessment) I accept that there is no material  error  in  the  judge's
    assessment of the risk on return at  the  date  of  decision  and  that
    despite the ongoing difficulties including in  Kabul,  this  appellant,
    who had shown considerable resourcefulness in travelling to the  United
    Kingdom, with the added protection of  family  support  and  no  health
    issues, could be safely returned to Afghanistan.

14. As Ms Everett highlighted, it was not  the  finding  in  the  Court  of
    Appeal that it was unduly harsh for  all  returnees  to  Kabul  at  the
    present time.  I am of the view that the fact that the Court of  Appeal
    have indicated that it is for the Upper Tribunal to decide, in light of
    the UNHCR 2018 guidelines which recommend that internal flight to Kabul
    is generally not available, whether a more extensive reconsideration of
    the country guidance in AS is now required,  does  not  mean  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal fell into error in this appeal.

15. It was not the case that the judge's findings were limited to  reliance
    on the country guidance.  The judge carefully  considered  all  of  the
    evidence before him including the background  country  information  and
    the CPIN on Afghanistan which highlighted the risk factors which should
    be considered, including  the  particular  profile  of  the  individual
    person.  The judge reminded himself (at [43]) that each  case  must  be
    considered on its facts.  Contrary to the original grounds,  the  judge
    adequately considered all the factors relevant to return to Kabul.  The
    judge's findings that this appellant does not have a  profile  and  did
    not fall into any of the risk categories are sustainable.

16. The judge assessed this particular appellant as not at  risk  including
    on the basis of all the relevant  country  information  evidence.   The
    fact that subsequent to that decision the Upper Tribunal has been asked
    to revisit the country guidance, which may entail a wider  review  than
    the narrow basis on which it was remitted, does not disclose  an  error
    in the judge's decision at the date of decision.



Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law and shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  28 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson

