
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06439/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 9 May 2019                        |
|Decision prepared 26 April 2019      |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     SKA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque, a Legal Representative instructed by
                    Diplock Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals, with permission, against a decision of Judge of
the First-tier Tribunal Moore, who in a determination promulgated on 14
February 2019 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision of the
Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The sole issue before me is whether or not the judge was correct to
refuse to grant an application made by the appellant's representative for
an adjournment of the hearing and therefore to go on and determine the
appeal without the evidence of the appellant.  The application for an
adjournment had been made by the appellant's representative on the basis
that on the day of hearing the appellant's wife, who was 28 weeks pregnant,
had fallen and hurt her back and the appellant had had to go with her to
hospital.

3.   The judge refused the application on the basis that the appeal had
been adjourned on two previous occasions.  On the first occasion, the
appeal was adjourned because the appellant was ill and the judge hearing
the appeal, having taken into account the medical certificate, adjourned
the appeal.  On the second occasion, the appellant had attended but the
appeal had to be adjourned because it appeared that he could not understand
the interpreter.  Judge Moore made it clear that he was refusing the
application made by the appellant's representative because of the two
previous adjournments, but he did offer to put back the hearing.  There was
no medical certificate produced at the hearing.  The appellant's
representative then withdrew.

4.   I consider that the judge made an error of law in not adjourning the
appeal.  It is clear that judges had on the two previous occasions
considered that the appropriate course of action was to adjourn the
appeals.  I consider that each application for an adjournment should be
considered on its own merits.  The reasons given by the appellant's
representative at the hearing were clear and understandable.  It was surely
appropriate that the appellant should accompany his wife to hospital, given
that she had hurt her back when falling in the snow, and that he should
remain in hospital with her until she was seen.  There is on the file,
although of course it was not before the judge, clear medical evidence
showing that what the appellant's representative told the judge was true -
that the appellant's wife had had to attend hospital and that it was
appropriate that given that she was 28 weeks pregnant that he should attend
with her.

5.   I consider that in these circumstances it would only be in the
interests of  a fair disposal of the  appeal that it should have been
adjourned and I consider that not to do so was a material error of law.  I
therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Judge and direct that
the appeal proceed to a hearing afresh on all issues.



Decision

The decision of the Judge in the First-tier is set aside

Directions

This appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  Taylor  House.
Bengali interpreter required.  Time estimate three hours.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:  [pic]    Date: 5 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
