
[pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06347/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 13 February 2018                      |On 22 February 2018               |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     ZA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Gaisford, instructed by JD Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ripley promulgated 20.10.17, dismissing on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    13.6.17, to reject his protection claim.

 2. First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Safer  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    29.11.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 13.2.18 as an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

Error of Law

 4. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    such that the decision should be set aside.

 5. The basis of the protection claim was a fear  of  mistreatment  due  to
    membership of a particular social group (PSG),  namely  a  lone  Somali
    female of the Sheikhal minority clan, and fear of her former neighbour,
    alleged to be a member of Al Shabaab.

 6. Judge Ripley accepted that the appellant had demonstrated that she  was
    a minority clan member, and accepted the medical  diagnosis,  including
    that she was suffering from a severe depressive disorder and PTSD; even
    though she had declined and was not  currently  receiving  any  medical
    treatment.

 7.  However,  the  judge  rejected  the  appellant's  factual  account  of
    abduction and subsequent escape, and went on to find, applying MOJ  and
    others (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442  (IAC),  that
    she was not at risk on return. The judge also rejected the  claim  that
    her family and her uncle's family no longer lived in Somalia.

 8. The grounds of application  for  permission  to  appeal  complain  that
    despite accepting the medical evidence and finding that  the  appellant
    had given a consistent  basic  account,  the  claim  of  abduction  was
    rejected because her account of returning to her mother's house  before
    leaving Somalia was totally inconsistent with her  claim  that  it  had
    been too dangerous to even notify her mother than she had  escaped.  It
    is submitted that the judge substituted her own perception of  what  is
    reasonable  when  that  view  was  unsupported  by  evidence  and   was
    dangerously speculative, amounting to an error of law. In  relation  to
    the appellant's family in Somalia, the judge also  erred  by  requiring
    independent evidence of the family's departure and making  mistakes  as
    to dates.

 9. In granting permission on all grounds, Judge Safer  found  it  arguable
    that "the judge may have erred in making an adverse credibility finding
    that a 16-year-old girl with PTSD and a severe depressive disorder  who
    required counselling, and was from a  minority  clan,  would  not  have
    returned to her mother's prior to fleeing the country."

10. In oral submissions, Mr Gaisford relied on KH v Secretary of State  for
    the Home Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1037, and the principles set out at
    [28] to [30],  to  the  effect  that  inherent  probability  can  be  a
    dangerous and even wholly inappropriate  factor  to  rely  on  in  some
    asylum cases. It was not proper to reject an applicant's account merely
    on the basis that it is not credible or not  plausible.  That  some  or
    even most of an appellant's story may seem inherently unlikely does not
    mean that it is untrue. The ingredients of the story and the story as a
    whole have to be considered against the available country evidence  and
    reliable  expert  evidence,  and  other  familiar  factors,   such   as
    consistency with what the appellant has said  before,  and  with  other
    factual evidence, where there is any.

11. Mr Gaisford pointed to the findings of the First-tier Tribunal that the
    appellant had given a consistent account, that the judge  accepted  the
    medical diagnosis, and that the claim to be from a  minority  clan  had
    been accepted. He then took me to the expert  report  at  [28]  through
    [34] where the expert was asked  to  comment  on  the  consistency  and
    plausibility of the appellant's account in the light  of  the  expert's
    knowledge and expertise of the circumstances in Somalia.

12. For the Secretary of State, Mr Nath pointed  to  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal as being detailed and addressing all the  evidence,
    and submitted that it was open  to  the  judge  to  consider  and  make
    findings as to whether the account was accepted. The judge was entitled
    to reach a finding on credibility. In  reply,  Mr  Gaisford  maintained
    that the crucial finding was one of plausibility not credibility.

13. I reserved my decision, so that I could read again and  more  carefully
    the contested parts  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision.  For  the
    reasons set out below, I am satisfied that the findings and conclusions
    were fully open to the judge and  in  particular  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to reject the factual account of  abduction,  for  the  cogent
    reasons set out in the decision.

14. It is clear that the judge had regard to the appellant's mental  health
    and treated her as a vulnerable witness. It is noted at [15]  that  she
    was uncomfortable to talk about her experience of  abduction  and  thus
    questioning was limited in this regard.

15. The  judge  set  out  a  detailed  summary  of  the  evidence  and  the
    submissions, including the medical evidence. At  [44]  the  judge  made
    clear that in considering the appellant's account she took into account
    the effect of her poor mental health and age on her ability to  give  a
    consistent account in interview and at the hearing. The judge  did  not
    compartmentalise the decision. She confirmed that before  reaching  any
    of her conclusions, she considered all the evidence in the  round.  The
    way that evidence was set out and considered bears  testimony  to  that
    approach. It is clear that the judge gave a  careful  consideration  to
    each aspect of the evidence, making some findings  in  the  appellant's
    favour, such as the minority clan membership, and  accepting  that  she
    had given a consistent account.

16. In relation to the claim of abduction, it was the appellant's case that
    she had been propositioned and threated by a neighbour who  was  an  Al
    Shabaab militant. A few days later, she was abducted and held for  five
    months, during which time  she  was  beaten  and  raped,  before  being
    assisted to escape by neighbours, taking shelter in her  uncle's  home.
    After three months, she returned home and lived with her mother  for  a
    further two months before leaving Somalia.

17. The judge considered and agreed with the submission of the Secretary of
    State in the RFR that the appellant would have remained  in  hiding  at
    her uncle's for three months after her escape  without  ever  notifying
    her mother, even though she knew her mother was looking  for  her.  The
    reason given for this was in case the neighbour learnt  where  she  was
    hiding. The judge then considered the point made in the  RFR  that  the
    appellant's return home, the only reason  for  which  "because  it  was
    difficult living in someone  else's  home,"  was  inconsistent  with  a
    claimed fear of a  neighbour  who  had  kidnapped  her  and  raped  and
    mistreated her over a period of 5 months.

18. At [52] the judge took into account the appellant's further explanation
    for this behaviour, not telling her  mother  where  she  was  and  then
    returning home for two months. She said that she was  worried  that  if
    her mother knew where she was, she would come to see her and  might  be
    followed, or would beg her to return home. In interview, she  said  she
    returned home because her mother was always worrying about her.

19. I am satisfied that the judge was entitled to consider and  assess  the
    credibility of the abduction  account  and  the  explanations  for  not
    telling her mother where she was and for  returning  home  despite  the
    claimed fear of the neighbour. As  the  judge  stated  at  [52]  it  is
    difficult to understand why she would not have sought to let her mother
    know that she was  safe  after  escaping,  whilst  minimising  risk  to
    herself. There were ways,  such  as  having  another  person  tell  her
    mother, or telephoning  her,  without  disclosing  where  she  was  and
    explaining why she did not feel it safe to come home. At [53] the judge
    noted another  explanation  for  returning  home,  that  she  had  only
    returned to say goodbye, but then stayed for  two  months  because  the
    agent took longer than expected. The judge concluded that if it was not
    safe to be at her mother's home,  which  was  the  reason  for  neither
    returning home after escape nor letting her mother know where she  was,
    then the appellant did not need to remain at her mother's home; she had
    not stated that she was unable  to  remain  longer  or  return  to  her
    uncle's home.

20. At [55] the judge reiterated that she had  considered  and  taken  into
    account the appellant's young age, and the effect of  the  poor  mental
    health, and  noted  that  her  basic  account  had  remained  the  same
    throughout. The judge then addressed again the medical evidence and the
    country expert evidence. The latter  confirmed  that  young  women  are
    abducted, raped and abused. It was specifically noted that  the  expert
    found plausible the appellant's account of staying with her  uncle  and
    not telling her mother, and then staying at home with her mother before
    leaving Somalia.

21. For my own part, I find that on this issue the expert  was  effectively
    straying beyond the boundaries of expert opinion in  that  set  out  at
    [33] of the report, losing his objectivity and thus the reliability  of
    his opinion. As the judge noted at [58], the expert did not explain why
    he accepted that part of the account following the  escape;  he  simply
    stated that he found it plausible. It is not for the expert to  profess
    merely that he believes the account; that is  not  his  responsibility.
    Frankly, I fail to see how the issue as to why the  appellant  did  not
    let her mother know  where  she  was  and  the  inconsistency  of  then
    returning home can have anything to do with expert evidence of  country
    background knowledge and/or experience. It is a matter for the judge to
    assess in the light of the evidence as a whole.

22. I also note that the judge went on to consider at [59] and  [60]  other
    aspects of the account that troubled her. Finally, at  [61]  the  judge
    reiterated that she took into account that the appellant  suffers  from
    the medical conditions identified by the  psychiatrist,  but  concluded
    that having  considered  the  evidence  overall,  the  account  of  the
    abduction was not accepted.

23. I am satisfied that the conclusion reached on this issue  was  entirely
    open to the judge on the careful assessment of evidence.  This  finding
    and conclusion does  not  amount  to  the  judge  merely  applying  her
    subjective opinion as to what a young woman from Somalia might or might
    not do. It was a credibility finding and not  a  plausibility  finding,
    one for  which  cogent  reasons  were  provided,  including  the  total
    inconsistency between the reasoning proffered by the appellant for  not
    telling her mother where she was and then for returning home after all.

24. Similarly, I am satisfied that the judge has provided cogent  reasoning
    for rejecting the appellant's claim that she has no family  in  Somalia
    to return to. It is clear that the judge assessed the evidence  in  the
    round, making due allowance for the appellant's age and mental  health.
    Nothing turns on the alleged error in dates. No material error  of  law
    is disclosed in this ground.

Conclusion & Decision

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I consider it appropriate  to
make anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Breach  of  this  order
may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.


     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Date:
