
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06829/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 January 2019                    |On 18 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                               MOIZ SAIFUDEEN
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jafferji
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Moiz Saifudeen, was born on 29 May 1965 and  is  a  male
    citizen of Sri Lanka.  By a decision dated 16 May 2018,  the  Secretary
    of State refused the appellant international protection.  The appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge S  L  Farmer)  which,  in  a
    decision promulgated on  10  July  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.  First, the appellant  challenges  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge on the basis of  the  judge's
    failure properly to consider the historic injustice which the appellant
    claims to have suffered on account of the failure of the  Secretary  of
    State to have  regard  to  the  operation  of  paragraph  395C  of  the
    Immigration Rules:

         'Before a decision to remove under Section 10 is given, regard will
         be had to all the relevant factors known to the Secretary of State,
         including:

         (i)  age;

         (ii) length of residence in the United Kingdom;

         (iii)    strength of connections with the United Kingdom;

         (iv) personal history including character, conduct  and  employment
         record;

         (v)  domestic circumstances;

         (vi) previous criminal record and the nature  of  any  offence  for
         which the person has been convicted;

         (vii)    compassionate circumstances;

         (viii)   any representations received on the person's behalf.

         In the case of family members the factors listed in paragraphs  365
         to 368 must also be taken into account'

 3. The chronology is briefly as follows.  The appellant entered the United
    Kingdom in December 2001 on a  visit  visa.   He  overstayed.   He  was
    encountered working illegally and  served  with  a  Form  IS151A  on  6
    October 2008.  He made a human rights application on  2  December  2008
    which was rejected by the Secretary of State on 10 February  2009.   He
    made a further human rights application on  17  April  2009  which  was
    refused by a notice dated 15 May 2009.  A further application  made  by
    the appellant on 26 June 2009  was  also  rejected  with  no  right  of
    appeal.  The appellant made yet another  application  on  human  rights
    grounds on 24 April 2015 which was  refused  on  14  May  2015.   On  6
    January 2018, the appellant was advised that his removal to  Sri  Lanka
    was imminent.  On 16 January 2018 he made further submissions but these
    were rejected and the decision certified.  Finally, on 26  March  2018,
    the appellant claimed asylum.  Notwithstanding his earlier human rights
    applications, this was the first occasion upon which the appellant  had
    claimed international protection.  By a decision dated 16 May 2018, the
    Secretary of State refused the asylum application which is the  subject
    of the appeal now before the Tribunal.

 4. The appellant relies on  the  former  paragraph  395C  of  HC  395  (as
    amended) which is no longer in force.  On 13 February  2012,  paragraph
    395C was replaced by a new paragraph 395B.

 5. The appellant argues that the Secretary of State's decision of 23 March
    2011 was flawed.  The decision erroneously stated  that  the  appellant
    should leave the United Kingdom; an enforcement decision  had  in  fact
    already been made.  As a result of the Secretary of State's  error,  no
    consideration was then given to the operation of  paragraph  395C.   In
    turn, the appellant would have benefitted from a revised policy of  the
    Secretary of State (August 2009) to treat a residence albeit illegal of
    six-eight years as significant.  By the  relevant  date  in  2011,  the
    appellant had been living in the United  Kingdom  for  more  than  nine
    years.  The appellant argues that there was  a  "good  chance"  that  a
    consideration by the Secretary of State at paragraph  395C  would  have
    led to a grant  of  leave  to  remain.   As  it  was,  the  appellant's
    submissions on this point were ignored by the Secretary of State.

 6. Judge Farmer's decision deals first with the appellant's claim to be at
    real risk in Sri Lanka on account of his associations  with  the  LTTE.
    Judge Roundly rejected that claim and credibility  of  the  appellant's
    account.  Her findings have not been challenged on appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  I am told that paragraph 395C was raised  before  the  judge
    but she makes no mention of it in her decision.  She does deal with the
    question of delay at [52].

 7. Whilst I accept that written representations were made  in  respect  of
    paragraph 395C by the appellant's representatives  (I  have  copies  of
    their letters) I do not find that the  issue  was  specifically  raised
    with Judge Farmer.  The judge at [21] has given a detailed  summary  of
    the submissions made by both representatives.  Further, the grounds  of
    appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  make  no  specific  reference  to
    paragraph 395C.  The appellant was represented  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by Mr Burrett.  He submitted to  the  judge  that  there  were
    "exceptional circumstances that warrant looking outside the Rules".  He
    referred to the "fact of delay in this case  where  the  appellant  has
    been denied a right of appeal in his human rights decisions  since  his
    application was made in 2008".  That would appear to be a reference  to
    the certification of previous claims by the appellant.  The judge  then
    recorded that Mr Burrett

         "... states the fact that [the appellant] has been in  the  UK  for
         seventeen to eighteen years (in fact  sixteen  and  a  half  years)
         together with the other  factors  means  that  when  balancing  the
         public interest considerations and looking at proportionality it is
         not proportionate to remove the appellant, especially as to say for
         his immigration status he has no illegal conduct.  The delay is  so
         significant in this case so as to be exceptional."

 8. First, I find that it is not surprising that the judge  has  not  dealt
    with paragraph 395C and the arguments previously made by the  appellant
    since  these  matters  were  not  raised  directly  with  her  by   the
    appellant's  representative.   Significantly,  the   claimed   historic
    injustice was not raised in the grounds of  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Secondly, even if I am wrong and the judge should have dealt
    with paragraph 395C, I do not find  that  she  has  fallen  into  legal
    error.  The appellant complains that the Secretary  of  State  did  not
    consider paragraph 395C before  making  the  decision  to  remove  him.
    Arguably, therefore, the Secretary of State's decision  to  remove  was
    not lawful and the  appellant  had  available  to  him  the  remedy  of
    judicial review which  significantly  he  took  no  steps  to  utilise.
    Moreover, neither paragraph 395C nor the respondent's  policy  (I  have
    not been provided with a  copy)  would  appear  to  have  guaranteed  a
    decision in favour of the appellant.  Indeed, Mr Jafferji, who appeared
    before me in  the  Upper  Tribunal,  accepted  that  the  operation  of
    paragraph 395C was not a "trump card" for the appellant; was  merely  a
    factor that should have been  taken  into  account  in  the  Article  8
    analysis.  Judge Farmer's analysis of Article 8 appears at [42] et seq.
     The judge has properly considered whether the  appellant  could  bring
    himself within the provisions of paragraph 276ADE and concluded that he
    could not do so.  He has thereafter  carried  out  a  consideration  of
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules by reference to  Razgar  [2004]
    UKHL 27.    Her  analysis  of  Article  8  is  thorough  and  carefully
    structured.  She has applied to various statutory provisions of Section
    117B of the 2002 Act (as amended).  She has specifically looked at  the
    question of delay [51-52].  She  was  aware  also  that  the  appellant
    complied   with   the   reporting   restrictions   imposed   on    him.
    Notwithstanding the delay and other factors in the appellant's  favour,
    the judge's finding that the appellant had not  "produced  evidence  of
    longstanding friendships or ties to the community" is plainly available
    to her on the evidence.  She has given cogent reasons for finding that,
    notwithstanding his long residence, the appellant should not be granted
    leave under Article 8 ECHR outside  the  Rules.   Further,  as  I  have
    indicated above, I am not satisfied that the question of paragraph 395C
    was ever raised before Judge Farmer.

 9. I have considered whether, had Judge Farmer  expressly  considered  the
    relevance of any submissions regarding paragraph 395C in the assessment
    of proportionality, whether this made  a  material  difference  to  her
    decision.  I have concluded that it would not have done so.   Paragraph
    395C together with the Home Office policy in force at  the  time  would
    not have guaranteed the  appellant  grant  of  leave  to  remain.   The
    appellant had  every  opportunity  to  challenge  the  failure  of  the
    Secretary of State to consider paragraph 395C by judicial  review.   He
    chose not to do so.  I am not satisfied that submissions in respect  of
    the paragraph 395C issue would have made any difference to the  outcome
    of the judge's analysis of Article 8 outside the Rules.  With regard to
    the question of delay (which is the subject of  the  second  ground  of
    appeal) I have dealt with this above.  I am satisfied that Judge Farmer
    has considered the  question  of  delay  and  has  reached  an  outcome
    available to her on the evidence.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 2 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 2 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
