
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06399/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2021                           |                              |
|                                             |On 19th May 2021              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                    TSAO
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, instructed by Fadiga & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the bundles on the court file, the contents of which I have recorded. The
order made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Nigeria born in 1973. His wife and five
children are dependent on his claim. The Appellant appeals against the
decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burnett promulgated on 26 November
2020 dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his protection claim on
asylum, humanitarian protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant's claim can be summarised as follows. On 9 January 2013,
the Appellant obtained a multi-entry visit visa to the UK valid until
January 2018. It is the Appellant's case that on 12 April 2014 his friend
[KO], a member of the All Progressive Congress [APC], was killed after
being targeted by members of the Peoples Democratic Party [PDP]. In
September 2014, his wife was attacked at their home by PDP members (who
came to kill the Appellant) sustaining an injury to her eye. The elections
took place in Nigeria on 28/29 March 2015. In April 2015, the Appellant's
mother died and the Appellant claimed this was a result of the regular
attacks on his family by the PDP. In May 2015, the Appellant came to the UK
with two of his children for a two-week visit. In July 2015, the
Appellant's wife was attacked again at their home causing an injury to her
hand.

3.   On 30 November 2015, the Appellant, his wife and five children came to
the UK. The Appellant returned to Nigeria at some point thereafter and
claimed that there was an attempt to kill him when his home was broken into
and his car was vandalised. After this the Appellant decided to return to
the UK and he arrived in March 2016. The Appellant's wife claimed asylum in
September 2016, giving the Appellant as her dependant and the Appellant
himself claimed on 27 December 2017, naming his wife and children as his
dependants.

4.   The First-tier Tribunal Judge made the following relevant findings.

(i)  The Appellant was involved in politics at a low level. He had no
particular profile and certainly not a high one.

(ii) There was little to support the Appellant's account of his role and
level of involvement in the APC between 2012 and 2016.

(iii)    The judge gave little weight to the letter from the APC dated 21
April 2020 because the information contained in the letter came from the
Appellant and therefore was not independent.

(iv) The judge attached little weight to the expert report from Mario
Aguilar for the reasons given at [58] to [60].

(v)  The judge attached little weight to the medical report showing that
the Appellant's wife had suffered a retinal detachment of her eye in
September 2014 for the reasons given at [61]. The judge did not accept that
it was due to an attack by the PDP upon the Appellant's wife.

(vi) The judge found that, given the chronology of events, it was not
credible that the Appellant came to the UK on holiday with two of his
children in May 2015 for two weeks.

(vii)    The Appellant and his family resided in Nigeria from May 2015 to
30 November 2015 when they came to the UK. (The Appellant went back to
Nigeria).

(viii)   The Appellant returned to the UK in March 2016 to his family, who
remained here.  Their daughter started school in January 2016 and the
Appellant's wife had applied to enrol her in December 2015. The judge found
that this undermined the Appellant's credibility because he had not yet
claimed asylum and so the family had no basis to stay at that point.

(viii)   The Appellant arrived in March 2016 but did not claim asylum until
December 2017 and wife did not claim until September 2016.

(ix) The judge concluded that these were not the actions of someone in need
of genuine protection.

(x)  It was accepted that there were tensions between the APC and PDP at
the time of the elections in 2015.

(xi) The judge did not accept that the Appellant was caught up in those
attacks.

(xii)    The Appellant had failed to establish any risk profile for members
or supporters of the APC.

(xiii)   The current President of Nigeria is from the APC Party.

(xiv)    The Appellant has failed to demonstrate that he would have been
targeted as described given his political profile.

(xv) The Appellant and his wife were unsatisfactory witnesses and most of
the Appellant's claims were incredible.

(xvi)    The judge rejected the Appellant's claim to have been the subject
of attacks by the PDP opposition.

(xvii) In conclusion, the Appellant had attempted to create a claim to
asylum and there was no risk of persecution to the Appellant in Nigeria
from the opposition party or anyone else.

5.   Permission to appeal was sought on three grounds.

         (1)  The judge's finding that the Appellant failed to demonstrate
         there was any risk profile for members or supporters of the APC was
         perverse, given that it was accepted that there was political
         violence during the 2015 election and there was expert evidence of
         a greater level of violence in Osun State.  The judge erred in law
         in rejecting the Appellant's account for the sole reason that it
         was implausible.  Secondly, the judge failed to consider the
         further attacks on the Appellant's wife and in particular the
         attack on the Appellant himself in 2016 and the judge misapplied
         section 8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.) Act
         2004.

         (2)  The judge failed to give reasons for finding the Appellant's
         wife was not credible, given the medical evidence of assault/trauma
         and the background evidence of violence at the time of the
         elections.

         (3)  There was a failure to properly consider the expert evidence
         or alternatively the judge's conclusions were perverse in light of
         that expert evidence.

6.   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Martin on 5
January 2021 for the following reasons. "It is arguable, as asserted in the
grounds, that the judge has erred in giving no reasons for rejecting the
evidence of the Appellant's wife who it was claimed was attacked herself
more than once. Her evidence is not set out and so the lack of findings
about what she said may be material. While the other grounds are less
strong, all may be argued."

7.   In the Rule 24 response dated 18 January 2021, the Respondent
submitted that the judge had assessed the Appellant's claim looking at all
the evidence in the round and had provided a detailed explanation for why
the Appellant's account failed at [52] to [70] of the decision. The judge
considered the background information and expert report, correctly noting
that there was no specific evidence regarding incidents against members of
the APC. The expert had not considered key evidence in the Appellant's
history and there was a lack of recent 'on the ground' analysis to enable
the expert to determine the level of risk generally to the party and its
members for the reasons given at [58], [59] and [65] of the decision.

8.   The judge had regard to the evidence of the Appellant's wife and there
was nothing in the grounds to suggest that the Appellant's wife's evidence
had any significant difference to that given by the Appellant: [54] and
[69] of the decision. It was open to the judge to find that the Appellant
and his wife were not credible. The judge would not need to give separate
reasons if the evidence in and of itself was manifestly the same.

9.   Given the Tribunal's rejection of the Appellant's claim it was
submitted that the expert report addressing the issue of internal
relocation would only be partially of assistance because the basis of the
Appellant's fear had fallen away. It was open to the judge to find that the
Appellant would not be at risk and the judge had given a number of reasons
for why he attached little weight to the expert report at [58] to [60].

10.  In conclusion, the decision was sufficiently reasoned to enable the
Appellant to understand why his appeal failed and the outcome was one which
was reasonable on the evidence presented: Shizad (sufficiency of reasons:
set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085.



Submissions

11.  Mr Eaton relied on his skeleton argument dated 8 February 2021. He
submitted that, in relation to ground 2, the judge failed to give any
reasons for not accepting the evidence of the Appellant's wife and for
concluding that she was not a satisfactory witness. The evidence of the
Appellant's wife was important because she gave evidence about two specific
acts to which the Appellant was not a party. The Appellant's wife gave
evidence of persecution and her account was supported by medical evidence.
The judge wrongly rejected this evidence at [61] and failed to give reasons
for doing so.  The medical evidence showed that the Appellant's wife
received a blow to her eye.  There were no reasons why Appellant's wife was
not a satisfactory witness, given the medical evidence supporting her
injury. This could not be a clearer error of law. The judge had ignored the
evidence of a witness notwithstanding there were two medical reports which
supported her account of being attacked in the way she described. The
Respondent's submission that the Appellant's wife was not credible because
the Appellant was not credible was an erroneous approach because the
Appellant's wife gave evidence of incidents to which the Appellant was not
a party.

12.  In addressing ground 1, Mr Eaton submitted it was accepted there was
evidence of political violence around the 2015 elections and the judge
accepted the Appellant's involvement in politics at that time. The judge
failed to give adequate reasons for rejecting the Appellant's account. At
[62], the judge ignored two key events, namely the attack on the
Appellant's wife in July 2015 and the attack on the Appellant in 2016. This
final incident caused the Appellant to leave Nigeria and come back to the
UK. The judge had failed to consider the ongoing attacks on the family
after the elections. He had a mistaken view that there were no incidents
after the elections and this was the only reason for not accepting the
Appellant's account. Against the background of political violence at the
time of the election and the accepted membership of a political party,
coupled with evidence from the Appellant's wife of two attacks, there was
no reason why the Appellant's account was not credible.

13.  Mr Eaton submitted the Appellant came to the UK in May 2015 because he
thought that the violence would end after the election. The judge had
rejected his account on implausibility grounds, which were insufficient.
The Appellant returned to Nigeria and was subject to a further attack,
which the judge failed to consider. The judge's reason for rejecting the
Appellant's account was that he did not believe the Appellant would behave
in this way. These reasons were not sustainable.

14.  In relation to ground 3, Mr Eaton submitted it was uncontentious the
Appellant may have been subject to violence around the time of the
elections. The judge had not reached a finding that the Appellant's fear
was not well-founded. The evidence before the judge demonstrated that there
was something more going on. Internal relocation was not a sustainable
finding, on the basis that the level of political violence elsewhere was
less, if it was likely that the Appellant was a victim of political
violence. In summary, the judge had failed to consider the evidence of the
Appellant's wife, there were no reasons for the Appellant's lack of
credibility and the judge had not properly dealt with sufficiency of
protection and internal relocation.

15.  Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response and his skeleton argument
dated 1 February 2021. He submitted the judge had properly set out the
Appellant's and the Respondent's positions and the submissions made before
him. The judge had taken into account all relevant matters and had made
clear findings. The findings at [58] to [70] were open to the judge on the
evidence before him and included consideration of the expert evidence and
the medical evidence. The judge had given clear findings on credibility.
There was no claim for asylum for many months after the Appellant came to
the UK in 2016. This undermined the Appellant's credibility, given the
claimed attack on his wife in 2014. The judge took into account the
subsequent attack on the Appellant's wife in July 2015 at [17] and [30].
The Appellant and his wife gave consistent evidence. The children were
enrolled in school a year before the asylum claim was made. There was a
lack of evidence in the expert report. The judge's rejection of the
Appellant's credibility was open to him on the evidence before him and
there was no background evidence that violence continued after the
elections in March 2015.

16.  Mr Melvin submitted the judge made an assessment of the Appellant's
claim as a whole.  The evidence of the Appellant's wife was consistent with
that of the Appellant, therefore it was not necessary for the judge to make
specific findings on evidence of the same events. The Appellant said that
he was 'elusive' and the judge rejected the evidence of the Appellant and
his wife in considering the totality of the evidence. The medical evidence
did not show that the trauma to his wife's eye was caused by politically
motivated violence. The eye injury could have been caused by any type of
accident. Although there was no specific paragraph dealing with the
evidence of the Appellant's wife, she was referred to in many of the
judge's findings which were open to him. Looked at holistically, the
decision was sustainable. The grounds of challenge amounted to
disagreements with those findings and repeated the submissions made before
the judge.

17.  In response to a question from me about the adequacy of reasons, Mr
Melvin submitted the claim had to be looked at in the round. The judge
found the claim was without credibility and one of the reasons given was
the settling of the family one year before the asylum claim was made. Mr
Melvin submitted that, if the Appellant and his wife had experienced the
difficulties claimed, they would have sought asylum sooner. The judge found
there was no real evidence that the Appellant would suffer sustained
political violence if returned in 2021. Against the evidence that there was
some violence in 2015, the Appellant's own party now maintained power in
the 2019 elections.  It was difficult to see on the evidence before the
judge, given the Appellant's political weight, that the Appellant would be
at risk. There was no evidence that supporters of the APC were at general
risk of persecution. In any event, the Appellant could internally relocate.
There was no real evidence of a well-founded fear of persecution. Any error
in not recording the judge's conclusions about the evidence of the
Appellant's wife was not material to the outcome of this case.

18.  In response, Mr Eaton submitted the judge had fundamentally failed to
look at the evidence in the round. There was accepted evidence of political
violence at the time of the elections and the Appellant was politically
active at that time. Given the evidence of the attacks on the Appellant's
wife, and considering all these matters in the round, the judge should have
come to a different conclusion. The judge had failed to consider the attack
in July 2015 at [62]. It was clear the judge was confused about the
timeline because he found that there was a six-month period when nothing
happened.  On the contrary, something quite significant happened. The only
point the judge made to support his credibility finding was that the family
did not run away straight away. These reasons were not sufficient. The
judge had to make findings on key parts of the evidence. The evidence of
trauma to the Appellant's wife's eye, although not conclusive, was
corroborative and the judge failed to consider it. There were no sufficient
reasons for finding the Appellant's claim was not credible.



Conclusions and Reasons

19.  The judge accepted there was political violence during the 2015
elections and the Appellant was politically active at that time, although
at a low level. Thereafter, the judge rejected the remainder of the
Appellant's claim. The grounds submit that, given these accepted findings,
the judge's finding that the Appellant was not at risk as a member of the
APC was perverse and lacked reasons.

20.  Ground 1: I am not persuaded by Mr Eaton's submission that the judge
failed to consider the attack on the Appellant's wife in July 2015 for the
following reasons. The judge stated at [10] that he had taken into account
the evidence of the Appellant's wife and referred to her statement. The
judge specifically referred to the attack in July 2015 at [17] and [30].
The judge stated at [68]: "In forming my conclusions above I have had
careful regard to the Appellant's wife's evidence." At [62] the judge
acknowledged the Appellant's wife was attacked on several occasions, in
particular September 2014. I am satisfied the judge took into account the
attack on the Appellant's wife in July 2015 in finding that the claim was
not credible.

21.  I am similarly of the view that the judge was well aware of the
Appellant's claim to have been attacked on return to Nigeria in 2015/2016.
The judge set out this part of the Appellant's claim at [19] and [20] and
any failure to specifically refer to this at [62] was not material because
the judge noted the chronology of the Appellant's claim, which he had
previously set out at [13] to [20]. The judge took into account the
Appellant's witness statement at [10] and [21] and his explanation for
going to the UK on holiday at [22]. The judge considered the submissions of
the parties at [39] to [48]. I am satisfied the judge considered the
totality of the Appellant's claim.

22.  I am not persuaded by Mr Eaton's submission that the only reason for
rejecting the Appellant's credibility was that the judge relied on the
implausibility of his account.  On the contrary, the judge gave several
reasons for why he did not accept the Appellant's account. The judge gave
adequate reasons for placing little weight on the documentary evidence at
[57] to [61]. The oral evidence of the Appellant and his wife was rejected
because the Appellant went on holiday to the UK soon after he claimed to
have suffered persecution in Nigeria. The Appellant relied on three
significant events which he attributed to the PDP: his friend/colleague,
KO, was killed; his mother died and his wife sustained a serious injury to
her eye. Further, the Appellant returned to Nigeria (after his two-week
holiday) where he remained for six months before bringing his family to the
UK. The Appellant then returned to Nigeria alone where he remained for a
further four months. In addition, the Appellant and his wife did not claim
asylum at the first opportunity and there was a significant delay which
undermined their credibility. I find that the judge's reasons were
sufficient to support his conclusion that the Appellant's claim lacked
credibility and there was no misapplication of section 8 of the 2004 Act.

23.  The judge considered the background evidence of violence between the
parties before and after the elections in 2015 and found that the Appellant
had failed to show that he and his family were caught up in that violence
at [64]. The judge took into account the circumstances existing at the date
of hearing, namely the President of Nigeria was from the APC party, in
concluding the Appellant had failed to establish any risk profile for
members or supporters of the APC or that he would be at risk on return. The
judge's findings were open to him on the evidence before him. There was no
error of law as alleged in ground 1.

24.  Ground 2: I accept that the judge did not deal with the evidence of
the Appellant's wife in a separate paragraph and it would have been wise
for him to do so. The evidence of the Appellant's wife was consistent with
that of the Appellant and it is apparent from [68] that the judge took her
evidence into account. I am satisfied that when the decision is read as a
whole and consideration is given to [10], [17], [30], [61], [62], [63],
[67] and [68] that the judge considered how the evidence of the Appellant's
wife supported the Appellant's claim. The judge gave adequate reasons for
attaching little weight to the medical evidence. Mr Eaton specifically
referred me to this evidence in submissions. The judge did not accept that
the trauma was caused by an attack by the PDP. This finding was open to the
judge on the evidence before him.

25.  The Appellant claimed his wife was attacked by members of the PDP at
their home when they came to kill him. The Appellant claimed he had managed
to evade his persecutors because he was 'elusive'.  The judge found that,
had the Appellant's wife sustained such a terrible attack, it was not
credible the Appellant would have left her alone in Nigeria with three
children while he went on holiday in the UK with two of his children. The
judge gave adequate reasons for why he attached little weight to the
medical evidence at [61] and why the account of the attack on the
Appellant's wife in September 2014 was not accepted.

26.  The Appellant's claim that his wife was attacked because of his
political involvement was undermined by his visit to the UK shortly after
the elections and the claimed attack on his wife. If the Appellant
genuinely believed he and his wife were at risk of persecution at that
time, it was not credible he would have left her and three of his children
in order to visit the UK for two weeks. The Appellant's claim is further
undermined by his return to Nigeria on two occasions after the attack and
threats to his life.

27.  The Appellant's explanation that he came to the UK in May 2015 because
he did not consider his wife would be at risk at that time supports the
judge's conclusion at [69] that there was no risk of persecution to the
Appellant or his wife from the opposition party in Nigeria or anyone else.
The judge did not misunderstand the evidence and did not solely rely on
section 8 to determine the entirety of the credibility of the Appellant's
claim.

28.  The judge gave adequate reasons at [61] to [63] and [66] for why the
accounts of the Appellant and his wife were not credible. The background
material does not establish any risk profile for members or supporters of
the APC and the current President of Nigeria is from the APC Party. The
tension and violence between the parties at the time of the 2015 elections
did not give rise to a well-founded fear of persecution and the Appellant
would not be at risk on return in 2021. The Appellant's own actions
demonstrate he did not have a well-founded fear of persecution. There was
no material error of law as alleged in ground 2.

29.  Ground 3: The judge considered the expert evidence at [58] to [60] and
gave cogent reasons for the weight he attached to the expert report. The
acceptance of a high level of political violence in Osun State during the
2015 elections and the Appellant's low level political involvement with the
APC was insufficient to demonstrate that the Appellant had a well-founded
fear of persecution or that he would be at risk of persecution on return to
Nigeria in 2021. Issues concerning sufficiency of protection and internal
relocation were not relevant in this case. The Appellant's human rights
claims were not pursued and were not the subject of this challenge.

30.  I find that there is no material error of law in the judge's decision
promulgated on 26 November 2020 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of Decision

Appeal dismissed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 30 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have dismissed the appeal I make no fee award.


     J Frances

Signed   Date: 30 April 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances



        _____________________________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email

