
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06422/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at  Priory Courts Birmingham            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 February 2019                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     KHM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Mr A W Khan of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:      Mr M Diwnycz Senior Home Office presenting officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born 8  December  1988.  He  appeals
    against a decision of  Judge  Graham  (the  judge)  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal promulgated following a hearing on 19 March 2018.

 2. The appellant made a claim for  international  protection  claiming  to
    fear his tribe in Iraq because he had refused to marry the daughter  of
    the tribal leader. Because  of  that  refusal  she  had  made  a  false
    allegation of rape against him and a warrant had been  issued  for  his
    arrest.  He  also  feared  persecution  because  he  had  converted  to
    Christianity while in Iraq.

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 21 May 2016 with a  business  visa,  to
    attend a training course. He returned to Iraq on  14  August  2016.  He
    then returned to the UK on 15 October 2016 and  claimed  asylum  on  18
    November 2016.

 4. The respondent refused the international protection  and  human  rights
    claim on 19 June 2017. At the appeal hearing on 19 March 2018 the judge
    heard evidence from the appellant and four witnesses from a  church  he
    attended including the Pastor.

 5. There was no issue raised as to the appellant's nationality or  Kurdish
    ethnicity. The  judge  made  an  adverse  credibility  finding  as  the
    appellant did not claim asylum  immediately  upon  arrival  in  the  UK
    although he had claimed that he left Iraq in October 2016  in  fear  of
    his life, but the judge made  it  clear  that  she  did  not  base  her
    credibility findings on that issue alone.

 6. The judge did not find the appellant to be a credible witness. She  did
    not accept that there was an arranged marriage with the daughter of the
    tribal leader and did not accept that he had been accused of  rape  and
    therefore concluded that the  appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  from
    members of his tribe.

 7. The judge did not accept  the  appellant  had  genuinely  converted  to
    Christianity.  With  reference  to  the  witnesses  she  concluded   at
    paragraph 29 that they were witnesses of truth, but she  was  satisfied
    that the appellant had misled them as to his interest in Christianity.

 8. The appellant, through his solicitors, applied for permission to appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. It was contended that the judge had erred in law
    by  failing  to  provide  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant was not a genuine convert to Christianity. It  was  submitted
    that the judge had failed to provide adequate  reasons  for  concluding
    that although the four witnesses were witnesses of truth, they had been
    misled by the appellant.

 9. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Bird who  found  it  arguable
    that the judge had provided inadequate reasons.

10. Following the grant of permission to appeal  the  respondent  lodged  a
    response pursuant to rule 24 of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Procedure  Rules
    2008. In summary it was contended that the  judge  had  given  adequate
    reasons for finding that the appellant's account of his  conversion  to
    Christianity was not  credible  and  it  was  submitted  that  the  FTT
    decision did not disclose a material error of law.

My Consideration and Conclusions

11. At the oral hearing before me Mr Khan  relied  upon  the  grounds  upon
    which permission to appeal had been  granted  and  submitted  that  the
    judge had failed to make adequate findings regarding  the  evidence  of
    four witnesses who confirmed their  belief  that  the  appellant  is  a
    genuine Christian.

12. Mr Diwnycz relied upon the rule 24  response  and  submitted  that  the
    reasoning provided by the judge was adequate.

13. There had been no challenge to the credibility  findings  made  by  the
    judge in which she concluded that the appellant would not  be  at  risk
    from his tribe if he returned to Iraq, because he  had  not  agreed  to
    enter an arranged marriage and he had not been accused  of  rape.  That
    therefore was not in issue before me.

14. The appellant's challenge  is  based  on  inadequacy  of  reasoning  in
    relation to the claimed conversion to Christianity. Guidance  has  been
    given on adequacy of reasoning in  Budathoki  (reasons  for  decisions)
    [2014] UKUT 341 (IAC). In  summary  the  guidance  states  that  it  is
    generally unnecessary and unhelpful  for  FTT  judgements  to  rehearse
    every detail or issue raised  in  a  case.  This  leads  to  judgements
    becoming overly long and confused and is not a  proportionate  approach
    to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary for judges to identify and
    resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in  clear  and  brief
    terms their reasons, so that the parties can understand why  they  have
    won or lost.

15. I am satisfied that the judge applied the principles set out above  and
    provided adequate reasons for her conclusion that the appellant had not
    genuinely converted to Christianity. Those  reasons  are  contained  at
    paragraphs 26-28 and summarised at paragraph 29.

16. Budathoki makes it clear that it  is  not  necessary  to  set  out  the
    evidence given by the witnesses. It is clear from the FTT decision that
    the  witnesses  believed  the  appellant  to  be  a   genuine   convert
    Christianity and the  judge  accepted  them  as  genuine  and  truthful
    witnesses. It is a matter for the judge to decide what weight to attach
    to evidence given by witnesses. It is not suggested that the judge  has
    made perverse or irrational findings and I find that she has  not.  The
    question to be decided is whether she has provided  sufficient  reasons
    for findings, so that the appellant can understand why his  appeal  was
    unsuccessful.

17. In giving reasons the judge found at paragraph 26 that the  appellant's
    credibility was adversely  affected  because  despite  claiming  to  be
    interested in Christianity while in Iraq, he did not attend any  church
    in Iraq prior to his baptism.  In addition he was in the UK between May
    and August  2016,  when  according  to  his  evidence  he  had  already
    converted to Christianity but he chose not to attend a  church  in  the
    UK. He did not become baptised in the UK, which is a safe country,  but
    returned to Iraq and claims then to  have  been  baptised  despite  the
    risks of converting to Christianity in Iraq.

18. The judge found that the appellant's credibility was adversely affected
    because his evidence was that he had  travelled  to  Kirkuk  to  become
    baptised where he would not be recognised, but then claimed that a  few
    days after his baptism he had openly visited a church in his home  area
    where he would be recognised.

19. At paragraph 28 the judge noted that the appellant had produced a  copy
    Baptism Certificate and although he said he had provided  the  original
    to his solicitors, the original had not been provided.  The  judge  was
    not satisfied that weight should be attached to a copy document because
    of changes that can take place during the copying process. In  addition
    the judge found against the appellant because he had not  provided  any
    explanation as to why he would choose to  be  baptised  in  a  Catholic
    church in Iraq, but subsequently chose to attend an Evangelical  church
    in the UK. The judge noted that the Pastor confirmed  that  his  church
    was  Evangelical  and  there  were  significant   differences   between
    Evangelical and Catholic churches.

20. The findings made by the  judge  in  paragraphs  26-28  have  not  been
    specifically challenged on  behalf  the  appellant,  as  the  challenge
    relates to paragraph 29 and the finding that  the  witnesses  had  been
    misled.  The  judge  made  findings  open  to  her  on  the   evidence.
    Sustainable reasons for those findings have been given. I am  satisfied
    that the reasons given by the judge in paragraphs 26-29 are  sufficient
    to explain why she did not believe the appellant was a genuine  convert
    to Christianity. The judge found that the weight to be attached to  the
    findings in paragraphs 26-29 outweighed the weight to be placed on  the
    belief of the four witnesses that the appellant is a genuine convert to
    Christianity.

21. The appellant disagrees with the judge's  conclusion  and  the  grounds
    upon which permission to appeal was granted disclose that disagreement,
    but they do not disclose a material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose  a  material  error  of  law.  The
appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed  [pic]                       Date 14 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed  [pic]                       Date 14 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
