
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06893/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 22 March 2018                       |On 26 March 2018                  |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     R P
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr P Nathan, Counsel instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant is a Sri Lanka national of Tamil ethnicity who claims
         to  be  in  fear  of  the  authorities  because  of  his  brother's
         activities with the LTTE, his own past detention  and  torture  and
         his activities with the TGTE in the UK. His appeal  was  previously
         allowed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Higgins on 21 August 2017  but
         that  determination  was  set  aside  by  way  of  this  Tribunal's
         determination of 8 January 2018 following  an  oral  hearing  on  4
         January 2018. I now hear the matter afresh in order to re-make  the
         determination.


      2.  Certain  findings  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were,   however,
         preserved. These were that:

             i) the appellant's brother was a member  of  the  LTTE  for  14
                years and that he collected intelligence;


            ii) the appellant joined the LTTE shortly before its defeat  and
                helped with delivering supplies;


           iii) he had no involvement in fighting;


            iv) he suffers from PTSD;


             v) he was detained and tortured (although there is confusion in
                the number of detentions referred to in paragraph 89);


            vi) he travelled to the UK with the help of an agent using false
                documents.

      3. I found that the judge  failed  to  make  clear  findings  on  what
         activities the appellant had been involved with in the UK, how this
         could be reconciled with the evidence that  he  was  frightened  to
         become  involved,  why  the  authorities  would  continue   to   be
         interested in him given the finding at paragraph  93  and  why  his
         brother was found to be a senior LTTE member given  that  this  was
         not referred to in the interview record  or  his  evidence  at  the
         hearing. Additionally, no finding was made on whether the  CID  had
         visited the family home and  made  enquiries  about  him,  and  the
         finding that he would fall into a  GJ  category  was  not  properly
         reasoned.



      4. The Hearing



      5. The appellant attended the hearing  and  was  simply  tendered  for
         cross examination, there being no  evidence  Mr  Nathan  wished  to
         call. He had the use of a Tamil interpreter whom  he  confirmed  he
         understood. The proceedings  were  explained  to  him  and  he  was
         informed  that  he  should  let  the  Tribunal  know  if  he   felt
         uncomfortable at any stage and required a break.



      6. Mr Walker cross-examined the appellant. The appellant said that  he
         had been living with a friend of the family (referred to as  uncle)
         since his arrival in the UK. He confirmed  he  had  been  diagnosed
         with PTSD and was receiving treatment  although  he  did  not  know
         what. He said he took tablets to help him sleep. He recently had an
         X-ray at Lewisham Hospital for chest pains. He had never worked  in
         the UK. When he was asked whether he  had  worked  at  the  Chicken
         Express, he said that the shop keeper was a friend and he sometimes
         helped out in the evenings in return for food. The  appellant  said
         that he had spoken to his family 2-3 times  when  he  had  been  in
         Bolivia. They told him that the CID had come to look  for  him  and
         his brother.



      7. The appellant was referred to his interview whenever he had claimed
         never to have been photographed or finger printed before coming  to
         the UK. He said he had been photographed by the authorities in  Sri
         Lanka. When asked why he had given  different  information  to  the
         British authorities, he said the question had not been clear.



      8. The appellant confirmed that he had obtained a passport in order to
         leave Sri Lanka. He agreed it was his first passport.  He  did  not
         have to produce a birth certificate in order to obtain it but a man
         had taken his photographs and  ID  card  and  obtained  it  on  his
         behalf. The appellant did not have to sign  anything.  He  did  not
         recall when it expired or whether it contained any visas.



      9.  The  appellant  agreed  he   had   been   frightened   to   attend
         demonstrations in the UK. He then said that at the time he had  not
         known that the TGTE existed. His 'uncle' then suggested  he  should
         go along and talk to someone as it might be helpful and  bring  him
         some relief. He was then no longer  frightened.  He  took  part  in
         protests, helped arrange sports events  and  made  tea  for  Sunday
         meetings. He also took  part  in  a  campaign  for  a  petition  on
         genocide and distributed leaflets to nearby  shops.  The  appellant
         confirmed he had provided photographs of himself at demonstrations.
         He was asked how he would be  identified  by  the  authorities.  he
         replied that when he surrendered the authorities knew who he was.



     10. The  appellant  said  he  had  not  seen  his  brother  since  they
         surrendered themselves to the authorities in 2009.  They  were  not
         together in detention.



     11. The appellant said he had been detained for  three  years  when  he
         surrendered in 2009. Following that he was detained twice in  2014.
         He was released the first time in 2014 but on the second occasion a
         bribe was paid for his release. This was arranged  by  his  father.
         That completed cross examination. There was no re-examination.



     12. I  then  asked  some  questions  for  clarification.  I  asked  the
         appellant whether he had followed his 'uncle's' advice  and  spoken
         to someone in the TGTE. He said he had spoken to a  minister  about
         the genocide. He told him about his experiences  and  that  he  had
         lost his brother, Rathan. He disclosed this information as  he  was
         told they could obtain information about his brother. The appellant
         had a sister who was in Switzerland. He was first detained in 2009.





     13. I asked the appellant what he meant when he claimed  to  have  gone
         for registration (A4:2.5). He said when he went  for  registration,
         he was told that everyone from  the  LTTE  should  stand  aside.  I
         repeated the question. The appellant said he was afraid he would be
         hit. The question was put again. The appellant said he did  not  go
         to register. He was told that even if he had worked for one day for
         the LTTE he should stand to the side. I asked  where  he  went.  He
         said he had been questioned and tortured.



     14. I asked the appellant about the photographs he  had  submitted.  He
         said they had been taken at 4-5 demos but  he  could  not  remember
         when. He did not why they were taken. He got some of them  off  the
         website and some were group photographs.



     15. Mr Walker had no questions arising.



     16. Mr Nathan sought to clarify the evidence about the  'registration'.
         The appellant said he was leaving with others at  the  end  of  the
         war. He was with his brother and most of  the  LTTE  members.  When
         asked whether he was with the authorities at that stage, he replied
         that he had gone to surrender. He was with  his  parents  and  many
         others including his brother and brother-in-law. His parents  'went
         out'.



     17. I then heard evidence from Mithilan Paransothey. He was  asked  why
         he believed the appellant's brother had been a senior member in the
         second or third rank of the LTTE. He said it  was  because  he  had
         been there so long and because he had a pistol. He did not know how
         to describe a pistol but he wore a big belt which would be given to
         those of that rank.



     18. In cross  examination  the  witness  said  he  had  last  seen  the
         appellant in Sri Lanka in March 2009. They met again in the UK  and
         the appellant told him what had happened to him.



     19. There was no re-examination.



     20. In response to my questions, the witness said the belt was wide and
         bely and the pistol hung from it. I asked whether members who  were
         not in the second or third rank had weapons. He  replied  they  did
         not. I asked whether all fighters were then in the second or  third
         rank. He then said that all LTTE members except for  those  in  the
         political wing had guns. He said the  soldiers  carried  them.  The
         senior officers had belts. I asked what  rank  soldiers  were.  The
         witness said that ranks were not known until after death.  I  asked
         who was in the first rank. The witness said the leader.  Brigadiers
         were in the second rank but ranks were only known  after  death.  I
         asked for clarification given that seniority of rank was  known  by
         the wearing of a belt. The witness could not give a clear response.
         He said one would know a lieutenant colonel.  He  said  there  were
         nine ranks in total. The appellant's brother wore a belt and was in
         charge of a camp so he knew he held a position of seniority.



     21. Mr Walker asked the witness how he knew the  appellant's  brother's
         rank when he was alive. The witness said  it  was  because  of  his
         experience, his belt and his position. He  was  asked  whether  all
         ranks received training in weapons. He replied  they  did.  He  was
         asked how long the training lasted. He said he did not know. He was
         asked whether he had received weapons training. He replied that  he
         had. He was asked how it was then that he did not know the duration
         of the training. He replied he had been trained for 45 days.



     22. Mr Nathan asked the witness what weapon he carried. He  replied  he
         had had an AK47 rifle. He was  asked  whether  anyone  outside  the
         first three ranks was issued with a pistol. He said they were  not.
         He confirmed that anyone with a pistol was known to be in the first
         three ranks. He was asked how one knew who  could  give  orders  if
         ranks were not known. He stated that orders were given by those  in
         charge. One would know who was in charge even if their rank was not
         known. That completed the oral evidence.



     23. I then heard submissions. For the respondent, Mr Walker  relied  on
         the decision letter. He submitted that the appellant's  involvement
         with the LTTE was of a very low level. He had not undergone weapons
         training, he had given inconsistent evidence about that and he  was
         not involved in any armed section of the LTTE. Whilst he claimed he
         would be at risk because of his brother's position, he had not seen
         his brother since 2009. It was very unclear how the ranking  system
         worked if ranks were not revealed until death.  The  appellant  had
         given contradictory evidence about whether he had been photographed
         in Sri Lanka. Whilst various detentions are claimed, there  was  no
         outstanding arrest warrant and he was able to obtain a passport  in
         his own identity in  order  to  leave.  although  claiming  he  was
         fearful, he had become involved with the TGTE albeit at a very  low
         level.  He  would  not  be  identified  from  the  photographs   at
         demonstrations if the authorities did not have pictures of him.  He
         did not fall into any of the categories of GJK. He had  never  been
         charged. His support for the LTTE was at a low level and he had not
         had any contact with his brother since  2009.  There  would  be  no
         interest in him by the authorities.


     24. Mr Nathan relied on an internet article which indicated that  there
         was no formal ranking system within the LTTE and that  titles  were
         only given after death. He relied on the skeleton argument and  the
         findings of the First-tier Tribunal. He submitted there had been no
         challenge to the appellant's evidence of involvement with the  TGTE
         and the only submission on that had been that the support was of  a
         low level. Even if that were so, it would still  be  known  to  the
         authorities.



     25.  Mr  Nathan  submitted  that  the  issue  over  fingerprinting  and
         photographing was a red herring. The appellant  would  be  returned
         with an emergency travel  document  and  checks  on  him  would  be
         conducted and his photograph would need to be  provided.  The  High
         Commission was known to  monitor  anti  regime  demonstrations  and
         officials would compare  his  photograph  to  their  collection  of
         photographs of activists. The appellant would be expected  to  tell
         the truth on return.  He  would  therefore  have  to  disclose  his
         involvement with the LTTE and the TGTE. The latter was a proscribed
         organisation. Reliance was placed on the judgment in UB [2017] EWCA
         Civ 85 in so far as it addressed the issue of  the  questioning  of
         returnees about their activities. The  appellant's  background  and
         the letter from the MP had not been challenged.  The  MP  confirmed
         that the  appellant  had  already  been  identified.  The  evidence
         pointed to the appellant being detained for questioning on  return.
         Once his past activities and his  support  for  the  TGTE  came  to
         light, he would be in trouble.



     26. Mr Nathan referred me to passages  in  the  COIS  report.  He  also
         argued that the appellant's exit  would  be  viewed  as  suspicious
         because he no longer had a passport to show his legal exit.



     27. Mr Nathan submitted that  the  appellant's  brother  was  a  senior
         ranking member. He argued that it was unusual for some one of a low
         level to be detained for such a long time and that  suggested  that
         his brother's rank had caused the problem. The  appellant  was  not
         aware of the significance of the belt but the witness had explained
         this. it was not correct that the appellant had received no weapons
         training. In the final period of the war, the  LTTE  were  grabbing
         anyone and providing  minimal  training.  That  tied  in  with  the
         appellant's evidence or a short period of training.



     28. Mr Nathan then turned to the  appellant's  mental  ill  health.  He
         submitted that it had been accepted that he suffered from PTSD.  It
         should lead to a grant of leave on article 3 grounds.



     29. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give with reasons.



     30. Conclusions



     31. As indicated at the start of this determination,  certain  findings
         of the First-tier Tribunal have been preserved. I therefore proceed
         on the basis that the appellant had been involved with the LTTE  to
         the extent that he helped to deliver supplies,  that  he  had  been
         previously detained and tortured,  that  his  brother  had  been  a
         member for some  14  years  and  had  been  involved  in  gathering
         intelligence,  that  the  appellant  suffered  from  PTSD  and  had
         travelled here on a false document.

     32. Whilst there was no reliance  by  Mr  Nathan  on  the  Presidential
         Guidance on Vulnerable Witnesses, I bore the medical report in mind
         during the course of the hearing and advised the appellant  at  the
         start that he should asked for a break if he felt uncomfortable  at
         any point. I was also aware that the appellant's concentration  may
         be impaired and that he  might  not  be  able  to  express  himself
         coherently. I have full regard  to  the  lower  standard  of  proof
         applicable in protection appeals.



     33. I heard oral evidence from the appellant and his friend and  fellow
         LTTE member Mr Paransothy. No challenge to the evidence was mounted
         by Mr Walker; his submissions focused  on  the  argument  that  the
         appellant's activities for the TGTE were of a low  level  and  that
         his support for the LTTE in Sri Lanka had not involved fighting and
         was of a basic nature. Mr Walker did, however, make submissions  on
         the matter of the appellant's brother's rank based on the  evidence
         of the witness. I shall deal with this matter later.



     34. On the basis of the evidence before me  including  the  submissions
         made, I find the following. The appellant gave a  detailed  account
         of his experiences in Sri Lanka at his asylum interview and in  his
         witness statement, and the more limited evidence  he  gave  at  his
         screening interview was largely consistent with that. I accept  his
         account of how he came to be involved with the LTTE in  2008,  what
         he did for them and that  he  was  subjected  to  long  periods  of
         detention and ill treatment between 2009  and  2012  and  twice  in
         2014.  I find that the medical evidence lends weight to  the  claim
         of torture. I accept he underwent ten days of training of which two
         days were spent  on  weapons  training.  I  accept  there  is  some
         confusion about the duration of the training in  the  evidence  but
         attribute this to the appellant's failure to  clearly  explain  how
         the training was divided up. I place no weight on  the  appellant's
         inability to name the parts of a rifle or the oil used to clean  it
         given the relatively short period of training and  the  passage  of
         time since it was undertaken. I also accept  his  brother,  Rathan,
         born in 1975 joined the  LTTE  around  1995  and  was  involved  in
         intelligence gathering. I accept that the appellant surrendered  to
         the authorities in May 2009 along with his brother and  brother-in-
         law and that the appellant has not seen his brother since that day.
         I find that the appellant's  sister  is  in  Switzerland  with  her
         husband and has been granted asylum there. I have seen no  evidence
         which  explains  how  the  appellant's  brother-in-law  got   there
         following his detention  in  2009.  I  find  that  the  appellant's
         parents remain in Sri Lanka. I find that there is  no  warrant  for
         the appellant's arrest and that he is not on a stop  list;  indeed,
         the appellant himself has never made  such  a  claim.  I  place  no
         weight on the fact that the appellant was able to leave  Sri  Lanka
         on his own passport. Bribery and corruption are pervasive  and  his
         ability to obtain  a  passport  and  to  leave  using  it  are  not
         indicators  of  a  lack  of  interest  in  him.  I  find  that  the
         appellant's  evidence  as  to  events  in  Sri  Lanka  is   broadly
         consistent and credible.


     35. The same is not the case for the evidence as to what happened after
         the appellant left Sri Lanka; there are inconsistencies  with  that
         part of the claim. At his asylum interview  (which  took  place  in
         June 2016) he claimed that he had spoken to his  father  after  his
         arrival in the UK and had been told that the CID had  been  to  the
         house twice asking about his whereabouts but that  they  had  since
         stopped coming. He confirmed again later in the interview that they
         had only asked about him and not about his brother. In his  witness
         statement, however, he claimed he spoke to them  once  or  twice  a
         month during his stay in Bolivia (for most of 2015)  and  was  told
         the CID had been to the house making enquiries about  him  and  his
         brother. At the hearing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  June
         2017, he confirmed the two visits took place between December  2015
         and June 2016 and that the visits had since increased in frequency.
         He referred only to enquiries being made about his whereabouts.  In
         oral evidence the appellant claimed  that  he  had  spoken  to  his
         parents about two or three times whilst in Bolivia and that he  had
         been told that the CID had come in search of him and  his  brother.
         These inconsistencies have not been  explained.  They  should  have
         been plain to Counsel from the evidence, and indeed  the  issue  of
         CID visits to the family home was a matter flagged up in my earlier
         decision, but there were no attempts to  resolve  them.  There  are
         discrepancies between when the visits occurred, whether they  began
         before he arrived in the UK and whilst he was in Bolivia or whether
         they commenced after he  left  and  whether  the  authorities  were
         interested just in him or him and his brother. I have regard to the
         appellant's state of mind and possible lack  of  concentration  but
         these were accounts given at different times and there is no reason
         why he should get his account so muddled on this more recent matter
         and yet remain consistent about events which occurred much  earlier
         on. I am, therefore, not satisfied that there have been  visits  to
         his home by the CID since he left Sri Lanka.


     36. I now turn to the evidence of the witness. I accept  that  he  knew
         the appellant and his family in Sri Lanka and that  they  last  saw
         each other there in March 2009. The witness claims that  he  joined
         the LTTE in 2007 and worked mainly in the kitchens. In his  witness
         statement he claimed to  have  undergone  two  months  of  training
         whilst in oral evidence he claimed to have had 45 days of training.
         This inconsistency has not been explained. Nor is it  clear  to  me
         why such lengthy training, whether it be 45 days or 60 days,  would
         be required for a person assigned kitchen duties. However, that  is
         not crucial to the appellant's case.



     37. The purpose of the witness' evidence was to support  a  claim  that
         the appellant's brother held  a  senior  rank  in  the  LTTE.  This
         appears to have  been  premised  on  Rathan's  lengthy  membership;
         certainly, that is what was claimed in the witness statement and in
         oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal. At the hearing before
         me, the witness claimed for the first time that he knew  Rathan  to
         be a senior member because he wore a 'big belt' and had  a  pistol,
         which only members of a higher rank were given, and also because he
         was in charge of a camp. He does not explain why he never mentioned
         these three, far more  significant,  matters  before.  Nor  was  it
         explained why he would have been aware of these matters, given that
         he did not work with Rathan, when the appellant  was  not,  despite
         the fact that Rathan was his  brother  and  that  they  had  worked
         together in the same camp.



     38. I accept the evidence regarding the secrecy  of  the  LTTE  ranking
         system, however, this does not explain why the appellant never gave
         evidence at any stage of these lengthy proceedings that his brother
         was in charge of a camp. It is  difficult  to  understand  how  the
         appellant would not know this given the  evidence  of  the  witness
         that one knew who gave the orders and who was in  charge.  Further,
         Mr Nathan's submission that the issue of senior  officials  wearing
         'big belts' was well known only serves to reinforce my concern.  If
         it is a matter that is so well known,  then  surely  the  appellant
         could be expected to know it too and, at some point, whether at his
         interview, in his witness statement or at one the two hearings, put
         it forward as part of his claim. For these reasons, I do not accept
         it has been established that the appellant's brother was  a  senior
         official of the LTTE.



     39. I have had regard to the letter from  Sockalingam  Yogalingam,  the
         Deputy Minister of Sports and Community Health of the  TGTE,  dated
         30 May 2017. This confirms that the appellant joined as a volunteer
         (although no date is given), attends meetings and takes  an  active
         role in organising events and public demonstrations. At the hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal, the  appellant  maintained  he  had
         joined the TGTE in May 2016.



     40. There are  a  few  difficulties  with  this  evidence.  First,  the
         evidence about when his activities begun conflicts with that  given
         at his asylum interview when he stated (in June 2016) that  he  had
         not been involved in any anti-government activities. Indeed, at the
         hearing before me, the appellant stated that he did not  even  know
         of the existence of the TGTE at that time. I am therefore left with
         no reliable  evidence  as  to  when  the  appellant  commenced  his
         activities. Second, the evidence of Mr Yogalingam contradicts  that
         given by the appellant. When questioned about his activities at the
         hearing before me, he  did  not  claim  that  he  organised  public
         demonstrations. The evidence he provided was that he  made  tea  at
         meetings where he also helped to organise  the  hall,  helped  with
         sports events, distributed leaflets and attended demonstrations.



     41. I have had regard to the photographs submitted by the appellant  in
         support of the claim that he attended demonstrations. The appellant
         claimed these photographs covered 4-5  demonstrations  however  the
         pictures where the appellant is visible were all were plainly taken
         at the same event. The appellant is dressed the same way in all  as
         are those beside him.



     42. This leads me to the following conclusions. I accept that there  is
         some recent support for the TGTE but not as  involved  or  as  long
         term as claimed. I accept that the appellant attends and has helped
         out at some Sunday  gatherings  and  sports  events,  that  he  has
         attended at least one demonstration and that he has participated in
         a campaign against genocide. I accept that although he expressed  a
         fear of any such involvement to begin with, that  he  then  changed
         his mind and found it therapeutic (as per Dr Dhumad's report).



     43. The only background evidence I was referred to is the  respondent's
         Country Policy and Information Note on Sri Lanka of March 2017.  No
         further country material was submitted for this hearing. I have had
         regard to the sections  cited.  I  have  also  had  regard  to  the
         guidance in GJ (post civil war : returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]
         UKUT 00319.



     44. I make the findings set out above only after having considered  all
         the evidence before me in the round, including that  which  I  have
         not specifically cited in the determination, and  bearing  in  mind
         the lower standard of proof. The findings are not made in any order
         of priority. Based on my findings, I conclude that  although  there
         are elements of the appellant's claim and evidence that I find have
         been embellished and perhaps even fabricated, there  is  enough  to
         satisfy me that the appellant is a person who faces a real risk  of
         being of interest to the authorities on return.



     45. The unchallenged evidence is that he  is  from  a  family  of  LTTE
         supporters/members and that  he  himself  has  also  been  an  LTTE
         member, albeit for a limited period. Given  his  three  detentions,
         the first of which was for a three- year period, there  will  be  a
         record of  him  and  probably  of  his  family  members  and  their
         detentions. The appellant would be returned on an emergency  travel
         document. That will flag him up as a person of interest  on  return
         and questioning would seem inevitable. Even if his activities  here
         for the TGTE have been exaggerated, he  would  be  disclosing  some
         support when giving a truthful  account  of  his  activities  here.
         Given that the TGTE is a proscribed  organisation,  and  given  his
         previous lengthy detentions and his  unofficial  release  from  the
         last detention, I find that  he  would  arouse  interest  and  that
         detention and subsequent ill treatment would  be  a  real  risk  on
         return. I consider that he falls into the GJ category of  a  person
         who may pose a threat to the unity of Sri Lanka.  The  respondent's
         report provides support for my conclusions (at 6.2.1, 6.3,  12.2.10
         and 12.2.12). It follows that the appellant succeeds on asylum  and
         article 3 grounds. In the circumstances, I have not  considered  it
         necessary to consider humanitarian  protection  or  the  submission
         that the appellant's medical conditions would of itself  justify  a
         grant of discretionary leave.


     46. Decision


     47. The appeal is allowed on asylum and article 3 grounds.



     48. Anonymity



     49. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed


       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 23 March 2018
















