


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
      PA/06964/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at:  Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On: 28th January 2020                   |On: 30th January 2020            |
|                                        |                                 |
|                                        |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     MCL
                          (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:           Mr Greer, Counsel instructed by Legal Justice
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Algeria born in 1980.  He  appeals  with
    permission against the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Dearden) to dismiss his appeal on protection and human rights grounds.




 2. The crux of the Appellant's claim for international protection is  that
    he is at risk of serious harm from a group of  organised  criminals  in
    Algeria. In March 2018  the  Appellant  was  working  as  the  Head  of
    Security at a shipping container port in Algiers. He discovered that  a
    number of other employees at the port, including  porters  and  customs
    officers,  had  been  involved  in  a  large-scale  theft   from   some
    containers. He reported his findings to the police and  later  appeared
    at an initial court hearing to speak to the CCTV images.  Subsequent to
    this the Appellant began to fear for his safety. The tyres of  his  car
    were slashed and his car damaged. He started to receive telephone calls
    in the night where the caller said nothing.   He sought advice from his
    brothers-in-law who are all serving police officers. They told him that
    there was nothing that they could do to protect him and advised him  to
    leave the country. This he did, claiming asylum  on  26th  April  2019,
    some two weeks after he had  arrived in the country on a visit visa.


 3. The First-tier Tribunal accepted that the Appellant had been  the  Head
    of Security at a container port as  he  claimed.  It  was  not  however
    satisfied that he faced a real risk of harm.  It did not  consider,  on
    the account given, that  the  Appellant  had  been  a  crucial  witness
    against the thieves. All he had done was  interpret  the  CCTV  images;
    anyone at a senior level in the company  could  have  done  that.   The
    trial could  therefore  proceed  in  the  absence  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence, which begged the question why anyone was bothering trying  to
    prevent him  from  giving  it.   Furthermore  the  Tribunal  found  the
    Appellant to be exaggerating the scale of the theft and the  importance
    of the perpetrators. There was no evidence to support  his  claim  that
    customs officers - as opposed to poorly paid porters -  were  involved.
    The Tribunal thought it speculative to link the criminal damage  caused
    to the Appellant's car with the case. Similarly the  silent  calls  had
    more than one explanation: if it was criminals intent on silencing  him
    one would have expected them to make that demand.   The Tribunal  noted
    that the Appellant had remained in his employment for over a year after
    these claimed events, and did not terminate it until  he  had  obtained
    visit visas for himself and his family.  Finally the Tribunal concluded
    that it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant to relocate  within
    Algeria.  Upon this basis the appeal was dismissed.

 4. Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb granted  the  Appellant  permission  to  the
    appeal to this Tribunal on the 6th December 2019,  having  very  fairly
    given the Appellant's self-penned grounds their widest possible reading
    (he was at that time without representation). Judge  Grubb  thought  it
    arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in its finding that the
    only criminals involved were the  porters.  He  so  found  because  the
    Appellant  had  produced  stills  from  the  CCTV  which  showed  other
    individuals, said to be customs  officials.   Had  this  evidence  been
    taken into account, the risk assessment may have been different.

 5. Before me Mr Greer made cogent submissions on the Appellant's behalf to
    expand upon the Appellant's own grounds, but for the reasons I set  out
    below, I am not satisfied that there is any proper basis upon which  to
    interfere with the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



    Reasons

 6. I am prepared to accept that the First-tier Tribunal does not appear to
    have taken all of the evidence into  account  in  respect  of  who  the
    perpetrators were, and that its reasons for rejecting  the  involvement
    of customs officials appear to be fairly thin.  Whilst it was perfectly
    proper for Judge Grubb to have  granted  this  unrepresented  appellant
    permission to argue the point I am not  however  persuaded  that  Judge
    Dearden's failure to expressly address the photographic evidence is  an
    error of law such that his decision should be set aside.

 7. The Appellant's complaint is that the First-tier Tribunal  should  have
    taken the risk  posed  to  him  by  the  criminals  at  the  port  more
    seriously. He submits that had it appreciated that senior officers were
    involved, its decision may have been different. Whilst  I  accept  that
    the involvement of senior officers was certainly a factor, it  was  not
    the only matter taken into consideration by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    More significant, in my view, is the fact that no threats were actually
    received by the Appellant.   The criminal damage to the Appellant's car
    and the silent telephone calls were no doubt unsettling,  but as  Judge
    Dearden points out, no direct threats were actually  made,  and  it  is
    difficult to see why such threats would have been issued given that the
    prosecution  could  easily  have  proceeded  without  the   Appellant's
    evidence.  Furthermore the Appellant was able to continue in  his  work
    at the port for over a year after the  claimed  events.    It  was  the
    combination of all of these factors which led the Tribunal to  conclude
    that the Appellant did not face a real risk of harm.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal also concluded that the Appellant could receive
    protection  from  the  Algerian  state,  and  that  it  would  not   be
    unreasonable to expect him to relocate  to  another  city  if  he  felt
    concerned for his security in  Algiers.  The  grounds  do  not  mention
    either of these matters and for my part I am unable to see any arguable
    error in the Tribunal's approach to those  key  issues.   Even  if  the
    Appellant's grounds had been made out, the appeal would still  fall  to
    be dismissed for those reasons.

 9. Accordingly I am satisfied that there was  no  material  error  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal's approach and I dismiss the appeal.



    Anonymity Order

10. Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1 of  2013:  Anonymity
    Orders I  consider it appropriate to make an  order  in  the  following
    terms:


         "Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
        Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
        shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
        family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
        Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
        direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"



    Decision

11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  upheld  and  the  appeal
    dismissed.


12. There is an order for anonymity.





                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                                    28th
                                January 2020
