
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06391/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 31 October 2018                   |On 18 December 2018                  |


                                   Before

                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN


                                   Between

                                    [N J]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Charles Mannan, (counsel instructed by Pillai &
Jones)
For the respondent:    Mr Chris Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    This is an appeal from Judge Alan Caskie, sitting at Taylor House on  2
    August, by a lady who was born in Bangladesh in 1994.   In  April  2015
    she applied for a multi-visit visa and was refused; but in  August  one
    was issued, valid until 29 February 2016.  She arrived on  that  on  18
    September 2015 and on 17 March 2016 her  husband  arrived  applied  for
    leave to remain as a student with  her  as  his  dependant.   That  was
    refused both originally in May and on administrative review in June and
    permission for judicial review was refused in October and also on  oral
    renewal.  Those proceedings ended with refusal of permission to  appeal
    to the Court of Appeal on 10 August 2017.

2.   The appellant was served with removal directions  on  20  August  2017,
    and detained on the 26th.  On 27 August her husband made a private  and
    family life claim, naming her as dependant, and on 7 September that was
    refused as clearly unfounded.  On 8  November  this  appellant  claimed
    asylum, with her husband as  dependant.   On  4  May  2018  asylum  was
    refused.  It is  enough  to  set  out  the  history  of  this  couple's
    applications to show  that  both  of  them  faced  serious  credibility
    challenges.  However the judge suggested that he  should  approach  the
    appellant's case by taking it at its highest, and dealing  with  it  on
    internal flight only.

3.   As the judge recorded, the appellant's  counsel  objected,  though  the
    presenting officer did not, and the judge proceeded to do what  he  had
    proposed.  It is easy  to  understand  the  temptation  for  judges  of
    dealing with the cases on  what  may  seem  to  them  a  simple  point.
    However, in a case such as this, where there is a  serious  credibility
    challenge, it does not seem to me that this course was  in  the  public
    interest, nor entirely fair to the appellant, and the  result  is  that
    the decision is set aside.   There  will  be  a  fresh  hearing  before
    another judge at Taylor House.

Appeal : decision set aside

Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal  at  Taylor  House,  not  before  Judge
    Caskie


                               [pic]
                                             (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

