
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06610/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 October 2019                            |On 13 November 2019           |
|Extempore                                     |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

                                   Between

                                     M R
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Meyler promulgated on 26 April 2018 in which  the  judge
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision by the respondent
    to refuse his protection and  asylum  claim.   Although  permission  to
    appeal was initially refused by the Upper Tribunal the application  for
    permission was eventually remitted to the Upper  Tribunal  following  a
    successful "Cart" judicial review which was pursued  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal.

 2. It is necessary to set out to the background of this case  to  give  it
    some context before reaching my conclusions.  The appellant entered the
    United Kingdom with his older brother  and  his  sister-in-law.   Their
    cases are that they are Iranian Kurds and face persecution on return to
    Iran on that basis.  It is important to note that subsequent  to  their
    arrival in  the  United  Kingdom  together  their  cases  were  treated
    separately owing to the  older  brother  being  convicted  of  domestic
    violence against the sister-in-law and the appellant being  taken  into
    care.

 3. The fact that there were three separate decisions is important  because
    of what then happened in the appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  in
    this case. That  is  because  the  Secretary  of  State  sought,  quite
    properly, to adduce evidence relating to both the appellant's,  brother
    and sister-in-law's respective appeals, in particular language analysis
    carried out by Sprakab and LOID and also the decisions in  relation  to
    the brother.  It should, I consider at this point, also be  noted  that
    the conclusions as to the nationalities of the  family  are  divergent.
    Differently constituted First-tier Tribunals found that the appellant's
    brother is Iraqi but found the sister-in-law was Iranian.  In this case
    the judge concluded that the appellant was Iraqi.

 4. In this appeal, the judge concluded that the appellant was not entitled
    to humanitarian protection but did allow the  appeal  under  Article  8
    given that the appellant was at the relevant time a minor and  entitled
    to benefit from the unaccompanied asylum seeking child policy.  But she
    did not accept that he was Iranian, nor did she accept his  account  of
    what happened in Iran.

 5. Much  of  this  appeal  centres  around  two  specific  issues  in  the
    determination of nationality.  The first is the existence  of  what  is
    described as a "crib sheet" said to have been found by the Home  Office
    in the lorry in which the  family  entered  the  United  Kingdom.   The
    second to which I  have  already  alluded  are  the  Sprakab  and  LOID
    Reports.  Both of these were considered in different ways by the  judge
    and it is those which the grounds of appeal address in some detail.

 6. The first ground of challenge is that the judge failed properly to deal
    with the challenge to the CID notes.   The  second  and  third  grounds
    which are taken together is the criticism of the judge's  treatment  of
    the brother's appeal, of the  evidence  from  Sprakab  and  LOID  which
    appeared in person.  Grounds 4 and 5 are  relatively  narrow,  being  a
    challenge to a  specific  finding  of  fact;  ground  5  is  a  reasons
    challenge.

 7. Turning to ground 1 the submission is  that  the  judge  erred  in  her
    approach to the crib sheet.  It is submitted by Mr Holmes that this was
    a document which met the norms of elegance.  The crib sheet itself  has
    not been provided.  The evidence which is in the form  of  a  CID  note
    states that a number of ripped up  pieces  of  paper  were  found,  put
    together and translated.  It observed that they were written in Kurdish
    and it is stated that they "form a cheat sheet that a person would  use
    if they were trying to pass themselves off as Iranian".  As  Mr  Holmes
    submits there is no copy of the crib sheet, and no  indication  of  who
    put the document together; nor is there any  indication  if  whether  a
    properly certified translation was obtained.

 8. The point put is in summary this:  what the judge did is  that  she  in
    effect reversed the burden of proof.  It is for he who asserts that the
    authenticity of the fact as to bear the burden of fact and  whilst  the
    appellant needs to prove his case the respondent can seek to  undermine
    that, that is not what has happened  here.   Here  the  respondent  had
    asserted and sought to prove that the crib sheet existed,  and  was  by
    implication used by the appellant and his family.

 9. A further criticism put by Mr Holmes is that the judge wrongly expected
    the appellant to have sought to call evidence about the nature  of  the
    crib sheet, specifically the judge who at paragraph  [41]  stated  that
    she  had  considered  Mr   Holmes'   submissions   but   at   paragraph
    [42],although acknowledging that Mr Holmes had made some  fair  points,
    stated that no evidence was placed before her to show  the  appellant's
    representatives had requested the original document or a copy of it  in
    its translation, had not asked the  identity  and  credentials  of  the
    translator, had not sought to call the  officer  who  found  the  note,
    stating " The reason for this is doubtless because the  appellant  does
    not actually deny the truth of what was asserted  by  the  officer  who
    found the document, that is the appellant has not denied the  existence
    of the document or the fact that it was found [in the  lorry  used  by]
    his family."  Mr Holmes submits that in the circumstances  if  it  were
    the appellant seeking to rely  on  such  a  document  no  weight  could
    properly be attached to it.

10. Mr McVeety in response accepted that he who wishes  to  assert  a  fact
    must prove it.  It was submitted that on the basis of the production of
    the CID note that that was sufficient on this basis and the  criticisms
    of the judge were unfair.  Whilst he accepted that the analysis was not
    perfect, it needed to be seen in the  context  of  how  the  judge  had
    approached the evidence in the round.  In particular, he drew attention
    to the fact that at paragraph  [45]  of  the  decision  the  judge  had
    considered other evidence regarding this issue.

11. Despite Mr McVeety's submissions I considered that the judge's approach
    to the "crib sheet" was flawed. It was for the Secretary  of  State  to
    show  that  the  crib  sheet  existed.   Without  its  existence   then
    inferences could not be drawn from it.  In this case it cannot be  said
    that it was incumbent on the appellant to ask  for  evidence  from  the
    respondent that is even going to the extent of requiring an officer  to
    attend to give evidence in order to in effect support the Secretary  of
    State's case.

12. It is important to note in this context that the  actual  document  has
    never been produced.  That in itself sets  this  case  apart  from  the
    cases involving primarily  Sri  Lanka  in  which  documents  have  been
    provided, often letters from lawyers and court documents, where it  has
    been said to the Secretary of State that steps ought to have been taken
    to verify.  Those cases are given the significantly  different  factual
    scenario applied here less relevant.

13. In essence it was for the Secretary of State who  made  the  allegation
    that the appellant had used a crib sheet, to show that the  crib  sheet
    existed and had been used by him and whilst the  judge  does  note  the
    evidence that there was nobody else in the container.  What  the  judge
    does not address is the point that was raised in evidence  is  that  he
    could have been there prior to the use of the lorry  by  the  appellant
    and his family and accordingly I find that ground 1 is made out.

14. I turn next to grounds 2 and 3 which are primarily  criticisms  of  the
    judge's approach to the evidence from the brother's appeal.  There  are
    I consider some significant difficulties arising from the  decision  in
    the brother's appeal where the judge, although this was not challenged,
    appears to have confused herself as to who had to  prove  what  and  to
    what standard of proof with regards to nationality.

15. Putting that to one side, as Mr Holmes accepted, the judge does  appear
    to have directed herself properly at paragraph [21] as to the  relevant
    law but he submits that the judge erred in following  too  closely  the
    approach taken in Devaseelan given that that is not directly applicable
    in this case because the parties involved were different.  There  is  I
    consider some merit in that.  The judge does appear to acknowledge that
    there is a problem in that this is not an appeal by the same person but
    equally I consider that there is, despite Mr McVeety's  submissions  to
    the contrary, a significant degree to which the  judge  has  in  effect
    considered  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  the
    brother's case was determinative. That is not so and it  was  incumbent
    on the judge to reach her own conclusions on the evidence  particularly
    whereas here Mr Holmes had set out detailed criticisms of  the  reports
    by Sprakab and LOID and it is to those reports that I turn next.

16. There are problems with the Sprakab and LOID Reports as has been  noted
    by the Supreme Court in SSHD v MN & KY [2014] UKSC 30.  Whilst I accept
    there is some force in Mr McVeety's submission that what ought to  have
    been produced is expert evidence to refute or contradict  the  evidence
    put forward by Sprakab that does not absolve the Tribunal from properly
    interrogating an expert report put before it.  It is always open  to  a
    party, as the  Secretary  of  State  frequently  does,  to  attack  the
    methodology,  logic  and  reasoning  of  a  report.   That   does   not
    necessarily involve bringing one's own expertise to it  but  simply  an
    application of logic and reasoning.  In this case I consider  that  the
    judge did not properly take into account the criticisms of the  Sprakab
    and LOID Reports made by Mr Holmes for the appellant.

17. It is I consider fair to note that the findings are particularly in the
    LOID Report equivocal although that  is  less  so  in  respect  of  the
    Sprakab Reports.  Mr McVeety does make the relatively strong point that
    it has to be borne in mind that there is  a  balance  of  probabilities
    issue.  Whilst that is correct, the reports needed to be looked  at  in
    the round because that is of course what is said about  the  linguistic
    reports.  As Mr Holmes submitted, there are a number  of  defects  with
    the reports not least of which  is  the  age  of  some  of  the  source
    material and also with regards to the approach by  way  of  hypothesis.
    It is perfectly legitimate  to  start  off  with  the  hypothesis  that
    somebody is from a particular area, in this case a  part  of  Iran  and
    then to go through the linguistic signifiers which would  suggest  that
    somebody is or is not from that area.

18. Where the difficulty arises is then having identified those signifiers,
    and having concluded that a person is not from  the  area  claimed,  to
    then assume that  there  is  another  alternative,  that  is  a  single
    alternative in this case the Sulaymaniah area of Iraq.  The problem  is
    best  illustrated  by  this.    Some   of   these   lexicological   and
    morphological indicators would be prevalent not just  in  the  area  of
    Sulaymaniah they would be present elsewhere.  It will be  necessary  to
    consider whether those other possibilities were  relevant  because  the
    phenomena described are not unique nor does the report  say  that  they
    are unique to Sulaymaniah.  Accordingly taking all of this in the round
    I consider that the appellant is correct in submitting that  the  judge
    erred in  the  approach  to  the  issue  of  the  Sprakab  Reports  and
    nationality.

19. Turning then to grounds 4 and 5.  Ground 4 has properly  been  conceded
    by Mr McVeety.  In the light  of  the  findings  that  I  have  already
    reached, ground 5 is of limited relevance.

20. To conclude, therefore, despite the  fact  the  judge  has  made  other
    findings which are not  directly  challenged,  I  considered  that  the
    decision in this case did involve the making of an error of law for the
    reasons set out in grounds 1 to 4 which for the  reasons  I  have  just
    given I find are sustainable.

21. It therefore follows that the decision must be  set  aside  and  to  be
    remade.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside.

 2. Given that it will be necessary for a remaking of substantially all the
    core issues in this case, I conclude that it is appropriate to remit it
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing on all issues.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 11 November 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


