
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06799/2019 (p)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Without a Hearing Under Rule |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|34                                   |                                     |
|On 15 September 2020                 |On 22 September 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     RMR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Freedom Solicitors (Written Submissions)
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    (Written Submissions)


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Iran and to have been  born  on
    15 August 1993.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom clandestinely  sometime  in
    March 2017.

 4. On 11 March 2017, he claimed asylum.   The  basis  of  the  appellant's
    claim was that he is a Kurd who was brought up in the village of  Qala-
    Rash in Iran close to the Iraqi border.  He claims that his father  was
    a supporter of the KDPI.  The appellant claims that he became  involved
    with the KDPI informing supporters of their meetings.  He  claims  that
    he received a phone call from a friend stating that his house had  been
    raided by the Iranian authorities who  were  looking  for  him.   As  a
    result, the appellant fled Iran and  travelling  through  a  number  of
    countries arrived in the UK.  He fears the Iranian  authorities  if  he
    were returned to Iran.

 5. On 14 June 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and on human  rights  grounds.   In
    particular, the Secretary of State did not accept that the appellant is
    an Iranian citizen but, rather, concluded he is an Iraqi citizen.

 6. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent  on  11  November  2019,  Judge  M  A  K  Lawrence  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  First, the  judge  did  not  accept
    that the appellant was an Iranian national but, as had the Secretary of
    State  previously,  he  concluded  that  the  appellant  was  an  Iraqi
    national.  Secondly, the judge found that, even if the  appellant  were
    an Iranian citizen, he would not be at risk on the basis of his claimed
    sur place activities in the UK which included attending  demonstrations
    outside the Iranian Embassy and  a  number  of  postings  on  Facebook.
    Thirdly, the judge concluded that if the appellant is Iraqi,  he  would
    not be at risk on return to Iraq.

The Appeal

 7. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal on three grounds.

 8. First, the grounds contend that the  judge  improperly  relied  upon  a
    Sprakab language report and failed properly to take  into  account  the
    appellant's Iranian  birth  certificate  which  an  expert  report  had
    concluded to be authentic.  In addition, the judge erred by taking into
    account that the appellant had failed to attend the  Iraqi  Embassy  to
    demonstrate that he was not an Iraqi national.

 9. Secondly, the grounds  contend  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  any
    findings in relation to the appellant's claimed activities and  support
    for the KDPI whilst in Iraq which would be  relevant  to  his  risk  on
    return.

10. Thirdly, the grounds contend that the judge failed  properly  to  apply
    the relevant country guidance decision in HB  (Kurds)  Iran  CG  [2018]
    UKUT 00430 (IAC).

11. On 19 December 2019, the  First-tier  Tribunal  refused  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.  However, on 29 January 2020 the  Upper  Tribunal
    (UTJ Finch) granted the appellant permission to  appeal.   In  granting
    permission, UTJ Finch said this:

         "The judge failed to take into  account  that  within  the  Sprakab
         Report  it  was  noted  that  the  Appellant's  language  displayed
         phonological features which were mutual for speakers from  Sardasht
         in Iran and Kurdish areas in Iraq.

         The judge also failed to remind  himself  that  the  Appellant  was
         illiterate and had not attended school in Iran and that, therefore,
         he may have had little contact with the Farsi language.

         It is arguable that the language a person speaks at  one  point  in
         time is not an immutable characteristic of that person.

         The reasons given for not placing weight on the expert report  were
         insufficient.  In addition, the judge failed to take  into  account
         the explanations given by the Appellant in his witness statement in
         relation to  errors  he  was  said  to  have  made  in  his  asylum
         interview.

         Given, the arguable errors made in relation to  his  assessment  of
         the Appellant's nationality, the judge also failed to consider  SSH
         and HR (illegal exit: failed asylum seeker) Iran CG [2016] UKUT 308
         (IAC).

         Therefore, there were errors of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Lawrence's decision and I find it is appropriate to grant the
         Appellant permission to appeal".

12. The appeal was initially listed for hearing in the  Birmingham  Justice
    Centre on 6 April 2020.  However, that hearing was adjourned due to the
    COVID-19 crisis.

13.  On  7  April  2020,  the  Upper  Tribunal  (UTJ  O'Callaghan)   issued
    directions, in  the  light  of  the  COVID-19  crisis,  indicating  the
    provisional view that it would be appropriate to determine the error of
    law  issue  without  a  hearing  and  inviting  the  parties  to   make
    submissions on the error of law issue and whether the appeal  could  be
    determined without a hearing.

14. In response, both the appellant and respondent made written submissions
    dated respectively 4  May  2020  and  11  May  2020.   Neither  set  of
    submissions raised any objection to the appeal being determined without
    a hearing and focused, instead,  upon  the  substantive  error  of  law
    issue.

15. In the light of these submissions, and in the absence of any  objection
    from either party, I consider that it is just and fair to determine the
    error of law issue in this appeal without a hearing under  rule  34  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008  (SI  2008/2698  as
    amended).

Discussion

16. The principal issue which the judge had  to  resolve  was  whether  the
    appellant had established that he is an Iranian citizen as he  claimed.
    In relation to that issue, the Secretary of State relied upon a Sprakab
    report.  That assessed the appellant's linguistic background  as  being
    from Iraq to a "high" degree of certainty (para 1.1) and  that  he  was
    from Iran, where he claimed to have lived, as  "unlikely"  (para  1.2).
    The report summarises its conclusions reached, at para 1.3, as follows:

         "The speaker spoke Sorani on a native level during  the  interview.
         The speaker stated to have been born and raised in the  village  of
         Qala-Rash  close  to  Sardasht  in  the  Azarbaijan-e-Gharbi  (West
         Azerbaijan Province) region  in  Iran.   In  the  area  the  Sorani
         dialect Mukri is typically spoken.  The  Sorani  dialect  Mukri  is
         similar to the dialect Hawleri or Sorani as  spoken  in  Arbil  and
         Makhmour in Iraq.  In most areas of Iran, Farsi is used in  schools
         and amongst speakers of different languages.  Speakers of Sorani in
         Iran usually display an influence from Farsi.

         The speaker's language use displayed features mutual for the  Mukri
         dialect of Sorani and the Hawleri dialect of Sorani.  The speaker's
         language  use  displayed  features  not  consistent  with  expected
         language use amongst speakers of Sorani with a background  in  Iran
         and features consistent with expected language use  among  speakers
         of Sorani with a background in Iraq.  The  speaker's  language  use
         did not display  a  clear  inference  from  Farsi.   The  speaker's
         language use is  assessed  to  be  more  consistent  with  expected
         language use among speakers of Sorani with a background in Iraq".

17. The report then goes on to consider a  linguistic  analysis  under  the
    headings "Phonology and Prosody" (para 2.2.); "Morphology  and  Syntax"
    (para 2.3) and "Lexica" (para 2.4.).

18. In relation to "Phonology and Prosody", the report states:

         "The speaker's language use displayed phonological features  mutual
         for the Mukri  dialect  of  Sorani  or  Sorani  as  spoken  in  the
         districts of Piranshahr, Naghadeh, Mahabad, Sardasht and  Bukan  in
         Iran and the Hawleri dialect of Sorani or Sorani as spoken  in  the
         region of Arbil and in the district of Makhmour in Iraq.  ....

         The speaker's  language  use  displays  phonological  features  not
         consistent with expected language use among speakers of Sorani with
         a background in Iran.  Comparisons are made with expected  language
         use among speakers of Sorani with a background in Iran.....

         The  speaker's  language  use   displayed   phonological   features
         consistent with expected language use among speakers of Sorani with
         a background in Iraq.  Comparisons are made with expected  language
         use among speakers of Sorani and with a background in Iran.....

         The speaker's language  use  displayed  phonological  features  not
         consistent with any dialect of Sorani known to the analyst".

19. In relation to "Morphology and Syntax" the report states:

         "The speaker's language  use  displayed  grammatical  features  not
         consistent with expected language use amongst  speakers  of  Sorani
         with a background in Iran.   Comparisons  are  made  with  expected
         language use among speakers of Sorani with a background in Iran".

20. In relation to "Lexica", the report states:

         "The speaker's language use displays  lexical  features  consistent
         with  expected  language  use  among  speakers  of  Sorani  with  a
         background in Iraq.  Comparisons are made  with  expected  language
         use among speakers of Sorani with a background in Iran".

21. As will be clear from the Sprakab report, it  was,  in  many  respects,
    supportive of the Secretary of State's case that the appellant was from
    Iraq rather than Iran.  However, there were passages  which  identified
    that there were similarities between the  appellant's  spoken  language
    and that spoken in areas in Iran.  The report was, therefore, not  'all
    one way' despite the summary conclusion that the likelihood was  "high"
    that the appellant was from Iraq and that it was "unlikely" that he was
    from Iran.

22. In relation to the report's conclusion in respect  of  "Morphology  and
    Syntax", the judge (at para 16) said this:

         "In my view, these characteristics are imbued into speakers over  a
         long period of speaking  his or her language.  It is not learnt  in
         isolation but in relation to other speakers of the same language in
         a particular area.  In this  regard  the  authors  found  that  the
         appellant  displayed  'grammatical  features  not  consistent  with
         speakers of Sorani with a background in Iran (my emphasis)."

23. Then, in relation to the "Lexica" features of the appellant's language,
    having set out the report's conclusion, the judge went on to  say  this
    about the report's analysis (at para 18):

         "As I have indicated the Spraka[b]  report  analysed  an  immutable
         characteristic  as  it  could  be.   Phonology  and   Prosody   and
         Morphology and Syntax and Lexica could  change  over  a  period  of
         time.   Changes  could  be  brought  about  by  the  speaker  being
         influenced by a different 'group of speakers' he or she mixes  with
         or lives with.  This happens by process of osmosis, as it were  and
         it takes time.  Or it could be learned, over a period of time, such
         as by elocution lessons taken by the speaker(s).   In  the  instant
         appeal, the appellant did  not  have  sufficient  time  to  acquire
         changes either  by  process  of  osmosis  or  by  taking  elocution
         lessons.  The appellant's speech was recorded in the interview  and
         it was that recording which was analysed.  Therefore,  I  find  the
         linguistic features the appellant displayed in the recording in the
         interview it is as close an immutable characteristic,  inextricably
         linked to the appellant, as it gets".

24. On behalf of the appellant, it is argued that the judge erred  in  this
    reasoning.  It is pointed out that the appellant  came  to  the  UK  in
    March 2017 and the language report interview took place in  March  2018
    over a year ago.  That was  sufficient  period  of  time  for  language
    changes to  have  occurred  as  a  result,  it  is  said,  of  external
    influences in the UK by, for example, mixing with Kurds from Iraq.

25. In my  judgment,  it  was  pure  speculation  whether  the  appellant's
    language, within a year, could (or could  not)  have  adapted  to  take
    account of the language  used  by  those  with  whom  he  mixed.   That
    reasoning was  not  founded  in  any  evidence,  in  particular  expert
    evidence.  But, more significantly, the judge's view that language  (or
    the relevant features of it in play in the analysis)  is  a  "immutable
    characteristic" such that it would not change was reasoning  not  based
    upon any expert evidence or other evidence which could sustain  such  a
    view.  It may, or may not, be correct but the judge could only rely  on
    it if it was based upon evidence before him.  The respondent's  written
    submissions point to no such evidence and, so far as I am able to  see,
    there is nothing in the Sprakab report itself which would sustain  this
    reasoning.

26. The appellant's grounds and  submissions  recognise  that  the  Sprakab
    report read overall was undoubtedly  supportive  of  the  Secretary  of
    State's case.  However, to seek to  support  his  case,  the  appellant
    relied upon a birth certificate which, he said, disclosed that  he  was
    an Iranian national born on the date he claimed, namely, 15 August 1993
    (in the UK calendar).  In support of that, the appellant relied upon an
    expert report.  That expert report, having analysed and translated  the
    text of the birth certificate, concluded as follows:

         "To my knowledge, and experience for the reasons given, there is no
         error in the production, content, layout, or other feature  of  the
         document.  I therefore confirm that to the best of my knowledge and
         experience that the Birth certificate is entirely genuine".

27. The judge dealt with the report principally at para 19 as follows:

         "The  appellant  challenges  the  contents  of  the  Spraka[b]   by
         producing the Rashti Report (see: 'App 1'  pages  P15-22).   It  is
         prepared by a lawyer who is said  to  be  intimate  with  examining
         documents said to emanate from Iran.  In  the  instant  appeal  the
         expert was provided with what purports to be the Appellant's 'Birth
         certificate'.  Copy of the report is exhibited with the appellant's
         latest witness statement (see: 'App 1' pages P13-P14; the purported
         original is retained in the IAC file).  Mr Bedford accepts that but
         for one error the 'birth certificate' is authentic and  it  relates
         to the appellant.  The one error, pointed out  by  Mr  Bedford,  is
         said to relate[] to the serial number on the top[] right  (67A)  is
         incorrect in that the number relates to adults born after  '1369  =
         1990' (see: 'App 1 P16 para 5) B).  I find  this  intriguing  since
         the appellant claims he was born in 1993".

28. The judge then went on to state at para 20:

         "The essential difference between the Spraka[b] and Rashti  Reports
         is the material upon which they are prepared.  The former is  based
         on, as I have already indicated,  on  the  appellant's  speech.   I
         characterise this as [an] immutable characteristic as it gets.   It
         is intrinsically linked to the person of the appellant.  The latter
         report is based on an external source, namely what purports  to  be
         the appellant's 'birth certificate'.   The  document  needs  to  be
         considered in the round and not in isolation".

29. The judge then went on to refer to the well-known decision  in  Tanveer
    Ahmed [2002] Imm AR 318.  The judge,  then,  turned  to  consider  "the
    Appellant's  evidence  surrounding  his  date  of   birth   and   birth
    certificate".  In relation to that at paras 22-24, the judge said this:

         "22. In his AIR the appellant was asked for his date  of  birth  in
             Iranian calendar (see: Q41).  The appellant gives his date  of
             birth as '15th August  1372'.   The  respondent  found,  using
             objective evidence on this point, that the date given  by  the
             appellant translates as '6 November 1993' and not  '15  August
             1993'.  In my view, for someone who claims to have  been  born
             and brought up in Iran, to get (sic) so wrong  undermines  the
             appellant's credibility.

         23.  In para 13 of  his  latest  witness  statement  the  appellant
             addresses the error in the date of birth (see:  'App  1'  page
             P3).  This states his date of birth, in  Iranian  calendar  is
             '24.05.1372'; this is the date he gave when he  first  arrived
             in the UK; he did not know the difference between the  UK  and
             Iranian calendars; an interpreter in  the  s/c  converted  his
             date of birth to read '15.08.1993' and asked the appellant  to
             use that because no one in  the  UK  will  understand  Iranian
             calendar; he got confused in his AIR; he remembered the  words
             of the interpreter; he got confused and gave the date recorded
             in the AIR.  The appellant appears to attribute error  on  the
             part of the interpreter.

         24.  I note in the Rashti Report the appellant's date of  birth  is
             given as '1372/05/24'.   This  translates,  according  to  the
             report, '15/08/1993' (see: 'App 1' P16-7)  A).   It  therefore
             appears that the interpreter's translation is confirmed by the
             appellant's own expert.  Further, in answer Q41, the appellant
             not only gave a different month (in the Iranian calendar)  but
             also the date (in  the  Iranian  calendar).   I  do  not  find
             attributing  the  error  to  the  interpreter   explains   the
             appellant giving a different date of birth to the one  he  had
             previously given".

30. There are two points that should be made about the judge's reasoning.

31. First, it is difficult to see what error the judge identifies (at  para
    19 of his determination) in the  appellant's  birth  certificate.   The
    appellant's case is that he was born in  the  Iranian  year  of  "1372"
    which translates into the UK calendar as the year "1993".  Despite what
    is said in para 19 and was the submission of  the  appellant's  counsel
    before the judge, there is no apparent error in the  birth  certificate
    when it contains a serial number in the top right which is reserved for
    "adults which were born after '1369' (Iranian calendar) or  '1990'  (UK
    calendar).  The appellant claims to have been born after that in "1372"
    (Iranian calendar) or "1993" (UK calendar).

32. Secondly, there is an obvious confusion in the dates of birth given  by
    appellant.  However, the date and month that he  gives  in  his  asylum
    interview the translated date (15th) and month  (8th)  equates  to  the
    date (24th) and month (5th) of his claimed date of birth in the Iranian
    calendar.  The former dates were then added to the year of his birth in
    the Iranian  calendar,  namely  "1372"  rather  than  the  UK  calendar
    equivalent  of  his  year  of  birth,  namely  "1993".   The   striking
    coincidence supports his explanation that  he  confused  parts  of  his
    birth date in the two calendars.   Far from being  implausible,  in  my
    judgment, the explanation of the appellant is entirely  plausible.   It
    does not, in my judgment, provide  a  sound  reason  for  doubting  the
    reliability of the birth certificate.

33. Then, at paras 25-29, the judge took into account  that  the  appellant
    had, in his view, stated in his asylum interview that he had never  had
    a birth certificate and which, in the judge's view, led  him  to  doubt
    the reliability of the document.

34. At para 30 the judge reached his  conclusion  on  the  two  reports  as
    follows:

         "The appellant's answers to q5-11 have to be considered in relation
         to the Spraka[b] and Rashti Reports.  The contents of the Spraka[b]
         Report are based on the appellant's  voice.   It  is  intrinsically
         connected with the person of the appellant.  The report states that
         there is a 'high' of 'degree certainty' that the  appellant  is  an
         Iraqi and not an Iranian.   The  appellant  relies  on  the  Rashti
         Report.  It is prepared  on  a  document.   That  document  is  not
         intrinsically connected with the appellant as  his  voice  is.   It
         states that the  document  emanates  from  Iran.   It  may  do  so.
         However, considered in relation to the appellant's answers to q5-11
         and the Spraka[b] Report, leads me to find that the  Rashti  Report
         does not demonstrate he is an Iranian national".

35. The judge was faced with the difficult task of seeking to make findings
    based upon a  Sprakab  report  which  pointed  in  one  direction  (the
    appellant is Iraqi not Iranian) and an expert report in relation  to  a
    document which, if authentic, pointed in the  opposite  direction  (the
    appellant is Iranian).  In my judgment, the judge has wrongly  elevated
    the importance of the Sprakab report based upon an  unsustainable  view
    that it was more significant as it assessed an  "immutable"  aspect  of
    the appellant, namely his voice  and  linguistic  characteristics  (see
    also para 25 above).

36. As the Supreme Court acknowledged in SSHD v MN and KY [2014] UKSC 30, a
    Sprakab report is highly relevant but that it  requires  evaluation  in
    the light of all the evidence and is only one part  of  that  evidence,
    even where a report states a conclusion in terms of "certainty or  near
    certainty" (see [46]-[48]).  Of course, the report in  this  appeal  is
    not so emphatically expressed.

37. In relation to the Sprakab report, the judge failed to grapple with the
    appellant's contention  that,  despite  its  summary  conclusions,  the
    report identified aspects of the appellant's linguistic  ability  which
    was consistent with his claim even  if  large  parts  of  the  report's
    conclusions were inconsistent  with  his  claim.   Further,  the  judge
    elevated the importance of the Sprakab report improperly (see paras  35
    above).  Faced with that, the judge also had  an  expert  report  which
    concluded that the birth certificate submitted  by  the  appellant  was
    authentic and, if genuine, was entirely supportive of his claim  to  be
    an Iranian  national.   The  judge's  reasoning  for  discounting  that
    evidence was, as I have already indicated, in part, flawed  (see  paras
    31 and 32 above).

38. Whilst there was evidence before the judge that could have led  him  to
    conclude that the appellant was not Iranian as he claimed, the  judge's
    assessment of  the  evidence  for  and  against  the  appellant's  case
    required a more nuanced approach and more accurately reasoned  findings
    in order to be sustainable.

39. For these reasons, therefore, I accept that the  judge's  finding  that
    the appellant had not established that he is an  Iranian  citizen,  but
    rather it is established that he is an Iraqi citizen,  is  not  legally
    sustainable.

40. In the light of that conclusion, the appellant's claim to be at risk in
    Iran, in my judgment, was not properly considered by  the  judge.   The
    judge, of course, approached the appellant's claim on the basis that he
    did not believe a central aspect  of  his  claim,  namely  his  Iranian
    nationality.  As ground  2  states,  the  judge  made  no  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's claimed activities in Iran on behalf of the
    KDPI.   Had  his  Iranian  nationality  been  established,  that   was,
    undoubtedly, a relevant issue in determining  what,  if  any,  risk  he
    would be exposed to on return to  Iran  given  his  claimed  sur  place
    activities in the UK applying  HB.   For  those  reasons,  the  judge's
    finding that the appellant would not be at risk on return to  Iran  (if
    his Iranian nationality had been established) is  also  legally  flawed
    and cannot stand.  None of the judge's findings are sustainable and the
    appeal must be determined de novo.

Decision

41. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material  error
    of law.  That decision cannot stand and I set it aside.

42. Given the nature and extent of fact-finding required, and having regard
    to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice  Statement,  the  proper
    disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a
    de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Lawrence.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                           17 September 2020

