
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06628/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 November 2018                          |On 12 December 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HILL QC


                                   Between

                                     k w
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is an appeal from the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Ross which was  promulgated  on  31  August  2018.   In  short,  the
       appellant is a young man from  Afghanistan  who  travelled  to  this
       country and claimed asylum upon arrival.


    2. There were a number of factual issues which the judge  was  required
       to  address  but  the  principal   issue   concerned   the   claimed
       relationship of the appellant with two named individuals said to  be
       his brothers. A body of DNA evidence was placed before the court  in
       this regard, most significant of which was an email  emanating  from
       the DNA expert to the appellant's solicitor which drew upon  several
       DNA markers and concluded, "This observation would suggest that  the
       three individuals share the same mother and father".


    3. It is also clear, as has been painstakingly submitted by Ms Willocks-
       Briscoe for the Secretary of State, that both the initial DNA report
       and the subsequent email exchanges indicate that there  are  caveats
       that apply in all forms of DNA testing. In relation to siblings  and
       half-siblings  it  is  notoriously  more   problematic   to   secure
       statistically robust final resolutions than in determining  parental
       DNA. Ms Willocks-Briscoe very helpfully took me to the  decision  of
       Mr Anthony Haden QC sitting as a Deputy High Court Judge in the case
       of Re F (Children) (DNA evidence) [2007] EWHC 3235  (Fam).   I  need
       not read the text of the judgment into this decision, suffice to say
       that it makes abundantly plain how sibling testing for  DNA  can  be
       inconclusive and much turns upon the questions put by the parties of
       the experts and the background information.


    4. The judge in this  instance  dealt  with  the  documentary  evidence
       starting at paragraph 17 where he refers to the DNA testing and  the
       documentation to which I have already made reference,  returning  in
       paragraphs 21 and following to a more  detailed  discussion  of  the
       situation.  The judge comes to the conclusion that  the  case  of  a
       sibling relationship is not made out and that in all likelihood  the
       appellant  is  probably  "more  distantly  related"   to   the   two
       individuals claimed as brothers.


    5. Ms Willocks-Briscoe argues that the judge's conclusion is  one  that
       was perfectly open to him on the evidence.  She points to  the  fact
       that the expert opinion was not conclusive, that it was expressed to
       be conditional upon other factors and that in the course of  several
       paragraphs of  detailed  analysis  the  judge  grapples  with  those
       factors and seeks to come to the best  conclusion  possible  on  the
       evidence which is available. Ms Willocks-Briscoe invites me to  find
       that there is no error of law in the way in which the  judge  sought
       to do the best he could on the material before him to come to robust
       and sustainable conclusions.


    6. Having reflected and re-read the material, I regret I cannot  accept
       that submission. On my reading of the expert evidence,  although  of
       course it cannot be said to be conclusive, it  certainly  points  to
       the likelihood of these three individuals being  full  siblings.  To
       depart from that expert intimation would require detailed  reasoning
       and cogent argumentation which I do not find to be present  in  this
       decision.


    7. It is accepted by both Ms Willocks-Briscoe and Mr Moriarty that if I
       come to the view that the judge in this instance did not  adequately
       engage with the expert evidence, this is so central to the issues in
       dispute and to the credibility of  the  appellant  that  it  infects
       every part of the decision.


    8. In those circumstances, bearing in mind the discomfort I  have  with
       the way in which the judge has dealt with this  aspect,  it  follows
       that the decision must be set aside, and remitted to the  First-tier
       Tribunal for a rehearing de novo with no facts preserved.


    9. There may be applications to adduce further evidence.  It would  not
       be appropriate for me to give formal directions in that regard, this
       matter being now within the province of the First-tier Tribunal  but
       the sooner any new  material  is  formally  lodged  and  served  the
       better.

Notice of Decision

   1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside
   2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be decided afresh
      by a judge other than Judge D Ross.
   3) No factual findings are preserved.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Hill                      Date     7 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hill QC



