
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06824/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 November 2018                           |On 10 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     amw
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Miszkiel, Counsel instructed by L&L Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born in January 1989 of
    Sinhalese ethnicity.  On 7 February 2015 he applied for asylum.  He
    claims to have been detained and subjected to torture and to be at risk
    on return because of perceived involvement with the LTTE stemming from
    his relationship with a Tamil girl and the assistance he gave to her
    brothers in finding accommodation in Colombo.

 2. The application was refused by the respondent on 25 February 2018.  The
    respondent did not accept the appellant's account of having been
    arrested, detained and subsequently released from prison and it was not
    accepted that he fell into any of the risk categories identified in the
    country guidance case GJ and others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri
    Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC).

 3. To support his application the appellant submitted a medico-legal
    report prepared by Dr Monica Carter, which considered in detail the
    appellant's claim to have been tortured and suffer from PTSD.  This
    report was prepared in accordance with the Istanbul Protocol.  The
    respondent stated the following in respect of the report in the Reasons
    for Refusal Letter dated 25 February 2018:

         "44. Dr Monica Carter ... found the lesions on your body to be
             consistent and highly consistent with the given attribution.

         45.  The report does not offer any evidence that the scars are
             likely to have happened within a set time period and thus it
             is not possible to conclude when the scars and the incidents
             they relate to happened.

         46.  Given the consistencies of the Medico Legal Report provided,
             the evidence is considered credible while assessing material
             facts, this part of your claim has been given significant
             weight in the round with all the available evidence.

         47.  It is noted that the Upper Tribunal in the case of KV
             (scarring - medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 230 (IAC)
             (23 May 2014) considered scarring and gave guidance on medico-
             legal reports in such cases and the reaching of conclusions
             about the causation of scarring.  The photographic evidence
             you have provided does not show when and how the scars were
             caused, nor that they were caused in the manner you claim, who
             took the photographs and when they were taken.  Having said
             this, some weight has been given to these photographs when
             considering the evidence of your claim in the round."

Decision of First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was
    heard by Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Manuell.  In a decision
    promulgated on 30 August 2018 the judge dismissed the appeal.

 5. The judge did not accept the appellant's account of having been
    involved with a Tamil girl, of being of interest to the authorities,
    and of having been detained and tortured. He described several aspects
    of the appellant's account as lacking plausibility and his claim to
    have been tortured as "not remotely credible".

 6. Amongst other things, the judge found damaging to the appellant's
    credibility that he did not claim asylum upon arriving in the UK in
    2011, that he pursued an appeal against refusal to grant further leave
    as a student without claiming asylum, and that he claimed to have
    travelled from the UK to Canada using forged documents in order to
    apply for asylum in Canada.

 7. The judge considered the appellant's claim to have been tortured at
    paragraphs 22 to 33 of the decision, including the report of Dr Carter.

 8. At paragraph 22 the judge stated, "As is frequently the case in Sri
    Lankan Tamil appeals, medical reports were produced in some volume".

 9. At paragraph 23 the judge noted the experience of Dr Carter (whose
    report is mentioned above at paragraph 3) and that she worked for the
    Medical Foundation.  He highlighted that she had distinguished between
    older scars, some of which were said to be from a motorcycle accident,
    and those attributed to the claimed torture, and that she had ruled out
    self-infliction by proxy.

10. At paragraph 24 the judge stated that Dr Carter, along with other
    medical professionals involved with the appellant, had accepted the
    appellant's attribution of the PTSD causation uncritically.

11. At paragraphs 25 and 26 the judge stated the following:-

         "25. Confronted with the stark evidence of the Appellant's horrific
             burn scars, it is not surprising that Dr Carter was unable to
             accept that the scars were anything other than the result of
             malevolent activity.  The possibility that the Appellant had
             consented to scarring in order to further his international
             protection claim was not seriously entertained.  In the
             tribunal's view, however, Dr Carter omitted to analyse the
             story put forward by the Appellant in the necessary depth, and
             to consider the highly selective supporting evidence he
             produced.

         26.  Purely at the medical level, in the tribunal's view there was
             insufficient consideration of the history given by the
             Appellant of his supposed arrest and interrogation in December
             2014 in Sri Lanka.  That supposedly commenced on 14 December
             2014, having been preceded by an earlier period of detention
             in Martinique following his arrest there, likely to have been
             several days.  The Appellant's claim was that, use of a false
             French passport aside, he had never done anything wrong in Sri
             Lanka and had no wish to support the LTTE.  He had left Sri
             Lanka without difficulty, travelling on his own Sri Lankan
             passport, in 2011.  It is almost inconceivable he could have
             been permitted to do so if he had been of any continuing
             interest to the Sri Lankan authorities."

12. At paragraph 28 the judge commented that the ill-treatment the
    appellant claimed to have suffered would likely have caused shock and
    given rise to the danger of disease and infection.

13. At paragraph 29 the judge stated:-

         "In the tribunal's view, the Appellant has put forward a
         stereotypical account of torture which is not remotely credible.
         To begin with, he is not Tamil, so sectarian hatred or revenge
         punishment as a motive for his treatment is improbable.  The civil
         war was long over ... and the LTTE has been dismantled root and
         branch.  If the Appellant as a Sinhalese person was somehow
         suspected of having LTTE sympathies, then he was a prize catch for
         the authorities.  Offering him financial reward and cajoling
         information from him would surely have been a more productive
         approach than immediate recourse to brutality, especially as his
         family connections could easily have been checked.  He would also
         have been a prime candidate to be put on public trial for terrorist
         offences."

14. The judge at paragraph 30 stated that given the severity of the torture
    the appellant claimed to have suffered, it was difficult to understand
    how he was able to undertake a long international flight almost
    immediately having only received first aid treatment from his father.

15. The judge at paragraphs 31 to 32 comments on the appellant's medical
    records and in particular noted that his blood pressure readings
    "excite no comment".  The judge commented that the records "suggest
    that he was surprisingly healthy despite his claimed torture".

16. The judge at paragraph 33 stated that the medical evidence fails to
    discuss the pattern of the burn marks and their broad symmetry and
    that:

         "There was nothing identified in any of the specialist literature
         as to why a torturer would seek symmetry, nor why repeated
         applications of a hot iron would be needed to secure compliance".

17. Having rejected the appellant's account in its entirety, the judge
    considered the country background evidence and found, applying GJ and
    others (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319
    (IAC), that there were no material factors which would place the
    appellant at real risk on return as he would not be of interest to the
    authorities.

18. The judge also assessed the appellant's human rights claim under
    Article 8 ECHR and concluded that removal would not be
    disproportionate.

Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

19. The grounds of appeal assert that the judge adopted a "hostile attitude
    towards the appellant at the outset" and suggest (but without saying so
    explicitly) that the appellant was treated unfairly as a consequence.

20. Noting the absence of a witness statement from Mr Lingajothy (who
    represented the appellant in the First-tier Tribunal), I asked Ms
    Miszkiel if a procedural unfairness argument was being pursued as a
    distinct ground of appeal.  Her response was that it was not. However,
    she contended that the language used by the judge in the decision (for
    example, describing the account of torture as "stereotypical" and
    introducing the medical evidence at paragraph 22 with the words, "as is
    frequently the case ...") was indicative of the judge having a
    dismissive attitude towards the appellant's evidence.

21. The first ground of appeal argues that it was not open to the judge to
    be "so readily dismissive" of the appellant's case, given that his
    evidence, including the medical evidence, came from "a number of highly
    trustworthy sources".  It is asserted that the appellant was clearly
    the victim of torture, based on the report of Dr Carter, and that the
    judge failed to "properly appreciate the valuable role of expert
    medical (sic) plays in immigration appeals" and that the expert has
    "not whimsically reached her conclusions."  The grounds go on to say
    that this is an example of a judge being dismissive of a medical report
    because he was unhappy with it.

22. The second ground of appeal contends that the judge erred by the
    "wholesale dismissal of the appellant's highly meritorious claim."  It
    is stated that the judge overlooked that the Sri Lankan authorities are
    "mortally worried about the resuscitation of the [LTTE] movement" and
    that the judge has not appreciated that as an ethnic Sinhalese the
    appellant stands no chance of getting any sympathy from the Sri Lankan
    authorities.

23. This ground also takes issue with the judge's approach to GJ and others
    and submits that "the salient principles enunciated in GJ are
    appropriately met by the appellant."

24. The third ground of appeal argues that the judge did not properly
    consider the best interests of the appellant's children, who should not
    be removed from the UK.  It is contended that the best interests of the
    children were not treated as a primary consideration.

25. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge of the First-tier
    Tribunal MacDonald on the basis that it is arguable that further
    reasoning was required for discounting the view of Dr Carter, given the
    nature of the injuries and that self infliction by proxy was ruled out.

26. Before me, Ms Miszkiel focused on the medical evidence, contending that
    the judge adopted a flawed approach. Her key arguments were that:

      a) It was an error of law for the judge to raise self-infliction by
         proxy when the medical evidence was clear that this had not taken
         place.

      b) The judge treated the medical evidence as "plugging a gap" rather
         than as evidence to be considered in the round as part of the
         assessment of credibility.   This, she argued, was contrary to
         SA(Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ1302.

      c) The judge erred by failing to have regard to the respondent
         accepting in the Refusal Letter that weight should be given to Dr
         Carter's report.

      d) The judge had been too quick to dismiss Dr Carter's report given
         that she had explicitly stated her awareness of her duty to the
         court and had written a comprehensive and thorough report in
         accordance with the Istanbul protocol.

      e) Some of the language used by the judge, for example, describing the
         account of torture as being stereotypical, indicated that the judge
         formed a view on credibility without having proper regard to the
         medical evidence.

      f) The judge had speculated about the mind of the torturer where, at
         paragraph 29, he stated that because the appellant was not Tamil
         sectarian hatred or revenge would not be a motive for the torture.

      g) The judge took into account the appellant's blood pressure readings
         being normal as an indicator he had not been tortured, which was
         mere speculation.

27. Ms Miszkiel also commented on other aspects of the decision. She argued
    that the judge had made findings of implausibility where it was not
    appropriate.  For example, the judge considered it implausible that a
    relationship would have formed between the appellant and a Tamil girl,
    but there is no reason why this could not have happened and it was not
    correct to describe this aspect of the appellant's account as lacking
    in plausibility.

28. She also argued that the judge's analysis was not consistent with GJ.

29. Mr Whitwell submitted that much of the argument advanced by Ms Miszkiel
    was not in the grounds of appeal.

30. With regard to the judge's approach to the medical report, Mr Whitwell
    argued that the judge correctly directed himself and dealt with the
    evidence in detail and before considering other evidence.  This was, in
    his view, clearly not a case where the judge treated the medical
    evidence in isolation (or as an "add-on") and it was clear that the
    judge properly considered the medical evidence in the context of
    considering credibility. He submitted that the judge was not bound by
    Dr Carter's report and the weight to attribute to it was a matter for
    the judge.

31. Mr Whitwell also submitted that there were numerous strong reasons for
    the judge to question the appellant's credibility, including in
    particular the factors set out above at paragraph 6.

Analysis

32. Dr Carter, an experienced doctor working with the Medical Foundation,
    prepared a thorough and detailed report which followed the guidance in
    the Istanbul Protocol and the Directions in paragraph 10 of the
    Practice Direction of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the First-
    tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal.

33. Dr Carter considered the appellant's numerous scars and lesions and
    identified several that she considered were either "highly consistent"
    with or "consistent" with his account.

34. She considered whether the appellant's wounds arising from the burns
    could be self-inflicted and concluded, in respect of certain of the
    wounds, that because of their angle and distribution this would not be
    possible.

35. With regard to self-infliction by proxy, Dr Carter stated at paragraph
    77 of her report:

         "I considered the possibility of fabrication by self-infliction by
         proxy (SIBP) and assessed it in the light of what is known in
         forensic medical practice about such injuries for secondary gain,
         and could find no evidence for it in this case.  There was no lapse
         of consciousness until after the burns were inflicted."

36. Although the judge gave clear and cogent reasons why he found aspects
    of the appellant's account to lack plausibility, in my view he did not
    adequately explain how, in light of Dr Carter's independent and
    comprehensive evidence which ruled out self infliction by proxy and
    found several lesions to be highly consistent with the claimed torture,
    he reached the conclusion that the appellant's account of being
    tortured was "not remotely credible" (paragraph 29 of the decision).

37. Moreover, several of the reasons given by the judge for not finding the
    account of torture credible are problematic.  These are:

         (a)  At paragraph 32 of the decision, the judge commented that the
         appellant's blood pressure excited no comment and that he was
         surprisingly healthy despite his claimed torture.  However, the
         judge has not explained why he would expect the appellant, who is a
         young man (under 30), to have high blood pressure or to exhibit
         other physical symptoms because of the torture experienced several
         years earlier.  The judge also failed to address in this context
         that the view of Dr Carter is that the appellant does in fact
         suffer from ongoing physical symptoms in the form of severe
         headaches, shoulder pain and impotence.

         (b)  At paragraph 33 the judge criticised the medical evidence for
         not discussing the broad symmetry of the burn marks.  However, the
         body diagrams appended to Dr Carter's report do not show
         symmetrical patterns of lesions and scarring.

         (c)  At paragraph 30 the judge found as undermining to the
         appellant's account that he claimed to have undertaken a long
         international flight almost immediately after his release with only
         medical treatment from his father.  However, it is not clear why
         the judge has reached the view that the appellant would have been
         unable to travel by plane without first receiving medical
         treatment.

         d)   At paragraph 25 the judge stated that the possibility of self-
         infliction by proxy was not seriously entertained by Dr Carter.
         However, Dr Carter addressed this issue explicitly at paragraph 77
         of the report (as quoted above), where she explained that, in her
         opinion, there was no lapse of consciousness until after the burns
         were inflicted and the evidence did not point to self-infliction by
         proxy occurring in this case.

38. Given the opinion of Dr Carter which, on any legitimate view, indicates
    that torture may have taken place, and that some of the reasons given
    by the judge for rejecting the appellant's claim to have suffered
    torture are unclear (as set out above at paragraph 37), having regard
    to the lower standard of proof applicable in asylum cases I am of the
    view that the judge materially erred in law by failing to give adequate
    reasons to explain how he reached the conclusion that the appellant's
    account of torture was "not remotely credible".

39. As the expert medical evidence is integral to the overall assessment of
    credibility, the decision will need to be re-made without any findings
    of fact preserved.  The extent of further fact-finding required is
    likely to be extensive, such that in accordance with Section 7.2(b) of
    the Practice Statements of the Immigration and Asylum Chambers of the
    First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal, the appeal should be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.

Notice of Decision

A    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
law and is set aside.

B    The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be considered
    afresh by a different judge.



|                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |Dated: 5 December 2018               |






