
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/06726/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|Centre                                 |                                |
|On 6 February 2019                     |On 14 February 2019             |

                                   Before
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BIRRELL

                                   Between
                           BRYAR ABDULLAH MAHMOOD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and
                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms Mair counsel instructed by GMIAU
For the Respondent: Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
   anonymity direction.  No  anonymity  direction  was  made  previously  in
   respect of this Appellant. Having considered all  the  circumstances  and
   evidence I do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Appellant was born on 21.10.1997 and is a national of Iran.

3. In order to avoid confusion, the parties are referred to as they were  in
   the First-tier Tribunal.

4. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
   Tribunal Judge A J Parker promulgated on 23 July 2018 which dismissed the
   Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent  dated  11  May
   2018.

The Judge's Decision

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged in essence arguing that  that  the  reasons
   given for dismissing the appeal were inadequate;  there  were  errors  in
   relation to  the  findings  about  the  Appellants  Facebook  activities.
   Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom on 17.8.2018.

6. The application was renewed and came before Upper Tribunal  Judge  Storey
   who granted permission on both grounds on 21 November 2018 stating:

       "I consider it is arguable that the judge's findings and reasons  in
       regard to adverse experiences in Iran  are  unclear  in  significant
       respects,  in  appearing  at  certain  points   to   summarise   the
       respondent's submissions and rely  on  these  as  his  own  findings
       without any separate reasoning as to why they have been adopted.'


Submissions

7. On behalf of the Appellant I heard  very  detailed  submissions  from  Ms
   Mair enlarging on her very detailed  Grounds  of  Appeal  and  these  are
   recorded in full in  my  record  of  proceedings.  She  identified  those
   aspects of the judge's decision which she argued showed that the findings
   were inadequate and lacked clear reasoning.  She  also  argued  that  his
   findings in respect of the Appellants sur  pace  activities  on  Facebook
   were inadequate.

8. Mr Bates on behalf of the Respondent argued  that  the  Appellants  claim
   that he had distributed leaflets for the KDPI was  not  accepted  by  the
   Respondent because of inconsistencies and inadequacies  in  his  account.
   The Judge was entitled to find that these had not been addressed  by  the
   Appellant either at the time of the interview or since. He noted that  in
   granting permission in respect of Ground 2 Dr Storey found  no  merit  in
   the argument that the Appellants social media activities would put him at
   risk on return. The Judge was entitled to find  these  were  very  recent
   activities to bolster a weak claim by someone who did not genuinely  hold
   the beliefs claimed. He was entitled to conclude there was no  basis  for
   finding his activities would come to the attention of the authorities and
   put him at risk.

9. In response Ms Mair argued that the Judge  had  to  consider  two  risks:
   that arising out of events in Iran and that arising out of  his  Facebook
   activities. She argued that the risk for Kurds was greater than that of a
   non Kurd.

Finding on Material Error

10. Having heard  those  submissions  I  reached  the  conclusion  that  the
   Tribunal made no material errors of law.

11. The Appellants protection claim was initially  based  on  his  assertion
   that he was at risk on return because  he  claimed  to  have  distributed
   material on behalf of the Kurdistan Democratic Party 2 months  before  he
   left Iran which led to a raid on his home.  By the  time  of  the  appeal
   hearing the Appellant also asserted that he was at risk because  a  month
   before the appeal hearing he had begun to share photos  and  posts  about
   the Kurdish cause on Facebook.

12. His  'story'  was  a  simple  one  both  factually  and  chronologically
   covering a brief period of time and  the  issues  were  not  complex  and
   therefore any criticism of the Judges failure to summarise what he  might
   have identified as the Appellants account is without merit as the summary
   of what is described as the 'claim' in the refusal letter at paragraph  8
   is not , in fact, the account as set out in  the  refusal  letter  as  it
   includes the later claim based on sur place activities. Thus it is a very
   brief but accurate summary of the Appellants claim at  the  time  of  the
   appeal hearing. The Judge notes  that  he  kept  a  full  record  of  the
   Appellants evidence and referred to it in his  findings  where  he  found
   that evidence relevant to the issue he had  to  determine:  there  is  no
   error in this approach.

13. The Respondent rejected the claim as it was at the time of  the  refusal
   letter in essence because it was not accepted that the  Appellants  claim
   to have engaged in leaflet distribution for the 'Democrats' was  credible
   as it was undermined by lack of knowledge, vagueness and  inconsistencies
   and this argument  I  am  satisfied  is  what  the  Judge  summarises  at
   paragraph 14.

14. The Judge went on to identify what he felt were the key  inconsistencies
   in this claim. It may well be that the decision could have  been  written
   in a clearer and more structured way and certainly addressing  s8  issues
   in the middle of his general credibility  findings  before  returning  to
   events in Iran was unhelpful but the test is one of adequacy and no more:
    so the Court of Appeal in MD (Turkey) [2017] EWCA Civ 1958 at  paragraph
   26 stated:

       "The duty to give reasons requires  that  reasons  must  be  proper,
       intelligible and adequate:  see the classic authority of this  court
       in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration  [1964]  2  QB  467.   The  only
       dispute in the present case relates to the last of  those  elements,
       that is the adequacy of  the  reasons  given  by  the  FtT  for  its
       decision allowing  the  appellant's  appeal.   It  is  important  to
       appreciate that adequacy in this context is precisely that, no  more
       and no less.  It is not a counsel of perfection.  Still less  should
       it provide an opportunity to undertake a qualitative  assessment  of
       the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising,  on
       their merits.  The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in  part,
       to enable the losing party to know why she has lost.  It is also  to
       enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what  the  reasons  for
       the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error  of
       approach has been committed."(my bold)


15. Thus the findings set  out  why  the  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
   Appellant had distributed leaflets as  he  claimed  and  given  that  the
   account was relatively short there was unlikely to be a great  deal  that
   the Judge could say. The Judge at paragraph 16 therefore examined whether
   the Appellants claims about  his  political  activities  were  internally
   consistent and on any fair reading of  the  whole  of  his  albeit  brief
   decision he highlighted discrepancies been his various accounts as to key
   issues: thus at paragraph 16 he notes that in the Screening interview the
   Appellant made no mention of distributing leaflets for the Democrat Party
   which was what he said in the asylum interview which clearly was the case
   he advanced before the Judge but said that he  distributed  leaflets  for
   all parties. That is a clear discrepancy.

16. The Judge again explicitly stated  at  paragraph  18  there  were  other
   discrepancies and refers to his claim to work for the  Democrats  who  he
   identified as Hizbi Komani Democrat Republic Party and I  do  not  accept
   the argument that this is anything other than  a  clear  finding.    This
   party does not exist and this was accepted by Ms Mair but she argued that
   he meant the KDPI: the Judge was perfectly entitled to  say  he  did  not
   agree that he must have meant a party who bore a different  name  to  the
   one that he stated and that 'you'd think he would get to know  the  party
   he was working for.' The Judge accepted that the Appellant was illiterate
   but was entitled to  find  that  this  did  not  adequately  explain  the
   inconsistencies he found. The Judge at paragraph 19 finds his description
   of the party logo was vague and this is perhaps an example of  where  the
   decision could have been better written in  that  the  Judge  could  have
   identified what the Appellant left out of the description  that  entitled
   him to use the word 'vague' but the word is apt as the Appellant made  no
   reference to the Sun which is a central and distinctive  feature  of  the
   KDPI logo.

17. In the refusal letter it was  also  suggested  that  the  Appellant  had
   shown limited knowledge of the aims and objectives of the party  that  he
   was distributing leaflets for: given the risks involved and the nature of
   his claim this was found not to be  credible.  The  Appellant  bears  the
   burden of proving his case and it was open  to  the  Judge  to  state  at
   paragraph 20 that he had not addressed this challenge. The fact  that  he
   is illiterate is not a clear explanation for his lack of knowledge  given
   that he was risking his life to distribute this material.

18. The Judge found at paragraphs 23-24 that the Appellants account  in  the
   asylum interview of how he got involved in the leaflet  distribution  and
   who and where he delivered to was' vague' and lacking in detail  that  he
   might have expected to hear. While the findings are brief I am  satisfied
   that these are clear and adequate findings.

19. It was open to the Judge to find at paragraph 28 that the  circumstances
   of his friend finding him while he was smuggling goods on  his  way  back
   from the border to warn him about the raid was implausible given that the
   route he took was 3-4 hours long and there was unlikely to  be  only  one
   route across the Iraq/Iran border.

20. The Judge also explained why he did not accept that the  Facebook  posts
   put the Appellant at risk. Upper Tribunal Judge Storey found no merit  to
   the challenge to  the  Judges  findings  in  respect  of  the  Appellants
   Facebook activities and I agree. While clearly  there  are  too  separate
   issues the Judge was not  considering  the  Sur  Place  activities  in  a
   vacuum. He found that the Appellant had not fled from  Iran  because  his
   home had been raided as a result of him leafleting for the KDPI. While Ms
   Mair argues that he  did  not  make  explicit  findings  as  to  Facebook
   activities and whether they reflected beliefs he held I am satisfied that
   he rejected his claim about his political beliefs in Iran  (paragraph 31,
   35 and 38 ) and makes clear he does not accept that the Appellant then or
   in Facebook was being truthful about his political beliefs     The  Judge
   was also looking at activity that  had  only  begun  shortly  before  the
   appeal hearing after the Appellant had arrived in the UK on  29  November
   2015. These were factors that the Judge was  properly  entitled  to  take
   into account in determining whether the Appellant was sharing views  that
   he genuinely held. He did not refer to AB and Others (internet  activity)
   [2015] UKUT 257 because it  is  not  a  country  guidance  case  and  was
   reported only to make available the material placed before  the  tribunal
   and therefore he is not in error in not referring  to  it.  Moreover  the
   Judge would have been entitled to note that in assessing whether he had a
   profile that would put him at risk In a number of ways the case  of  this
   Appellant is distinguishable from AB in that AB was a member of the  KDPI
   and had supportive evidence from them in the UT this Appellant is not and
   does not, AB attended meetings and demonstrations and this Appellant  has
   not, AB was the author and originator of the material  that  appeared  on
   the internet whereas this Appellant is illiterate and  merely  'shared  '
   material. All those factors contributed to the potential profile  of  AB,
   factors which were entirely absent in this case.

21.  No  expert  evidence  about  Facebook  evidence  or  how  and  in  what
   circumstances  such  activity  would  come  to  the  attention   of   the
   authorities was placed before the Judge particular to this Appellant.  He
   found that the Appellant had no political profile from anything that  had
   occurred in Iran as he did not find his account credible  (paragraph  35)
   and concluded that posting some material as he had did  not  give  him  a
   risk profile particularly given that these  were  views  that  the  Judge
   found he did not genuinely hold (paragraph 37) . The Judge  was  entitled
   to find that no material had been placed before him  that  precluded  the
   deletion of Facebook accounts or that such an account would have come  to
   the attention of the authorities in  Iran.  I  accept  that  the  T-shirt
   analogy drawn by the Judge is particularly unhelpful given that a T Shirt
   can be discarded/ abandoned /destroyed but Ms Mairs argument (without any
   evidential support) was that a permanent footprint was left  by  Facebook
   accounts. However the Appellant bears the burden of proving his  case  so
   if he wished to argue as Ms Mair suggests that Facebook accounts leave  a
   permanent footprint that would expose him to risk he bore the  burden  of
   establishing that as part of his case.

22. I therefore accept that the Judge's determination when read as  a  whole
   set out findings that were adequate reminding myself  that  this  is  the
   standard that applies.

CONCLUSION

23. I therefore found that no errors of law have been established  and  that
   the Judge's determination should stand.

DECISION

24. The appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                                              Date
11.2.2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Birrell

