
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06155/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 4 June 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                  AARTI [P]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 15 August 1987 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    India. She appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against  a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State dated 30 April 2018 to refuse her  international
    protection/human rights application.  The  First-tier  Tribunal,  in  a
    decision promulgated  on  19  June  2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. A previous hearing before  the  Upper  Tribunal  had  to  be  adjourned
    because an interpreter in Hindi  was  not  available.  At  the  resumed
    hearing on 4 June 2019, an interpreter was  again  not  made  available
    but, fortunately, it was possible to use a Punjabi interpreter who  was
    present at the tribunal centre. The appellant confirmed  that  she  was
    content to proceed with a Punjabi interpreter.  I  told  the  appellant
    that she should let me know if she did not understand any part  of  the
    proceedings. I was assisted by Mrs  Pettersen,  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State,  who  made  her  submissions  in  a  manner  easily
    comprehended by the appellant.

 3. The grounds of appeal are brief. The grounds were not  drafted  by  the
    appellant  herself  but  by  Counsel  instructed  by  the   appellant's
    solicitors who no longer appear to be retained in the appeal. There is,
    in essence, one ground of appeal, namely that the judge failed to  have
    proper regard to the best interests of the appellants daughter  subject
    to the provisions  of  section  55  of  the  Borders,  Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009. The  findings  of  fact  of  the  judge  are  not
    challenged. The judge had rejected  [66]  the  appellant's  account  of
    having suffered abuse at the hands of  her  first  husband.  The  judge
    accepted that the appellant is taking medication for anxiety  [77]  but
    the judge did not accept that there was any evidence  that  the  second
    husband of the appellant was seeking to remove the appellant's daughter
    from her. The judge rejected the appellant's claim that she would  face
    ill-treatment in India on account of the conduct of either of  her  two
    husbands [89]. At [90], the judge agreed  with  a  previous  tribunal's
    finding that the appellant had failed to prove that she had  no  family
    or friends in India who would assist her.

 4. In her submissions to the Upper Tribunal, the appellant  told  me  that
    her second husband is now living in India. She said that she  only  had
    her husband's family in India and no family of her own who would assist
    her.

 5. I have considerable sympathy for the appellant who presented  her  case
    cogently. It is also clear that she is suffering anxiety at the present
    time, possibly as regards the uncertainty of her immigration status and
    the custody of her child. However, I am bound to  consider  the  appeal
    only on the grounds on which permission has been sought and granted. It
    is clear that the judge at  [52]  did  consider  the  position  of  the
    appellant returning to India as a single mother 'with a  young  child.'
    The judge does not refer to section 55 of the Borders, Citizenship  and
    Immigration Act 2009 in terms but I  am  satisfied  that  his  analysis
    addresses the best interests  of  the  child  and  I  agree  with  this
    Secretary of State's submission that those best interests will  be  met
    by the child remaining at all times with the appellant. This will  mean
    that the child will return with the appellant to  her  own  country  of
    nationality, India. No challenges been made to the judge's findings  of
    fact as regards the availability of family or other support in India. I
    am not in a position to reverse those findings. It may be the case that
    there is limited family support on which  the  appellant  may  draw  in
    India, but the judge also found that she  would  have  the  support  of
    friends and others, a finding which has not been challenged in any way.
    In conclusion, I am satisfied that the judge  has  addressed  the  best
    interests of the appellant's daughter and, given that there is no other
    challenge to his decision, I find that the appeal should be dismissed.



Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 4 June 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

