
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06862/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Working Remotely by Skype            |On 19 May 2021                       |
|On 22 April 2021                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bass of Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity who comes  from
    Chamchamal.  He was born on 12 April 1994.  He arrived  in  the  United
    Kingdom on 21 October 2018 and on that date claimed asylum.  The  basis
    of his claim was that there was a blood feud  within  his  family  over
    property inherited by his father and uncles.  A cousin had been  killed
    and his father and he and his brothers were blamed.  He feared that  he
    would be killed if he returned to Iraq.  He also raised, as part of his
    claim, a fear from Daesh and the PMF in Iraq.

 3. On 3 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 7 October 2020, the FTT (Judges Osborne and Lloyd-Lawrie)  dismissed
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds.  Importantly for the purposes of
    the present appeal, the FTT made an adverse credibility finding and did
    not accept that there was a blood feud within  the  appellant's  family
    and that he would be at risk on return as a result.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    challenging the FTT's adverse credibility finding on  essentially  five
    grounds.

 6. First, the FTT had been wrong  to  rely  upon  inconsistencies  in  the
    appellant's evidence as to the identity of his "eldest brother" who had
    shot at his uncles and had, in effect, initiated the blood feud.

 7. Secondly, the FTT was wrong to take into account, what were said to be,
    inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence as to the age of his cousin
    when he was killed as part of the blood feud.

 8. Thirdly, the FTT had been wrong to take into account inconsistencies in
    the appellant's evidence as to whether his cousin was killed in 2001 or
    2010.

 9. Fourthly, the FTT had failed to take into account documentary  evidence
    produced by the appellant in his supplementary bundle relating  to  the
    acquisition of the land by the family which was  at  the  core  of  the
    claimed blood feud.

10. Finally, the FTT had wrongly applied s.8 of the Asylum and  Immigration
    (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 ("the 2004 Act") in taking into
    account as damaging of the appellant's  credibility  that  he  had  not
    claimed asylum in Greece where he had spent a month  before  travelling
    on to the UK.

11. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge Andrew) on 23 October 2020.  However, on a renewed  application,
    the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Rimington) granted the appellant permission  to
    appeal on all grounds on 17 November 2020.

12. The appeal was listed at the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre on  22  April
    2021 working remotely.  The appellant was represented by  Mr  Bass  and
    the respondent by Mr Walker, both of whom joined the hearing by Skype.

13. Mr Bass relied upon a skeleton argument in support of  the  grounds  of
    appeal and which he supplemented in his oral submissions.  I also heard
    oral submissions from Mr Walker.

The FTT's Reasons

14. The FTT recognised that  the  main  dispute  between  the  parties  was
    whether the appellant had established he was at risk on return due to a
    blood feud within his family that had resulted in a  cousin  "B"  being
    accidentally killed and the appellant's father and he and his  brothers
    being blamed for that killing.

15. The FTT gave its reasons for reaching an  adverse  credibility  finding
    and rejecting the appellant's claim that there  was  a  blood  feud  at
    paras 29 - 33 of its determination.  The  appellant,  although  he  had
    originally claimed to fear Daesh and the PMF, did not  rely  upon  that
    basis for his claim before the FTT (see para 34).

16. The FTT first considered s.8 of the 2004 Act and  whether  or  not  the
    appellant's failure to claim asylum in Greece,  a  safe  third  country
    damaged his credibility.  The FTT said this (at para 29):

         "29. In  considering  Section  8  of  the  Asylum  and  Immigration
             (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004,  we  note  that  the
             appellant has not in essence dealt with the criticisms made of
             him by the respondent for failing to claim asylum in Greece in
             his witness statement.  However, he did so to a point  in  his
             screening interview and explained that he wanted to travel  to
             the UK as there 'you can be free other than other  countries'.
             He also confirmed that he had family members in the UK and had
             spent a month in Greece.  The family members point  was  later
             corrected by his solicitor who said he did not have any family
             in the UK.  He was silent as to whether  or  not  he  had  any
             problems in Greece.  In his Asylum Interview he  advised  that
             he did not claim asylum in Greece as it is a poor country  and
             it cannot provide a living for its own citizens.  We find that
             the appellant knew that Greece was a safe  country  and  chose
             not to claim asylum as he wanted to go to  the  UK.   This  is
             supported by the letter submitted as evidence by the Appellant
             from his brother.  He advised in the letter, '[the  appellant]
             always talked about Europe and  he  was  keen  to  leave  this
             mess'.  This suggests that leaving Iraq was always planned  by
             the appellant.   We  find  that  this  adversely  damages  the
             appellant's credibility."

17. The FTT went on to look at the appellant's  "credibility  overall  from
    both an internal and  external  perspective".   At  para  30,  the  FTT
    reminded itself that the appellant was a child of 6/7  years  old  when
    the alleged dispute started  and  that  that  would  "almost  certainly
    hamper his ability to recall events".  The FTT then said this:

         "However, we find that this excuses some mistakes on  exactly  what
         happened and when.   However, we find that the appellant would have
         known the key facts of the dispute, such as the age of  his  cousin
         and would obviously know who his own family members were."

18. Then in paras 31 - 33, the FTT considered the evidence  concerning  the
    age of his cousin at the time the appellant claimed he  was  killed  in
    the dispute and when that occurred, together with  evidence  concerning
    which of  his  brothers  -  "S"  or  "A"  -  was  instrumental  in  the
    circumstances that led to that killing.  The FTT said this:

         "31. The appellant in  his  Preliminary  Information  Questionnaire
             stated that the cousin was killed in 2010 but was silent as to
             the age of the cousin.  In the appellant's Asylum Interview at
             question 9 he stated '... I had a blood feud  regarding  land,
             one of my cousins was killed and because of that they hated my
             father, as I  was  always  going  with  my  dad  to  the  land
             therefore they  hated me and they tried to kill me  twice  and
             they shot at me twice, that was in 2010 when we  fled  and  we
             went to Daquq ....'  At question 35  the  appellant  confirmed
             that the blood feud began in the spring of 2000.  At  question
             37 the appellant said in answer to a question as to  what  the
             name was of the cousin who was killed  '["B"]  [where  was  he
             killed] in Chamchamal [what date did this happen] I was  about
             6 or 7 years old [which uncle killed him] "R"  [which  uncle's
             son was this] "A" [who started the shooting] initially it  was
             my brother, he was 21 years old at the  time  as  he  did  not
             accept the situation, therefore he shot at one  of  my  uncles
             and then that uncle shot at one of my cousins as he thought it
             was him who shot him [he killed him] yes  [how  old  was  this
             cousin at the time] 16 or 17 years old.'  The appellant in his
             answer to question 40 confirmed that his  eldest  brother  was
             called "A" and that his brother "S" was  born  in  1987.   The
             appellant's solicitors  sent  a  list  of  corrections  on  05
             February 2019 but this  did  not  include  any  of  the  above
             details.

         32.  When moving on to consider the appellant's witness  statement,
             he was clear that the killing of his  cousin  occurred  around
             2001 and that the appellant was himself targeted as he was the
             same age and  looked  very  similar  to  "B".   He  stated  at
             paragraph 8 'traditionally blood feuds  in  Iraq  targets  the
             eldest child of the father;  however,  my  brother,  "S",  was
             married to a woman with very well-connected  political  family
             members'.  This suggests that the  appellant's  elder  brother
             was therefore "S", not, as claimed in the Asylum Interview,  a
             man named "A".  The appellant  submitted  a  letter  from  his
             brother "S" which, by way of second sentence reads, 'the  fact
             that I am the older brother and I also look after  his  family
             more than my grandmother [] who passed away in [2000]'.   This
             again leads us to find that "S" was  the  older  brother,  not
             "A".  The appellant, in cross-examination, stated  again  that
             he was the same age as the cousin who died.  It was  clarified
             with him how old his cousin was and he  said,  'we  both  born
             1994 and he died in 2001 and I do not know if that makes him 7
             years'.  It was put to him that he had said  that  his  cousin
             was 16 or 17 in his Asylum Interview and he denied that he had
             stated that and said that he was killed in 2001  and  was  the
             same age as him.

         33.  We find that it is damaging  of  the  appellant's  credibility
             that the date upon which the killing of his cousin takes place
             changes from 2010 to 2001.  We note  that  the  form  was  not
             completed by the appellant but by his Solicitor and the  point
             was not put to him, however, he clearly stated  at  one  point
             during the Asylum Interview that  his  cousin  was  killed  in
             2010.  We find that the  appellant  may  have  mis-stated  the
             years and that this error alone does not completely  undermine
             the appellant's case as he later stated the date  of  2001  in
             the Asylum Interview.  Thereafter he was consistent as to  the
             year.   However,  we  find  it  wholly  incredible  that   the
             appellant will be mistaken about the age of his cousin when he
             died and the  name  of  his  eldest  brother.   The  appellant
             mentions "A" as shooting during the 2001 dispute and expressly
             states that he is his eldest brother.  He then refers  to  "S"
             as being his elder brother and by the use of language, in  his
             witness statement, we find that he was meaning that he was the
             eldest brother.  We find that the  letter  from  "S"  confirms
             that he is indeed  the  eldest  brother.   We  find  that  the
             appellant simply would not have made a  mistake  about  either
             who was his elder brother or what the age was  of  the  cousin
             when he was killed.  We find that the mistake in age of  16/17
             which is almost an adult to 7,  a  very  young  child,  to  be
             fundamental and find that it is not  a  mistake  that  can  be
             explained away, for example, by someone guessing an age.   The
             appellant later claimed to clearly know the age of his  cousin
             by being able to give  his year of birth and claiming that the
             reason that he was targeted, not his other brothers,  was  due
             to his being the same age as his cousin who  was  killed.   We
             find that either of these errors would,  alone,  fundamentally
             undermine the  appellant's  credibility.   We  find  that  the
             reason the appellant is not credible is that  the  blood  feud
             did not occur and that he was not a victim or intended  victim
             of any blood feud.  We find that  he  simply  would  not  have
             erred on these key and basic details if he  had  been  telling
             the truth.  We find that errors as to dates  would  have  been
             understandable when looking at matters in the round."

Discussion

19. I will deal first with the credibility points relating to the  evidence
    and then s.8 of the 2004 Act.

20. On behalf of  the  appellant,  Mr  Bass  submitted  that  the  FTT  had
    misunderstood the appellant's evidence about which of his  "eldest"  or
    "elder" brothers had initiated the events that led to the death of  his
    cousin.  In his asylum interview (at question 40),  the  appellant  had
    said that it was his brother, "A" whom he referred to  as  his  "oldest
    brother".  Mr  Bass  submitted  that  the  FTT  had  misunderstood  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness statement that it was "S"  who  was
    the brother who  had  initiated  the  incident.   At  para  8  of  that
    statement the appellant said this:

         "Traditionally blood feuds in Iraq target the eldest child  of  the
         father; however, my brother, "S", was married to a woman with  very
         well-connected political family members.  In  the  circumstances  I
         think that my uncles realised that targeting him would be too risky
         and dangerous [for] themselves."

21. Here, the appellant refers to "S" as his eldest brother.  However,  the
    sense of para 8 is that, despite  "S"  being  his  eldest  brother  the
    family did not target him and it was not "S" who initiated  the  events
    which the appellant relied upon and in question  40  of  his  interview
    said was initiated by his brother "A".  However, the FTT identifies  an
    inconsistency in the appellant's account as to  which  brother  -  "the
    eldest" -  initiated  the  incident.   As  Mr  Bass  pointed  out,  the
    appellant's evidence was that he had five brothers of which one brother
    (together with also a sister) were younger than him.  In  other  words,
    his evidence was that he had four older brothers.  To  read  into,  and
    juxtapose, the appellant's evidence in his asylum interview and witness
    statement as giving rise  to  an  inconsistency  as  to  which  of  his
    brothers is his eldest brother whom he, it is said,  was  claiming  had
    initiated the incidents is, in my judgment, unreasonable and identifies
    an inconsistency that is not truly  present.   It  requires  confidence
    that the questions and  answers  correctly  identified  the  difference
    between an "older" or "elder" brother - on  the  one  hand  -  and  the
    "oldest" or "eldest" brother - on the other hand.   Both  "S"  and  "A"
    were elder or older brothers even if "S" was the eldest.  The precision
    with which the FTT analyses the appellant's evidence is  not  reflected
    in its own use of language in para 33 when it states that the appellant
    referred to "S" as being his "elder" brother.  The FTT offers no reason
    why it takes the view that by saying that "S" was his  "elder"  brother
    the appellant meant his "eldest" brother.  In fact,  the  appellant  in
    para 6 speaks of his "older" brother not by name as  being  the  person
    who "fired at my uncle first" and then  refers  to  "S"  as  being  the
    "eldest child" of his father, namely his eldest brother.  At  no  point
    does he say that "S" was the "older brother" who fired upon  his  uncle
    first.  Indeed, his witness statement, if subject to  close  linguistic
    analysis, clearly differentiates between an  "older  brother"  and  his
    "eldest brother" who is "S".  It is worth  noting  that  the  appellant
    refers to his brother "S" on  a  number  of  occasions  in  his  asylum
    interview at questions 40, 41 and 42.  At no point does he suggest that
    "S" was the  brother  who  initiated  the  incident.   The  appellant's
    evidence, when he names a brother is always that it was "A".  As I have
    said, the FTT's reliance on the fact that in question 40 he  refers  to
    "A" as  being  his  "oldest  brother"  relies  upon  a  linguistic  and
    grammatical usage of the comparative and superlative adjectives that is
    not reasonably warranted, not least given that the appellant was giving
    his evidence through an interpreter.

22. The points about when his cousin was killed and what age his cousin was
    at the time, resulted in the FTT accepting that the appellant may  have
    mistakenly said that his cousin was killed in 2010 when, throughout the
    remainder of his evidence, he had  said  it  was  2001.   However,  the
    appellant had, if that were the case, mis-stated his  cousin's  age  as
    being 16/17 rather than 6/7 years old which was a mistake that he could
    not  explain.   The  FTT  did  not  expressly  reject  the  appellant's
    explanation that he had never said in his  asylum  interview  that  his
    cousin was "16 or 17".  Rather, the FTT stated in para 33 that this was
    a fundamental mistake which even a 7 year old, such as  the  appellant,
    could not make by confusing his cousin's age.  Mr Bass  submitted  that
    the FTT did not explain why it was prepared to accept,  as  a  mistake,
    that the appellant said at one point that his cousin was killed in 2010
    but not that mistakenly said that his cousin was 16 or 17 at  the  date
    of the incident.  He pointed out that the  appellant  had  consistently
    said that the incident occurred in 2001.  Further, he had  consistently
    said that his cousin was the same age as him and, indeed, that was  why
    he had been targeted in revenge for the killing of his cousin.

23. In his submissions, Mr Walker acknowledged that  there  was  a  lot  of
    confusion concerning the age of the appellant's cousin and the relevant
    dates of 2001 and 2010.  Mr Walker accepted that there  was  supporting
    evidence, in  the  land  documents  contained  within  the  appellant's
    supplementary bundle, which supported the  events  as  having  occurred
    around 2001.  That was shortly after the land was  transferred  to  the
    appellant's father and uncles and which, it was said, led to a dispute,
    the killing of the appellant's cousin and  the  resulting  blood  feud.
    That point blends into the third point relied upon by Mr  Bass,  namely
    that the FTT failed to take into account that documentary  evidence  as
    being consistent with the appellant's claim.

24. I agree with Mr Walker that there was considerable confusion, not least
    in the FTT's reasoning relating to the evidence concerning the  age  of
    the appellant's cousin and whether the events occurred in 2001 or 2010.
     In giving the benefit of the doubt to the appellant in relation to his
    making a mistake in saying that his cousin was killed in 2010, the  FTT
    gave no reasons why they did not give the same benefit  of  doubt,  and
    implicitly rejected, the appellant's explanation that  he  had  not  in
    fact said that his cousin was 16 or 17 at the time of his  death.   The
    FTT failed to grapple with the whole of the evidence  which,  in  large
    measure  supported  the  appellant's  claim  that  a  land  transaction
    occurred in 2000 and which the appellant then relied upon as creating a
    blood feud dating from 2001.  Further, the FTT did not take that latter
    evidence, set out in the appellant's supplementary bundle together with
    the witness statement of "S" into account in assessing the  consistency
    of the appellant's account, despite the inconsistencies  identified  by
    the FTT, in reaching its finding that  the  appellant  was  not  to  be
    believed.  Although Mr Walker did not go so far as to concede that  the
    appellant should succeed in this appeal because of the FTT's  treatment
    of the evidence concerning  the  age  of  the  appellant's  cousin  and
    whether he was killed in 2001 or 2010, he did recognise that there were
    difficulties with the FTT's approach.

25. The FTT essentially only relied upon two aspects  of  the  evidence  to
    support its adverse credibility finding - other than s.8  of  the  2004
    Act  At para 30, the FTT said that: "We find that the  appellant  would
    have known the key facts of the dispute, such as the age of his  cousin
    and would obviously know who his own family  members  were".   For  the
    reasons I have given, the FTT's approach to both of  those  issues  was
    unsatisfactory.

26. Even if the FTT was entitled to take into  account  as  "damaging"  the
    appellant's credibility that he did not claim asylum in Greece applying
    s.8 of the 2004 Act, without these additional reasons, s.8 could not on
    its own sustain an adverse credibility finding.

27. I do not accept Mr Bass' submission that the FTT erred in law simply by
    considering s.8 of the  2004  Act  at  the  outset  of  its  reasoning.
    Nothing in the relevant case law of M (Section 8: judges process)  Iran
    [2005] UKAIT 00116 and JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  878  -  to
    which he referred in paras  21  and  22  of  his  skeleton  argument  -
    prohibited the FTT from considering s.8 initially.  Given that the  FTT
    properly considered the  appellant's  explanation  for  his  behaviour,
    namely not claiming asylum in Greece, and also properly only had regard
    to the behaviour as "potentially" damaging the appellant's credibility,
    the FTT would not, in that regard, fall into error.

28. There is, however, merit in Mr Bass' submission that the FTT did not in
    fact engage with the appellant's  explanation  why  he  did  not  claim
    asylum which included that he was under the control of a  smuggler  and
    there were difficulties (see questions 85 - 87 of the asylum interview)
    and that he had no opportunity to claim asylum in  Greece.   Also,  the
    FTT's reliance upon the evidence from the appellant's brother that  the
    appellant "always talked about Europe and he was  keen  to  leave  this
    mess" (page 33 of the  supplementary  bundle)  did  not  refer  to  the
    context of that statement namely that he was talking about  the  impact
    upon the appellant of ISIS taking control in their home area.

29. I have considerable reservations about the FTT's consideration  of  s.8
    in para 29 of its  determination  and,  if  it  were  necessary,  would
    conclude  that  it  failed  properly  to  grapple  with  the   evidence
    concerning the appellant's explanation why he did not claim  asylum  in
    Greece.  But, even if the FTT did not fall into error, as I have  said,
    its finding in para 29 in  respect  of  s.8  cannot  alone  sustain  an
    adverse credibility finding once its reasoning and findings in paras 31
    - 33 fall away.

30. For  these  reasons,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    materially erred in law in reaching its  adverse  credibility  finding.
    Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

Decision

31. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of  law.
    Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

32. Both representatives acknowledged that if the FTT's credibility finding
    could not stand, the proper disposal of the appeal was to remit  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a de  novo  rehearing.   I  agree.   Having
    regard to the nature and extent of fact-finding, and para  7.2  of  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement, the appeal is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing (not before Judges  Osborne
    or Lloyd-Lawrie).  No findings are preserved.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                  7 May 2021

