
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06841/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Working Remotely by Skype for        |                                     |
|Business                             |                                     |
|On 28 January 2021                   |On 19 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    A O A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Dieu, instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 2 August  1990.   He
    is a Kurd who comes from Jalawla in Dyala Province.   His  religion  is
    Kakai.

 3. The appellant left Iraq in November  2018  and,  travelling  through  a
    number of countries, arrived in the United Kingdom on 7 December  2018.
    He claimed asylum.  He claimed to fear the Iraqi government, Daesh, the
    Peshmerga and the PMF.  In particular, he  claimed  that  he  had  been
    seriously mistreated in the Peshmerga by a commander, "MS".

 4. On 7 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the ECHR.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 3 December 2019, Judge G Solly dismissed the appellant's appeal
    on all grounds.

 6. Before the judge, the appellant's claim focused on his account that  he
    had been seriously ill-treated when he had  joined  the  Peshmerga  and
    that he feared a commander, MS.  He claimed that he had been mistreated
    because of his religion.   Judge  Solly  made  an  adverse  credibility
    finding and did not accept the appellant's account  that  he  had  been
    seriously mistreated on the basis of his religion and would be at  risk
    on return.

 7. Further, the judge rejected the appellant's claim based upon  any  risk
    arising from the Iraqi government, Daesh or the PMF.

 8. The judge also rejected the appellant's claim under Art  15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive.

 9. In addition, the judge found that the appellant could,  in  any  event,
    internally relocate to the IKR or Baghdad.

10. As regards documentation, the judge found that the appellant  would  be
    able to return to Iraq with the necessary  documentation  in  order  to
    avoid any risk of serious harm contrary to Art 3 of the ECHR.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

11. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  On 8 January 2020, the First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Grant-Hutchison) granted the appellant  permission  to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

12. Following the issue of Directions in the light of the COVID-19  crisis,
    the appeal was listed for a remote hearing by Skype for Business.  That
    hearing took place on 28 January 2021  at  the  Cardiff  Civil  Justice
    Centre working remotely.  Mr Dieu, who represented the  appellant,  and
    Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of  State,  also  joined  the
    hearing remotely by Skype for Business.

The Issues

13. Mr Dieu relied upon his skeleton argument dated 23  August  2020  which
    reflected  the  grounds  of  appeal.   He  supplemented  that  skeleton
    argument in his oral submissions.  I also heard oral  submissions  from
    Mr Howells.

14. In the course of his oral submissions, Mr Howells accepted that, on the
    basis of para 8 of the grounds, the judge had erred in law  in  finding
    that the appellant could internally relocate to  Baghdad.   Mr  Howells
    did not therefore, seek to uphold the appeal on the basis  of  internal
    relocation to Baghdad.

15. Further, Mr Howells accepted that, although the judge's finding in para
    77 that the appellant could internally relocate to  the  IKR,  had  not
    been challenged in the grounds of  appeal,  nevertheless  that  finding
    could not stand if I  concluded  that  the  judge's  finding  that  the
    appellant had not established he was at  risk  from  MS  could  not  be
    sustained.  He accepted that  was  the  position  because  the  judge's
    finding in para 77 was premised on her  rejection  of  the  appellant's
    claim to fear MS.

16. Likewise, Mr Dieu, at the outset of his submissions, indicated that  he
    no longer pursued para 7 of his grounds which  criticised  the  judge's
    reasoning in para 69 of her determination in relation to the  issue  of
    whether the appellant could obtain  a  laissez-passer  from  the  Iraqi
    Embassy.  He accepted that that was now irrelevant to  the  appellant's
    claim.

Discussion

17. Mr Dieu relied upon five grounds set out in paras 2-6 of  his  skeleton
    argument.   Each  of  these  grounds  challenges  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding.  I will take each of these in turn.

    Ground 1

18. Ground 1 contends that the judge, in effect, misstated the  appellant's
    evidence in paras 39, 49 and 50 of her determination.  Those paragraphs
    are as follows:

         "39. He does not practise [h]is religion in the UK.  He  was  asked
             to clarify his written statement which said he was  persecuted
             because of his religion in the Peshmerga.  He said that he was
             not made to walk on broken glass because of his religion.   He
             was told to walk through some mud and he  stood  on  something
             sharp.  He accepted that this injury and  the  injury  to  the
             fingers were not due to his religious beliefs but due  to  his
             military training although saying  that  his  commander  hated
             him.  He also said he did not know why his commander was tough
             on him.  He said it was not just him that was put on frontline
             when fighting ISIS but a list of names were put up and he  was
             put on it.  The person in charge was put  in  place  by  [MS],
             this person was tough on him and he fears both.

         ...

         49.  He left the Peshmerga on 15 November 2018  with  [N]  who  was
             also of the Kakai religion.  His Kalashnikov was given to  the
             traffickers and he fears the Peshmerga.  There is no  evidence
             that he fled in fear.

         50.  He left because his name was on a list of people to fight in a
             very dangerous area, because of his religion he  says  in  his
             witness statement, however in oral  evidence  he  contradicted
             this saying that he was just one of several people on the list
             and his religion was not material.  I accept his oral evidence
             that his scarring was not due to his religion and neither  was
             him being placed on a list to fight in a dangerous area."

19. Mr Dieu submitted that the judge  had  failed  properly  to  take  into
    account that in cross-examination the appellant  had  referred  to  the
    commander  as  being  "racist"  and  that  the  judge  had   drawn   an
    unnecessarily narrow distinction  between  religion  and  racism.   The
    point, Mr Dieu emphasised, was that  the  appellant  had  said  in  his
    witness statement (at pages 1-7 of the supplementary  bundle)  that  he
    had been treated differently.  Mr  Dieu  referred  to  the  appellant's
    evidence in cross-examination in his own records which  he  agreed  was
    substantially the same as the judge's Record  of  Proceedings  which  I
    consulted and read out at the hearing.

20. Mr Howells submitted that the judge's conclusions were properly open to
    her on the evidence.  The appellant had accepted that his injuries were
    due to military training and not religion.  The judge was  entitled  to
    find there were  inconsistencies  in  his  evidence  in  assessing  the
    credibility of his claim.

21.  Whilst  the  appellant  did,  in  his  oral  evidence  during   cross-
    examination, refer to  him  being  treated  "differently",  when  asked
    whether he agreed that he had not been targeted, his  answer  was  that
    you would have to ask the person who  was  being  tough  on  him.   The
    appellant did refer to the individual as "racist" in his oral  evidence
    and that the person "hated" him but he also conceded that  he  had  not
    been made to walk on broken glass - as he had claimed - but that he had
    been told to walk through mud and that he had  stood  on  something  in
    that mud.  He was asked whether he accepted that what had happened  was
    due to military training and not  religion  and  he  replied  "yes.   I
    treated like that.  He was racist.  He hated me.  ....  okay  to  other
    Muslims.  Don't know why he tough on me".

22. In my  judgment,  Judge  Solly  properly  represented  the  appellant's
    evidence not least in para 39 of her  determination.   The  appellant's
    evidence was inconsistent both as between  his  witness  statement  and
    oral evidence but also in his oral evidence at the time of the hearing.
     He clearly said at one point that his mistreatment was not due to  his
    religion and that he did not know why his commander was tough  on  him.
    He also accepted that the reason why he was put on a list of people  to
    fight  on  the  frontline  was  not  because  of  his  religion.   That
    contradicted what he had said in his witness statement.

23. It was well within the bounds of a primary fact-finder, faced with this
    inconsistent evidence,  to  take  the  inconsistency  into  account  in
    assessing whether the  appellant's  account  was  credible  and  to  be
    accepted.  For these reasons, I reject ground 1.

    Ground 2

24. In Ground 2, Mr Dieu contended that the judge had failed, in para 51 of
    her determination, to give proper weight to  an  expert  report  by  Dr
    Monroe (at pages 8-31 of the supplementary bundle).  In that report, at
    paras 75-77, Dr Monroe states that the appellant's scarring  is  either
    "typical" or "highly consistent with" its  claimed  attribution  whilst
    the appellant was engaged in military training.

25. At para 51 of her determination, Judge Solly said this:

         "The appellant relies on a medical report from Dr Alexander  Monroe
         dated 25 September 2019 when  considering  that  scarring  on  his
         finger and foot were typical of the attribution he gave them.   The
         appellant had  told  the  expert  that  he  was  required  to  walk
         barefooted across a muddy area in  which  there  was  broken  glass
         which Islamic Peshmerga were not required to do, paragraph 23.  The
         injury to the fingers occurred when he fell after  running  onto  a
         sharp-edged object.  In his  oral  evidence  to  me  the  appellant
         denied that either element of  the  training  was  because  of  his
         religion.  It therefore follows that I give little  weight  to  the
         medical report on scarring."

26. Whilst Dr Monroe's report could  assist  in  establishing  a  cause  or
    connection between the physical aetiology that the  appellant  claimed,
    it could not assist in establishing that any such injuries were due  to
    mistreatment of the appellant in the Peshmerga because of his religion.
     The latter issue was central to the appellant's asylum claim.  Mr Dieu
    did not  specifically  address  this  ground  of  appeal  in  his  oral
    submissions.  In my  judgment,  in  relation  to  whether  or  not  the
    appellant had established the religious motivation for  any  injury  he
    claimed was caused to him  whilst  in  the  Peshmerga,  the  judge  was
    entitled to note that the appellant, in his oral evidence, denied  that
    there was any religious motivation and to give "little weight"  to  the
    medical report so far as it related to the cause of the scarring.  Even
    if it assisted in connecting the scarring to  the  appellant's  claimed
    cause of the injury, it provided no assistance in  determining  whether
    the appellant was to be believed that his injuries  were  caused  as  a
    result of religious motivation by his commander.  For  this  reason,  I
    reject ground 2.

    Ground 3

27. Ground 3 also relates to the judge's treatment of Dr  Monroe's  report,
    this time in relation to his evidence concerning the appellant's mental
    health.  Mr Dieu submitted that,  in  para  52  of  the  determination,
    although the judge had taken into  account  the  appellant's  diagnosis
    that he suffered from mild generalised anxiety and moderate  depression
    in assessing whether his evidence was affected by  his  mental  health,
    the judge failed to take it into account as support for the appellant's
    claim that he had been mistreated in Iraq which had affected his mental
    health.

28. Mr Dieu relied upon paras 86 and 88 of the expert's report.  In para 86
    Dr Monroe states that the appellant: "suffers mild generalised  anxiety
    and moderate depression in  response  to  his  experience  and  current
    situation."  Then at para 88, Dr Monroe says that the appellant's

         "anxiety and depression are attributable to the violent loss of his
         closest  relatives;  his  parents,  his  adverse  experience  while
         serving in the Peshmerga, and his  foreboding  of  imprisonment  or
         being killed if he is returned to Iraq."

29. Mr Howells submitted that the appellant did  not  suffer  from  serious
    mental health issues and the judge had found that his evidence was  not
    affected by that mental health.  He submitted that the  judge  had  the
    medical evidence well in mind.  It was, in any event, unlikely to  have
    had any material effect on the outcome of the appeal given the  judge's
    reasons for not accepting the appellant to be credible.

30. In fact, in para 52 the judge does refer to Dr Monroe's view concerning
    the appellant's mental health.  The judge said this:

         "Dr Monroe contributes [the appellant's  mild  generalised  anxiety
         and moderate  depression]  to  the  violent  loss  of  his  closest
         relatives  and  his  adverse  experience  while  serving  with  the
         Peshmerga together with his foreboding  of  imprisonment  or  being
         killed returned (sic) to Iraq.  The appellant indicated that he was
         fit and well before he gave his evidence.  I find that his evidence
         is not affected by his mental health, indeed  Dr  Monroe  does  not
         suggest it has been.  He is  not  being  treated  for  anxiety  and
         depression at the time of the hearing."

31. As will be clear, the judge does refer to Dr Monroe's evidence set  out
    at paras 86 and 88 of his expert report.  The judge was  not  bound  to
    find, as a result, that the appellant had established that his  account
    was a truthful one.  The expert evidence was  relevant  and  was  taken
    into account by the judge.  It had to be considered in the  context  of
    all the evidence.  The judge plainly did consider all the  evidence  in
    her extensive reasons given at paras 43-63 of her determination and  in
    reaching her adverse credibility finding in relation to the appellant's
    account.  I am wholly unpersuaded that the judge  materially  erred  in
    law by failing to properly take into account in  para  52  Dr  Monroe's
    evidence.  I, therefore, reject ground 3.

    Ground 4

32. Ground 4 relied upon by Mr Dieu concerned the judge's assessment of the
    evidence that led her not to accept the appellant's  account  that  his
    documentation, which he had when in Iraq, had  been  destroyed  because
    his home had been destroyed by the Iraqi Army.  In para 54,  the  judge
    said this:

         "His witness statement at paragraph 24 says that he has  been  told
         by a friend that his home has been destroyed by the Iraqi Army/PMF.
          I note this is vague and without  independent  corroboration.   My
         findings concerning identification document and where  it  is  thus
         depend on my assessment of the appellant's credibility."

33. Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had been wrong in  that  paragraph  to
    take into account that there was no "independent corroboration" of what
    the appellant had been told by a friend, namely that his home had  been
    destroyed.

34. Whilst it is uncontentious that it would be a legal error not to accept
    evidence simply because it was not corroborated, that is not the proper
    understanding of the judge's reasoning  in  para  54.   As  Mr  Howells
    submitted, the key feature of what the  judge  says  is  in  the  final
    sentence in para 54, namely that without any  supporting  documentation
    of what the appellant was told by his friend, whether the appellant  is
    to be believed that his home has  been  destroyed  "depend[s]  on  [the
    judge's] assessment of the appellant's credibility".  Absent supporting
    documentation, which if the judge found to be reliable could assist  in
    establishing whether the appellant's home had been destroyed, the  only
    basis upon which the judge could find that  the  appellant's  home  had
    been destroyed was if she accepted the appellant's evidence  which,  in
    turn, turned upon whether his evidence  was  credible  and  was  to  be
    accepted as truthful.  Consequently, I reject ground 4.

    Ground 5

35. In Ground 5, Mr Dieu submitted that the judge had been  wrong  in  para
    62, when assessing whether the  appellant  had  been  credible  in  his
    evidence concerning what  identification  documents  he  had  or  could
    access, to refer to "background evidence that Iraqi's (sic) do  produce
    documentation on return in reaching  that  assessment".   In  his  oral
    submissions, Mr Dieu submitted this was a significant factor taken into
    account by the judge in making her  adverse  credibility  findings,  in
    particular on the issue of documentation and  it  was  not  clear  what
    "background information" she was referring to.

36. In his submissions, Mr Howells took me to Annex A of the  CPIN,  "Iraq:
    Internal Relocation, Civil Documentation and Returns"  (February  2019)
    at pages 264-332.  At Annex A (at page 325) is a letter from the  Iraqi
    Ambassador to the United Kingdom dated 5 September 2018 in which it  is
    said:

         "please note that most of them may be in possession  of  copies  of
         their National IDs which they  may  have  not  been  not  disclosed
         previously."

37. Mr Howells submitted that  this  document,  which  was  in  the  bundle
    available to the judge, was "background  information"  which  supported
    what the judge had said in para 62 of her determination.

38. In the light of this, Mr Dieu  accepted  that  evidence  seemed  to  be
    consistent with the judge's remark and he did not seek  to  pursue  the
    point further.

39. In my judgment, the document in Annex A is  consistent  with  (and  can
    properly be seen as the basis for) the judge's observation in  para  62
    that some Iraqis do produce documents on return even though  they  have
    previously not disclosed them.  The judge has not, therefore, relied on
    background information which was not before her  or  made  a  statement
    that does not find support in  the  background  information.   She  was
    entitled to take that into account, albeit only as one of many factors,
    in  reaching  her  adverse  credibility  finding  in  relation  to  the
    appellant, in particular in relation to his evidence  that  he  had  no
    identification documents nor would be able to access them.   For  these
    reasons, I also reject ground 5.

    Conclusion

40. As a result, I reject each of  the  grounds  relied  upon  by  Mr  Dieu
    challenging the judge's adverse credibility finding and her conclusions
    that the appellant had not established a real risk  of  persecution  on
    return to Iraq or that he would be exposed to a real  risk  of  serious
    harm contrary to Art 3 as he would lack the appropriate  documentation.



41. It follows,  therefore,  that  the  judge's  decision  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's international protection claim did not involve  the  making
    of a material error of law.

42. Further, it follows that, to the extent required, the  judge's  finding
    that the appellant could internally relocate to the IKR also stands.

Decision

43. For the above reasons, the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  to  dismiss
    the appellant's appeal on all grounds did not involve the making of  an
    error of law.  That decision stands.

44. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.




                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

     Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                             29 January 2021



