
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06556/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford Magistrates' Court  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 31 July 2017                       |On 10 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CLIVE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                               elias shipindo
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Hussain, instructed by Halliday Reeves Law Firm


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and to the  respondent
    as the appellant (as they appeared respectively before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, Elias Shipindo, was born on  25  March  1982
    and is a male citizen of Namibia.  The appellant was convicted of  five
    counts of theft from another person; intention to pervert the course of
    justice, and possession of class A drugs (cocaine).  He  was  sentenced
    to ten months' and four months' imprisonment to run consecutively.   He
    did not appeal against his conviction.  The Secretary of  State,  by  a
    decision dated 6 June 2016, refused the  appellant's  protection  claim
    having, on 2 February 2015, made a decision to  deport  the  appellant.
    The appellant had made his protection claim (that he could  not  return
    to Namibia on account of his sexual orientation) having earlier  signed
    a deportation disclaimer notice  indicating  that  he  was  willing  to
    return voluntarily to Namibia.

 2. The appellant appealed against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    claim on the grounds  of  his  sexual  orientation  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Mensah) which, in a  determination  promulgated  on  26
    January 2017, allowed the appeal.  I note from the decision  [34]  that
    the respondent had accepted that, if he  were  to  prove  that  he  was
    homosexual, the appellant had established that  he  would  be  risk  of
    serious harm or mistreatment in Namibia.

 3. Judge Mensah considered the evidence and found there were a  number  of
    reasons for rejecting the appellant's claim to be  homosexual.   First,
    she did  not  consider  the  appellant's  signing  of  the  deportation
    disclaimer as consistent with  his  claim  to  be  a  genuine  refugee.
    Secondly, she noted that  the  appellant  had  not  claimed  asylum  on
    arrival at the airport but had entered the United Kingdom as a  visitor
    and thereafter had overstayed.  Even at this point, the  appellant  did
    not claim asylum, behaviour which the judge did not consider consistent
    "with a person who is genuinely in fear of serious harm  in  their  own
    country".  Thirdly, the appellant had committed serious offences whilst
    in the United Kingdom.  The judge did not consider that this  behaviour
    was consistent with the appellant's fear of returning to Namibia  given
    that his criminality would increase the risk of his removal.  Fourthly,
    the appellant had, before the First-tier Tribunal, sought to go  behind
    his conviction to argue that he had  in  fact  been  innocent,  conduct
    which the judge did not consider consistent with  his  claim  to  be  a
    witness of truth.

 4. The appellant claimed to have had gay relationships in Namibia and that
    he had been discovered as a  homosexual  and  beaten  by  a  number  of
    assailants.  The appellant  had  obtained  a  medical  report  from  Dr
    Katherine Wrigley.  It is clear that Judge Mensah was impressed by this
    report which recorded that the appellant had over 50 scars on his  body
    which correlated "highly" with his account of "repeated attacks,  using
    blunt instruments and sharp weapons".   The  judge  accepted  that  the
    medical report  supported  the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  been
    attacked.  However, the judge did note that Dr  Wrigley  had  not  been
    informed of the appellant's conviction and imprisonment at the time she
    wrote her report.  Furthermore, at [29] the  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant had been attacked whilst in prison in the United Kingdom on 1
    April 2016 (that is before he was examined by Dr Wrigley) and  that  he
    had been hit "... with a metal bar and a fight  had  broken  out".   Dr
    Wrigley's report is silent as to this incident which the appellant  had
    chosen not to refer to her.  The judge recorded that,

         "This [failure of the appellant to notify the doctor of the assault
         in prison] has cast some doubt over the medical report and what the
         appellant told the doctor.  However, it does not appear to  account
         for all the scars and the surgery in Namibia."

 5. At [35] the judge concluded that,  whilst  she  was  concerned  by  the
    appellant's criminality in the UK, she was "impressed  by  the  medico-
    legal report".  She states that she was persuaded by this  report  that
    the appellant had proved that he is homosexual and had been attacked as
    described.  Judge Mensah wrote,

         "I have taken very seriously his behaviour in the UK but the medico-
         legal report is independent corroboration and  the  extent  of  the
         scars, the number  of  highly  consistent  scars  and  the  overall
         credibility has in my view been enough to establish  the  facts  as
         claimed."

 6. I find Judge Mensah's analysis problematic.  The  very  basis  of  this
    appellant's claim is that he is  homosexual.   The  only  part  of  the
    appellant's claim for which the medico-legal report might  be  regarded
    as providing "independent corroboration" is the appellant's claim  that
    he had been attacked and assaulted with a blunt instrument.  Other than
    observing that homosexual men in Namibia may be violently mistreated, I
    do not see why the conclusions of Dr Wrigley should have led the  judge
    to conclude that the appellant is  homosexual  as  claimed  whilst  the
    remainder of the evidence indicated that his claim was  false  (see  my
    summary above).  Medical evidence, of course, often plays an  important
    role in the fact-finding exercise (see Mibanga [2005]  EWCA  Civ  367).
    However, it remains important for judges to  focus  upon  what  medical
    evidence may actually prove in  a  case;  in  this  instance,  it  only
    supported the  appellant's  claim  that  he  had  been  assaulted.   Dr
    Wrigley's report does not  prove  that  the  appellant  is  homosexual.
    Judge Mensah has not considered or discounted the possibility that  the
    appellant had been assaulted in Namibia for  reasons  unconnected  with
    his sexuality.  Indeed, as Judge Mensah herself  notes,  the  appellant
    has refrained from reporting an attack in prison in  April  2016  which
    may have left him with scars which Dr Wrigley,  deprived  of  the  full
    facts, has concluded could be consistent with his claim  to  have  been
    attacked in Namibia.

 7. The Upper Tribunal should hesitate before  interfering  with  a  robust
    fact-finding exercise conducted by the First-tier Tribunal.  However, I
    find that the decision of the judge should be set aside.  First, I find
    that the judge has attached too much weight to Dr Wrigley's  report  as
    corroborative evidence of the appellant's claim that he is  homosexual.
    Secondly, I find that the judge  has  not  explained  why  the  limited
    assistance provided by Dr Wrigley's report is  sufficient  to  outweigh
    the several negative credibility findings which the judge  herself  has
    made.  Thirdly, I find that the judge has not taken proper  account  of
    the fact that the appellant has withheld from Dr Wrigley  an  important
    element of his history which, had she been aware of it,  may  have  led
    her to alter her opinion.  Finally, I am troubled by the final sentence
    of the judge's decision at [36]:

         "This [the judge's finding that the appellant is homosexual]  would
         not prevent another judge in  the  future  coming  to  a  different
         decision  if  there  is  further  criminality  which  may  tip  his
         credibility the other way."

 8. I am at a loss to understand why the judge's findings of credibility in
    this appeal should be conditional upon the  appellant  refraining  from
    further criminal conduct.  The judge appears to suggest that she  might
    reverse her finding that the appellant is homosexual if  the  appellant
    were convicted of  further  criminal  offences  whilst  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  It is not easy to fathom the logic of that comment.

 9. There will need to be a new fact-finding  exercise  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  I therefore set aside Judge Mensah's decision and return the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  that  Tribunal  to  re-make  the
    decision.

Notice of Decision

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  26
    January 2016 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact  shall  stand.
    The appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal  (not  Judge  Mensah)
    for that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

11. No anonymity direction is made.






Signed                              Date 9 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.





Signed                              Date 9 August 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge Clive Lane
