
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06279/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 December 2019                  |On 17 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                          AMAL BUSHRA YOUSIF AHMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant was born on 31 December 1989  and  is  a  citizen  of
         Sudan. She claims that she  cannot  return  to  Sudan  because  she
         married against her uncle's will and she fears that she will be ill-
         treated by him on return. The respondent, in a  decision  dated  29
         May  2019,  refused  the  appellant's   claim   for   international
         protection. She  appealed  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which,  in  a
         decision promulgated on 16 September 2019,  dismissed  the  appeal.
         The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

      2. The appellant attended the initial hearing in the Upper Tribunal in
         person. The Secretary of State was represented  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  a
         Senior Presenting Officer.

      3. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  flawed  by
         legal error. First, in his analysis of the appellant's credibility,
         the judge has  failed  to  take  account  of  evidence  by  way  of
         explanation of her account provided by the appellant. At [50],  the
         judge noted that the appellant claimed that her mother had received
         threats by text and telephone after the  appellant's  marriage  and
         that her uncle had found out that she was pregnant whereupon he had
         attended the appellant's mother's  home  to  threaten  her  with  a
         knife. The judge states that, 'no evidence has been put  before  me
         as to how the appellant's uncle found out that [the appellant]  was
         pregnant.' However, in her asylum interview at [Q98], the appellant
         been asked how her uncle knew that she was  pregnant  and  she  had
         replied, 'My mother spoke with  a  neighbour  and  told  him  I  am
         pregnant to tell the people I'm married as legal marriage  and  the
         rumour spread around my uncle found  out  about  this.  (sic)'  The
         judge was, of course, not obliged to accept that explanation but he
         was, at the very least, required to engage with it. The  judge  has
         found that the failure or refusal of the appellant  to  provide  an
         explanation diminishes her credibility as a witness;  that  finding
         for those reasons was not available to the judge given the fact the
         appellant had provided an explanation.

      4. Secondly, at [52] the judge writes:

             There is another area of the appellant's account which I  find
             to  be  somewhat  incongruous.  The  suggestion  is  that  the
             appellant's uncles threatening the appellant is  a  result  of
             her marriage to  a  non-Sudanese  and  their  pregnancy  by  a
             husband behaving in  what  may  be  termed  as  a  traditional
             manner. However, on the basis of the appellant's  account  her
             uncles ensured she was highly educated, pursuing a  degree  in
             an extremely technical subject. I find that this  is  somewhat
             incongruous set against the suggestion  that  the  appellant's
             uncles are behaving in the manner claimed as an enforcement of
             what may be termed more traditional cultural patterns.

      5. I find that the meaning of that paragraph is by no means clear.  In
         particular, the judge fails to explain how  his  finding  that  the
         behaviour of  the  uncle  (or  uncles)  is  'somewhat  incongruous'
         impacts upon his assessment of  the  appellant's  credibility.  The
         appellant is entitled to know why her appeal was dismissed and  the
         poor  expression  and  vague  references  in  this   paragraph   to
         'incongruous' behaviour  and  'traditional  manners'  (without  any
         explanation as to with what the behaviour might be  incongruous  or
         what  exactly  is  meant  by  'tradition'  in  this  context)   has
         understandably puzzled the appellant.

      6. In the circumstances, I find that the decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal should be set aside. None of the findings  of  fact  shall
         stand. There will need to be a new fact-finding exercise  which  is
         better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which this appeal is
         now returned.




    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned  to  the  FTT  for
    that tribunal to remake the decision.




    Signed   Date 31 December 2019


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


