
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06779/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                         |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 26 January 2018                        |On 07 February 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                RAMANDEEP [S]

                          (nO ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Davison     (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Petterson  (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with the
permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision of the  First-
tier Tribunal (hereinafter "the tribunal") which it sent to the parties  on
13 April 2017, whereupon it dismissed her appeal against the Secretary  of
State's decision of  10 June 2016  refusing  to  grant  her  international
protection.  For the reasons set out below I have decided to set  aside  the
tribunal's decision and to remit to the First-tier Tribunal for a  complete
rehearing.

2.    By way of brief background, the claimant is a national  of  India  and
she  was  born  on  [  ] 1984.   She  came  to  the  United Kingdom   on
5 November 2009 as a student.  She received extensions on that basis  but,
according to the Secretary of State, her leave as a  student  was  curtailed
on 6 August 2012 albeit that she had been granted an extension of leave to
remain in that capacity until 28 June 2014.  There may or may  not  be  an
ongoing dispute between the parties as to whether her  leave  was  curtailed
at that point or  not  but,  if  there  is,  it  has  not  been  a  relevant
consideration for me.

3.    The claimant says  that,  having  come  to  the  United Kingdom,  she
entered into a relationship with one Surinder [S] and that the two  have  a
daughter [PK] who was born on 26 November 2012.  However, the relationship
between the claimant and Surinder [S] has ended.  The Secretary  of  State,
in a lengthy decision letter of 10 June 2016 described the child as  being
"an Indian national".  I am not clear  on  the  material  before  me  as  to
whether she might or might not, in fact, be a British Citizen.   That  might
depend upon the immigration status of Surinder [S].  Be that as it may, the
basis of the claimant's claim for international protection was that she  had
upset her father through refusing to enter into  a  marriage  which  he  had
arranged for her with an Indian national who was  resident  in  India.   She
said that her father  had  subsequently  made  threats  to  kill  her.   She
asserted that, in consequence, she could not return  to  her  home  area  in
India.  She also said that it  would  be  unduly  harsh  to  expect  her  to
relocate to a different part of India with  her  child.   The  Secretary  of
State, however, did not accept  that  the  claimant  had  given  a  truthful
account of events but also thought that, even if  she  had  told  the  truth
with the consequence that she was at risk in her home  area,  she  would  be
able to relocate.

4.    The tribunal heard the appeal on 30 March 2017.   Both  parties  had
legal representation.  The claimant gave oral evidence with  the  assistance
of a Punjabi speaking interpreter.  One witness, a Mr Dharamjeet [S],  was
called to give evidence on  her  behalf.   His  evidence  was  of  potential
importance if accepted because he had said he  had  visited  the  claimant's
parents in India, in a bid to assist her, but that  he  had  been  "verbally
attacked" by her father who had threatened to  complain  to  the  police  in
India about him.  So  his  evidence,  again  if  accepted,  was  capable  of
providing some corroborative support for the claimant's contention that  she
would be at risk at the hands  of  her  father  and  possibly  other  family
members upon return to her home area.

5.    The tribunal accepted that, if the claimant's account was  a  truthful
one she could not be expected to relocate.  So, it proceeded  on  the  basis
that the outcome  of  the  appeal  would  turn  upon  credibility.  It  then
conducted an assessment as to credibility, as it was  required  to  do,  and
which appears from paragraph 25 to  49  of  its  written  decision.   Those
paragraphs encompass credibility assessments with respect  to  the  claimant
herself and with  respect  to  her  witness.   An  adverse  conclusion  with
respect to each of them was reached.  So, on  that  basis,  it  was  decided
that she would not face any risk upon return at the hands of her family.

6.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought.  The  grounds,
which were prepared by the claimant herself (I  know  not  whether  she  was
assisted) assert, in summary,  that  the  tribunal  wrongly  identified  the
point at which she ceased to have leave to remain  in  the  United Kingdom;
failed to take into account medical evidence capable of suggesting that  due
to mental health concerns she might be prone  to  inconsistency;  failed  to
properly enquire into an issue relating to some  gold  jewellery  which  had
been said to have been given to her by her father as a preparatory step  for
the proposed arranged marriage; wrongly concluded that  it  was  implausible
or incredible that she would  have  made  attempts  to  reconcile  with  her
father as she had asserted  she  had;  confused  two  different  individuals
being Dharamjeet [S] and one Ranjeet [S] (the latter being  her  landlord)
with the consequence that it wrongly took a credibility  point  against  the
former; and in general terms had impermissibly speculated as to a  range  of
matters.

7.    Permission  having  been  granted  there  was  a  hearing  before  the
Upper Tribunal (before me) so that  it  could  be  considered  whether  the
tribunal had erred in law and, if  it  had,  what  should  flow  from  that.
Representation at that hearing was as stated above  and  I  am  grateful  to
each representative.  Mr Davison, in  his  submissions,  focused  primarily
upon the  suggested  errors  with  respect  to  the  medical  evidence,  the
jewellery and in particular  the  alleged  confusion  on  the  part  of  the
tribunal between the witness and the claimant's  landlord.   Mrs Petterson,
whilst not agreeing with Mr Davison's contention that in general terms  the
decision was "sloppy" did strike a conciliatory note  with  respect  to  the
confusion between the witness  and  the  landlord  and  accepted  that  such
placed her in difficulty.  She did not, therefore, seek to  persuade  me  on
behalf of the Secretary of State that the Judge's decision should stand.

8.    I do not accept all  of  Mr Davison's  criticisms  regarding  all  of
the tribunal's credibility assessment and of course I  bear  in  mind  that
generally speaking an assessment of credibility is one for the  tribunal  to
make.   I  absolutely  reject  the  contention  that  the  decision  can  be
characterised as "sloppy".  But  it  is  right  to  say  that  the  tribunal
reached an adverse credibility conclusion with respect  to  Dharamjeet [S].
It did so for a number of reasons but, in my judgment, the reasons it  gives
from paragraph 41 to 43 are not, of themselves, especially forceful.   But
the tribunal then said this:


    "44.   I have carefully read the letter from  the  Sandwell MBC  dated
    21 January 2016 and the letter from the  appellant  at  HOB2  seeking
    financial assistance.  The appellant states  in  her  letter  that  she
    lives in West Bromwich from December 2009 to December 2015 and that her
    friends  helped  her  financially  from   September 2015   when   her
    relationship ended.  They helped her pay her rent and  living  expenses
    but they needed to be paid back.  She goes on to  state  that  she  was
    staying with friends at the date of the letter, namely, 6 January 2016
    and that she had no means of supporting herself.


    45.     I  infer  that  in  response  to  what  they  regarded  as  her
    'destitution letter' Sandwell MBC spoke to Mr Ranjeet [S].  I note here
    that Mr Dharamjeet [S], when referring to the appellant, shortened her
    name from Ramandeep to Raman and that Ranjeet, I infer, is a shortening
    of Dharamjeet notwithstanding the slight difference  in  the  spelling.
    Mr Dharamjeet [S] refers to knowing the appellant in West Bromwich.  I
    also note that the appellant is referred to as Ramandeep [K]  in  that
    letter.


    46.    The Sandwell MBC spoke to Ranjeet [S] by telephone on the basis
    that he  was  the  appellant's  private  landlord  when  she  lived  at
    10 Constance Avenue in West Bromwich as  they  wished  to  obtain  a
    'destitution letter' from him and that he refused  to  co-operate  with
    them and supply such a letter to  assist  the  appellant  and  put  the
    telephone down.  I conclude this lack of assistance to be  inconsistent
    with Mr [S]'s claim to have visited the appellant's parents in India in
    order to help her."


9.    So, the tribunal was deciding that Ranjeet [S] and Dharamjeet [S] are
one and the same. It was also deciding that there was inconsistency  in  his
not assisting the claimant in her application for  local  authority  funding
yet being prepared to go so far as to visit the her parents (whilst  he  was
in India visiting others) on her behalf.

10.   I would accept that if the tribunal is right in  concluding  that  the
two are one and the same, that such would amount to an  adverse  credibility
point  of  real  substance.   The  claimant,  though,  says  that  they  are
different individuals.  I would observe that if the tribunal had  identified
this as an issue at the hearing it could have easily sought to  clarify  the
matter.  If, on the other hand,  the  point  was  only  realised  after  the
hearing (and it is expecting too much to say that a tribunal  should  always
realise each and every relevant matter of concern during a hearing)  it  had
the alternative  of  either  inviting  written  submissions  on  the  point,
reconvening  the  hearing  or  assessing  credibility  without  taking  that
unexplored point into account.  But it did  not  do  any  of  those  things.
Further, it appears to have concluded that Ranjeet must be  an  abbreviation
for Dharamjeet simply because Ramandeep had been shortened  to  Raman.   But
it seems to me that that simply does not follow at all.  I do  not  have  to
go so far as to decide whether that part  of  the  reasoning  is  irrational
because I accept that the conclusion that they are  one  and  the  same  has
been  inadequately  reasoned.   Since  I  cannot  say  the  tribunal   would
inevitably have reached the same view as to his evidence  absent  the  point
about lack of support for the local authority application, I have  concluded
that the adverse credibility assessment with respect to  Dharamjeet [S]  is
unsafe.

11.   My analysis, though, has not stopped there.  That is  because  I  have
considered whether the points identified by the tribunal  and  which  caused
it to disbelieve the claimant on the basis of her  own  evidence  were  such
that the supportive witness evidence was incapable  of  impacting  upon  the
outcome.  However,  as  indicated,  the  evidence  of  Dharamjeet [S],  if
accepted, was capable of assisting the claimant. The tribunal did make  some
points of seeming significance when asking itself whether the  claimant  was
telling the truth or not although I would accept, as  is  almost  inevitable
with such a consideration,  that  some  of  its  reasons  were  better  than
others. Certainly, for example, what it  said  at  paragraph 29  about  the
claimant having offered an unpersuasive explanation for her failure to  seek
asylum earlier and what it said about  the  apparent  inconsistency  in  her
evidence as to when she had first told her parents  about  her  relationship
with Surinder [S] (see paragraphs 34 to 36 of the Decision) might from one
perspective at least have force.  But a positive  credibility  finding  with
respect to Dharamjeet [S], in my  judgment,  was  capable  of  tipping  the
scales with respect to credibility in the claimant's favour.  So,  I  cannot
say that the  error  I  have  identified  in  the  tribunal's  decision  was
immaterial.

12.   In light  of  all  of  the  above,  therefore,  and  bearing  in  mind
Mrs Petterson's appropriately conciliatory stance, I have decided that  the
tribunal's decision, careful though it is in many respects, has  to  be  set
aside.

13.   Both representatives were of the view, my having stated in open  court
I would set aside the decision, that the appeal should be  remitted  to  the
First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.  I agree.  That is the proper
place for a comprehensive credibility assessment.  There  are  facts  to  be
found  and  the  First-tier Tribunal  is  an  expert  fact-finding   body.
Accordingly, I have issued some brief directions which may well have  to  be
supplemented  at  some  point  but  which  will,  hopefully,   afford   some
assistance with respect to the remaking process:

Directions


    (a)    There will be a  complete  rehearing  of  the  appeal  before  a
    differently constituted First-tier Tribunal (in other words  before  a
    different judge).


    (b)    The time estimate for the hearing shall  be  three  hours.   The
    hearing shall take place at the Bradford Hearing Centre.  The  claimant
    is to be provided with a Punjabi speaking interpreter.


    (c)    Nothing shall be preserved from the  previous  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.


    (d)    These directions may be varied, replaced or supplemented at  any
    time by any Salaried Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law.  Accordingly, that decision is set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:     Date: 5 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway




TO THE REDSPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.


Signed:     Date: 5 February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

