
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06915/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 November 2019                  |On 6 February 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     A C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Danial, S K Lloyds Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  as
this is an appeal on protection grounds, it  is  appropriate  to  make  that
order.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

BACKGROUND

The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
Rowlands promulgated on 23 September 2019 ("the Decision") dismissing the
Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision dated 2 July 2019,
refusing the Appellant's protection and human rights claims.

The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.   He claims to be at risk on
return to Bangladesh as a BNP supporter and the brother of a prominent BNP
supporter. He also claims that he faces two murder charges relating to a
land dispute which were motivated by political animosity and that he will
face prison conditions which amount to a breach of Article 3 ECHR.

The Appellant challenges the Decision on three grounds.  First, he says
that the Judge has adopted the wrong standard of proof, namely a balance of
probabilities.  Second, he says that the Judge has erred in his
consideration of the documentary evidence produced in support of his case.
Third, he says that the Judge has erred when looking at his case in the
context of the background evidence concerning Bangladesh.

Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Keane on 9
October 2019 in the following terms:

         "Notwithstanding their length the grounds amounted to no more than
         a disagreement with the findings of the judge, an attempt to re-
         argue the appeal and they did not disclose an arguable error or
         errors of law but for which the outcome of the appeal might have
         been different.  For reasons open to the judge on the evidence the
         judge found that the appellant did not give a credible account to
         have been party to a land dispute or to have been arrested on a
         false charge.  The application for permission is refused."

The Appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal, out of
time.  By a decision dated 31 October 2019, Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
admitted the application and granted permission to appeal in the following
terms, so far as relevant:

         "... 3.  The renewed grounds are identical to those accompanying
         the application made to the First-tier Tribunal.  It is argued that
         the judge failed to take account of material evidence, failed to
         adequately reason the decision, and failed to apply the correct
         standard of proof.  Most of these grounds are not made out on a
         reading of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.  The grounds
         are confused and in parts difficult to follow.  For example, it is
         not clear where it is suggested that the judge applied a balance of
         probabilities approach.  The factual basis of the claim was
         rejected.  The judge also considered the alternative of prosecution
         rather than persecution and reached the conclusion for cogent
         reasons given in the decision that conditions would not amount to
         inhumane conditions.  Article 8 was not pursued at the appeal.

         4.   However, it is arguable that the judge's dismissal of the
         supporting documentation was inadequately reasoned at [29] of the
         decision and that this may undermine the overall credibility
         findings.  In the circumstances of a relatively short delay and at
         least one arguable ground of appeal, I consider it in the public
         interest to admit the application and grant permission.  I do so on
         all grounds, though most are weak and unlikely to succeed."

The Respondent contends that the Decision does not contain any material
error of law.  In response to ground one, she points to [13] of the
Decision where the standard of proof is correctly stated.  In relation to
the Judge's treatment of the documentation, the Respondent directs the
Tribunal's attention to [19], and [26] to [28] of the Decision. The
Respondent points out that the Judge's primary finding is that the
Appellant's claim is not credible.  He was not required to consider the
claim in the alternative that the Appellant had been convicted in
Bangladesh as he claimed.  However, the Judge having done so, the
Respondent refers to [32] of the Decision where the Judge considered the
claim in the alternative that it was true and reached findings about the
impact of that on the case.  The Respondent submits that the Judge has
reached findings open to him on the evidence that prison conditions in
Bangladesh do not breach human rights and that the Appellant is not subject
to any politically motivated proceedings.

The matter comes before me to assess whether the Decision does disclose an
error of law and to re-make the Decision or remit to the First-tier
Tribunal for re-hearing.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

As a preliminary matter, I note that the Appellant who was not legally
represented at the time sought to submit further documents by e-mail late
on 11 December 2019.  He indicated that he wished to rely on those further
documents at the hearing.  As I pointed out to Mr Danial who represented
the Appellant at the hearing before me, I cannot look at documents which
were not before the First-tier Tribunal Judge when considering whether
there is an error of law in the Decision.  I can do so only once an error
of law is identified.  The e-mail sent by the Appellant does not comply
with rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and
therefore does not for example identify any reason why the documents were
not produced earlier.  However, as the hearing progressed, it became clear
that I did not have before me all the documents which were before the First-
tier Tribunal Judge.  Accordingly, I allowed the Appellant's
representatives to produce a copy of the bundle before the First-tier
Tribunal after the hearing so that it was clear which documents were and
were not before the previous Judge.

As will become clear from what follows, one of the further documents on
which the Appellant now seeks to rely is a re-translation of a document
which did appear in the previous bundle (at [AB/22]) purporting to be a
letter from the Appellant's Attorney in Bangladesh and the other is also a
letter from the lawyer who apparently was responsible for the previous
translation explaining that he had made a mistake in the previous
translation in relation to the sentence claimed to be imposed by the
Bangladeshi Courts in relation to the Appellant.  The lawyer says that he
wrongly translated the sentence in relation to one of the two court cases
of "imprisonment for life and 6 (Six) more months of imprisonment for the
unpaid penalty money of 50,000/- (Fifty thousand) taka", whereas he should
have translated it as "five years imprisonment and 6 (six) more months of
imprisonment for the unpaid penalty money of 50,000 taka".  He also says
that he has made the same error when translating the court documents in
relation to the sentence.  I observe that he does not explain how the error
came about.  More importantly, he does not provide any evidence as to his
qualifications as a translator and his expertise in that regard is
seriously undermined by the errors which he accepts he made.  As such, it
is difficult to see how any weight could be given to these further
documents.  In any event, the point remains that an error of law cannot be
established by documents which were not before the Judge.  I will come back
to the point to which this relates below.

In relation to ground one, Mr Danial relied on the ground as pleaded.  He
pointed out that he had not drafted the grounds.  The paragraph on which
the pleaded ground relies is [29] of the Decision where the Judge said that
he could not rely on the documents which the Appellant provided.  It is
suggested that the expression of this view in the negative offends the
principle set out in ME (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of State for the Home
Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1486 where the Court of Appeal said that it was
unsatisfactory to express findings of fact in the negative when the
question is whether there is a real risk of something occurring; to do
otherwise suggests the adoption of a binary question which in turn
indicates the adoption of a balance of probabilities test.  However, that
judgment has no bearing on this case.  First, what is said at [18] of the
Court of Appeal's judgment is nuanced and has to be read in the context of
what is said in particular at [17] of the judgment.  Second, the finding
made here is not of the same nature.  What the Judge was dealing with at
[29] of the Decision is whether the documents produced could be accepted as
genuine having regard to the test set out in Tanveer Ahmed and not whether
the Appellant was at real risk.  As the Respondent points out and Judge
Pickup accepted when granting permission, the Judge here has identified the
correct test at [13] of the Decision and applied that test thereafter at
[32] and [33].

Ground two formed the main focus of the submissions before me.  That
concerns the Judge's treatment of the court documents.  However, Mr Danial
began his submissions with ground three and therefore I deal with that
point first.  That ground concerns the applicability of the background
evidence to the Appellant's claim.  Mr Danial said that the Judge had
failed to deal with the Appellant's case that the prosecutions which he
alleged had been brought against him were politically motivated.  He said
that the Judge had failed to consider that the Appellant would face ill-
treatment based on prison conditions because he was subject to a sentence
of imprisonment.  Ground three as pleaded also asserts that the Judge has
failed to consider that there would be no State protection from the risk
from non-State actors due to the Appellant's support of the BNP and no
possibility of internal relocation to avoid that risk.

Turning first to prison conditions in Bangladesh, Mr Danial relied on the
case of SH (Prison Conditions) Bangladesh [2008] UKAIT 00076.  I begin by
noting that it is not at all clear that the Judge's attention was drawn to
that case as having any relevance.  In any event, however, Mr Danial relied
on [54] of the decision which is reflected in the guidance given in the
headnote and does not assist the Appellant.  That reads as follows:

         "1.  Prison conditions in Bangladesh, at least for ordinary
         prisoners, do not violate Article 3 ECHR.

         2.   This conclusion does not mean that an individual who faces
         prison on return to Bangladesh can never succeed in showing a
         violation of Article 3 in the particular circumstances of his case.
         The individual facts of each case should be considered to determine
         whether detention will cause a particular individual in his
         particular circumstances to suffer treatment contrary to Article
         3."

    When referring to "the particular circumstances" at [54] of the
    decision, the Tribunal makes clear that it is considering the likely
    length of detention, type of detention facility and age and state of
    health of the prospective detainee.

The Judge dealt with this argument at [32] of the Decision as follows:

         "I was addressed in the alternative about the prospect of him
         simply facing prosecution and not persecution.  The Appellant tried
         to argue that prison conditions in Bangladesh are so poor that it
         would amount effectively to inhumane treatment should he be
         returned.  I have considered the country policy information report
         on the prison conditions as especially outlined in the letter of
         support from his solicitors and do not consider that they show that
         that would be the case.  So far as corruption in the Court is
         concerned it is clear that there is some evidence that there may be
         unfair prosecution of political opponents but having reached the
         conclusion that I have i.e. that this is not a politically
         motivated incident then I do not find that that would be the
         case.."

Although I accept that the documents before the Judge indicated that the
Appellant might face life imprisonment (for murder) (if that claim were
accepted as genuine), the Judge was entitled to take into account in this
regard his finding that the prosecution (if indeed there was a prosecution)
was not politically motivated and that the Appellant would not face any
unfairness in the prosecution of what would be a serious offence and would
not therefore face persecution (as opposed to prosecution).  As Mr Lindsay
pointed out, there was no evidence that the Appellant would be anything
other than an ordinary prisoner.  The fact that detention would be for a
long period (justified by the seriousness of the offence if true) did not
amount to an Article 3 breach.  There was no evidence as to the type of
facility where the Appellant would be held.  Although there was some very
limited evidence as to the Appellant's state of health, the Judge dealt
with that (see below).

That then brings into play ground three as pleaded in relation to the
Appellant's asserted involvement in the BNP.  It is asserted in the pleaded
grounds that the Judge did not reject the Appellant's claim to have been
politically active within the BNP when in Bangladesh and has failed to
consider whether he would be at risk in that regard from non-State actors
and has wrongly assumed that State protection would be available in that
regard.

I can deal with this aspect of the grounds shortly.  The Judge did not
accept that the Appellant had been politically active in the past.  At its
highest, the Judge accepted only that he was the brother of a supporter.
What is said about that aspect of the case is to be found in the record of
the submissions at [17] of the Decision and the Judge's findings at [24] to
[25] of the Decision as follows:

         "17. It was part of his claim that he had been a BNP supporter but
         this was rejected by the Respondent.  His knowledge of the party
         was scant and he knew little of their current programme.  He had
         failed to explain why he wanted to join the party.  Although he
         said that he supported his brother it was noted that he had not
         taken any part in any BNP activities in the six years he had been
         in the United Kingdom.  He has no political profile according to
         the Respondent.  Next, the Respondent considered whether he had
         shown there to be a land dispute between him, as part of one group
         of people, and others who had formed the rival group.  His claim is
         that he owned some land that had been rented to others, for their
         use, between 2008 and 2011, this was a simple business deal.  At
         the end of the contract the other group wanted to remain in
         possession and an argument broke out between them.  Initially he
         said nothing about the political leanings of the group, it was only
         later that he claimed it was a significant fact.  He couldn't name
         any of the group and this undermined his claim.  He claims that the
         land belongs to him in his letter to the Respondent of 12th June
         2009. There is no credible evidence to support this.

         ...

         24.  ... So far as his BNP membership is concerned I am satisfied
         that, even if he had some involvement in the past in Bangladesh, it
         is an irrelevance to his claim.  He was no more than a relative of
         a BNP supporter i.e. his brother.  If true, his claim has more to
         do with a land dispute than anything else.

         25.  The next question is that of the nature of the land dispute,
         if any.  The Appellant has claimed that he let his land
         legitimately to a group of people between 2008 and 2011.  At the
         end of the lease the other group wanted to stay on the land with
         their crops but the Appellant said no and the dispute began.  At
         first there was no mention of the political parties but then he
         changed his explanation. This undermines his credibility and, in
         any event, I find it highly unlikely that he would lease his land
         to hostile political opponents in the first place.  I don't accept
         that politics has anything to do with the dispute, if it exists at
         all."

Contrary to the suggestion in the grounds, the Judge did not accept that
the Appellant had been politically active in Bangladesh in support of the
BNP (and there was no suggestion that he had supported the party in the
UK).  Nor did the Judge accept that the prosecutions (if genuine) were
politically motivated.  As such, there would be no reason why the Judge
needed to consider matters such as State protection or internal relocation.
 If the Appellant were genuinely wanted for having committed two murders,
he would be dealt with by the State in the usual manner by the courts.  In
other words, the Judge accepted that if the Appellant were genuinely
involved in two murders (which he did not deny) then he was fleeing
prosecution and not persecution.

In any event, the Judge's primary finding is that the court documents could
not be relied upon and therefore that the Appellant would not face any
prosecution or serve any prison sentence.  This brings me therefore to
ground two concerning the Judge's treatment of the court documents.  His
reasons for rejecting the documents are set out by reference to the
submissions at [18] to [20] and in his findings at [26] to [29] of the
Decision as follows:

         "18. The Appellant claims that the two opposing groups have been
         involved in two separate incidents, one in 2011 and the other in
         2012.  On both occasions one of the opposing sides has been killed.
          He claims that he was arrested in 2011 and detained for a month
         before being released on bail in April of that year.  He claims
         that during this time in custody he was beaten by the Police at the
         paid for request of the opposing group.  There is no medical
         evidence to support this taking place and none to support his claim
         that it was at the paid request of the others even if it did.  The
         Respondent does not accept that he was arrested as claimed and then
         released on bail.  The documents were not to be relied upon.

         19.  He then claimed to have been involved in a second fight in
         February 2012 while on bail for the first murder.  He has admitted
         involvement and participation in the fight but his claim is that he
         was acting in self-defence.  He claims to have been the subject of
         a FIR submitted on 29th February 2012, again ten months before his
         departure.  Looking at the documents in the round the Respondent
         does not accept that he has been charged, let alone convicted of
         two murders.  In reaching this conclusion the Respondent has taken
         into account the immigration history of the Appellant and his
         failure to properly explain the reasons for not claiming a lot
         earlier than he did.

         20.  The documents have also cast doubt on his claim by the fact
         that they are inconsistent.  He told me that he had been convicted
         of two offences one for which he got life and one for which he got
         five years imprisonment.  The letter supposedly from his Advocate
         says that he has been given two life sentences and there is another
         document suggesting that or some other argument suggesting that for
         one of the cases he was ordered to be hung.  He has been totally
         inconsistent.

         ...

         26.  His claim is that it was his land but I have noted the land
         documents in his bundle which clearly show the land belongs to [P K
         H C] who is not the Appellant.  This undermines the claim and I am
         not satisfied that his ownership of the land was a significant
         factor at all.

         27.  The Appellant has claimed that he was arrested in April 2011
         following an FIR submitted in January of that year.  There has been
         no explanation for the three-month delay in his arrest especially
         as he claims that the other side were politically powerful.  He
         made no attempt to avoid arrest according to him.  There is no
         independent evidence to support his claim of having been beaten up
         and I have noted that, despite his claim that he was bailed in
         April 2011 he remained in Bangladesh for twenty months before
         leaving, this is inconsistent with his claim to have been arrested
         on a false charge.

         28.  He then claims to have got himself involved in another fight
         which led to the unlawful killing of a second man.  He does not
         suggest that he wasn't involved and indeed actually claims that he
         took part in the killing but that he was acting in self-defence.
         It is part of his claim that he could not have received a fair
         trial in Bangladesh but he admits that he avoided arrest and did
         not go to Court to put forward his defence.  Clearly the criminal
         Court has been faced with some evidence that he was involved in a
         killing but no evidence from him to raise self-defence and it is
         hardly surprising that he was convicted seemingly properly of that
         crime.  In any event the simple fact that an FIR was raised some
         time before he left Bangladesh raises an issue which the Appellant
         has not dealt with.  He says that he went on the run and the Police
         were looking for him and yet he seems to have left Bangladesh
         having applied for a visit visas to the United Kingdom and left on
         his own passport through a main airport without any problems
         whatsoever.  I do not accept that somebody wanted not just for one
         but two murders would be able to leave the country so easily and
         not have to resort to some kind of deception to leave.  The fact
         that he managed to leave the country without any problem totally
         undermines his claim to have been wanted for the two murders.

         29.  In support of his appeal the Appellant has provided a number
         of documents and I have to say that some if not all of them have
         been provided after he made his asylum claim and dated after he
         made his asylum claim.  There is no evidence that they are
         fraudulent but I must still consider whether or not they can be
         relied upon and I have considered the principle in the case of
         Tanveer Ahmed and reach the decision that they cannot."

As I have already pointed out, the documents in relation to one of the
prosecutions alleged are now said to have been incorrectly translated and
it is now said that the Appellant would face only five years' imprisonment
rather than life in relation to one of the charges (although life in
relation to the second).  If that translation error were accepted, then it
may deal with one aspect of the inconsistencies identified by the Judge at
[20] of the Decision.  However, as I have already observed, the fact that
the documents were all translated by the person who accepts that he wrongly
translated some of those documents (and who is a lawyer and not a
translator on the face of it) further undermines the reliance which could
be placed on any of those documents.  Of course, Judge Rowlands could not
make that point as the further documents were not before him.  Those cannot
establish any error of law. However, as Mr Lindsay submits and I accept,
the further documents undermine rather than support the Appellant's case
and reinforce the Judge's findings about the documents.

Moreover, as Mr Lindsay submitted, the Judge's approach is consistent with
the guidance given in Tanveer Ahmed, in particular at [38(ii)] that "[t]he
decision maker should consider whether a document is one on which reliance
should properly be placed after looking at all the evidence in the round."


The Judge correctly self-directed himself in accordance with the guidance
as set out at [38] of the starred decision of Tanveer Ahmed at [29] of the
Decision. There is no error of law in relation to the Judge's findings
about the documents surrounding the court documents.

That then brings me on to a further point made about those documents which
Mr Danial raised in his submissions, but which was not prefaced in the
grounds.  Mr Danial drew my attention to an application made by the
Appellant's previous solicitors for an adjournment in order to obtain an
expert report about the potential treatment of the Appellant in light of
the court proceedings.  Mr Danial's point in this regard appeared to be
that, although this request did not involve the instruction of an expert to
verify the court documents, that was because the Respondent had made a
concession that the Appellant had in fact been prosecuted.  That is pleaded
at [9] of the grounds of appeal as follows:

         "An additional ground seeking an adjournment was to obtain expert
         evidence to confirm the authenticity and veracity of the cases
         registered against the Appellant in Bangladesh.  In response the
         Respondent's position was that it did not dispute the authenticity
         of the cases."

That paragraph forms part of the preliminary comments about the background
to the case and there is no allegation of procedural unfairness made about
the Judge's treatment of the court documents or of the refusal to adjourn.
The adjournment request at [AB/8-9] was not put forward based on any
intention to verify the court documents.    Mr Danial said that there was a
concession by the Respondent that the documents were genuine (he
represented the Appellant before Judge Rowlands) but could not produce any
evidence of what occurred at the hearing. There is no record in the
Decision of any concession being made by the Respondent.  Mr Danial's
submission is completely at odds with what is recorded by the Judge about
the submissions at [18] and [19] of the Decision as set out above.  Mr
Lindsay checked the file minute of the hearing which did not record any
concession.  The Respondent clearly takes issue with the documents in the
reasons for refusal letter (see in particular [65] of that letter).   It
would be odd indeed if the Appellant did not raise procedural unfairness as
an issue if there was indeed a concession as Mr Danial says is the case.
Given the concerns raised in the Respondent's decision, the submissions
recorded in the Decision and that no concession was recorded in the Home
Office's note of the hearing, I cannot accept that any such concession was
made before the Judge.

Mr Danial also asserted that the Judge had acted in a "heavy handed" manner
given the Appellant's asserted vulnerability.  Again, as a potential claim
of procedural unfairness, I would expect this to have been raised as a
ground of appeal if the Judge were considered to have behaved improperly.
There is no such allegation pleaded. Moreover, Mr Danial who was the
representative at the hearing raised no objection then or thereafter.
There is no witness statement from him and if he intended to give evidence
as to the conduct of the previous hearing, he could not also have acted as
representative before me.  The most that Mr Danial could point to was what
is said by the Judge at [31] of the Decision as follows:

         "At the beginning of the hearing I was invited to ensure that the
         Appellant was dealt with as a vulnerable witness.  He was quite
         strong in his evidence and showed no vulnerability whatsoever.
         What he did show was a clear intention to try and avoid answering
         direct questions.  He seemed more concerned with the fact that he
         wasn't sleeping or eating well than the genuineness of his claim."

Mr Danial said that there was medical evidence in support of the
Appellant's vulnerability which may well have explained the inconsistency.
However, the medical report of Dr Das whilst indicating that the Appellant
was suffering from depression indicates that there is "no evidence of any
significant Cognitive decline".

The Judge makes mention of the medical report at [36] of the Decision in
the context of the Appellant's human rights as follows:

         "... There has been a medical report provided as regards his mental
         health but that seems to simply show that he is depressed and
         showed some symptoms of it which I suspect is not uncommon in
         people who are kept in detention prior to their removal from the
         United Kingdom.  I do not see for one moment that the medical
         report assists him in showing that he has a claim to remain in the
         United Kingdom under Article 3."

I accept that the Judge does not refer to this when dealing with the
assertion that the Appellant was vulnerable.  However, that does not
constitute any error of law.  The report records, as the Judge notes, that
the cause of the mental health issues is the Appellant's current
circumstances in detention.  It does not have any relevance to events in
Bangladesh and therefore the risk on return.  Mr Danial confirmed that what
the Judge said about the Appellant's evidence at [4] to [8] of the Decision
was not inaccurate.  The Judge heard the Appellant giving evidence and was
in a position to assess whether he was vulnerable.  The medical report did
not suggest that the Appellant was in any way unfit to give evidence, that
any adjustments were required in that regard or that his mental health
affected the consistency or reliability of the evidence he could give.

For those reasons, the Appellant has failed to establish that there is any
material error of law in the Decision.

CONCLUSION

For the above reasons, the grounds do not disclose any material error of
law. I therefore uphold the Decision.

Notice of Decision

I am satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Rowlands promulgated on 23 September 2019.  I
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the Appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.


Signed   [pic]    Date: 6 January 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
