
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06808/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2020                    |On 09th July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     MT
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Directions were issued by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 24  April  2020
    indicating  the  provisional  view,  in  light  of  the  need  to  take
    precautions  against  the  spread  of  Covid-19  and   the   overriding
    objective, that this case was suitable to determine whether  there  was
    an error of law in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  if  so,
    whether that decision should be set aside.

 2. The Appellant opposes the determination of these issues on  the  papers
    on the basis that the Appellant should have the  opportunity,  via  his
    Counsel, to make oral submissions and respond to any questions or views
    the Judge  may  have,  as  would  be  the  standard  position.   It  is
    emphasised that the appeal is of the utmost importance to the Appellant
    and a remote hearing is suggested as an alternative.

 3. The Respondent has made no submissions as to whether the error  of  law
    stage of this appeal could or should be determined on the papers,  such
    that there has been no objection in  proceeding  with  the  provisional
    view of Judge Smith.

 4. In my view, this is a case in which it is suitable for  the  issues  of
    whether the First-tier Tribunal's decision materially erred in law  and
    if so, whether the decision should be set aside, to  be  determined  on
    the papers on the basis of the written submissions made.   This  is  in
    light of the unprecedented circumstances surrounding Covid-19  and  the
    need to take precautions to prevent the spread of the  disease;  is  in
    accordance with the overriding objective for the Upper Tribunal to deal
    with cases fairly and justly in rule 2(1), (2) and (4) of the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 and in circumstances where on the
    facts; there are comprehensive written submissions  from  both  parties
    covering all of the relevant issues.  Having regard  to  those  written
    submissions, there are no further points upon  which  clarification  is
    needed nor do I have any questions for either party.  This decision has
    therefore been made under rule 34.

 5. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Graves promulgated on 13 November  2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claims dated 5 June 2019 was dismissed.

 6. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on  21  March  1996,  who
    first entered the United Kingdom as a visitor in March 2013 at the  age
    of 17, with a visit visa valid to 13 May 2013.  The Appellant travelled
    with his father who he says returned to Pakistan  a  few  weeks  later,
    leaving the Appellant with family friends in the United  Kingdom.   The
    Appellant's younger brother arrived in the United Kingdom as a  visitor
    in September 2015 and has also  remained  here  illegally  since.   The
    Appellant has remained here unlawfully since 2013, making a  claim  for
    asylum in January 2019 after he was arrested and served with papers  as
    an overstayer at an immigration visit on 16 January 2019.  The basis of
    the Appellant's asylum claim is that he fears a risk of persecution  on
    return to Pakistan as a gay man.

 7. The Respondent refused the application essentially on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant's claim was not credible, it was not accepted that he was
    gay and as such he would not be at risk on return to Pakistan.

 8. Judge Graves dismissed the appeal in a  decision  promulgated  on  13th
    November 2019 on all grounds.   In  summary,  Judge  Graves  found  the
    Appellant to be lacking in credibility, in particular because his claim
    was internally inconsistent and inconsistent with the evidence  of  the
    majority of his witnesses; such that it was not accepted  that  he  was
    gay, nor at any risk on return to Pakistan based on his sexuality.  The
    human rights claim was also dismissed on Article 8 grounds, in  respect
    of which there has not been any further challenge.

The appeal

 9. The Appellant appeals on four grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law in its  assessment  of  the
    evidence of PM;  rejecting  his  evidence  because  the  other  witness
    evidence had been assessed as unsatisfactory; which showed a failure to
    consider and assess all of the evidence in the round and relied upon  a
    pre-formed view that the Appellant had manipulated witnesses such  that
    the evidence was unreliable.  Further, it was not  a  sufficient  basis
    for the First-tier Tribunal to reject PM's evidence in its entirety  on
    the basis of how many or which  tribunal  hearings  he  had  previously
    given evidence in.  Overall, this  materially  undermined  the  adverse
    credibility findings made against the Appellant.

10. Secondly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in paragraph 37
    of the decision relying on the lack  of  evidence  from  the  Appellant
    about his realisation of his sexuality whilst also  acknowledging  that
    this is a personal matter against which there is no standard to measure
    it.

11. Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in its  approach
    to the Appellant's evidence in holding adverse to his credibility  both
    the consistent and inconsistent parts of his evidence; and further that
    no reasons or examples are given  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  being
    'rehearsed'.

12. Finally, that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in its  approach
    to the evidence as to whether the Appellant was running a mobile  phone
    business in the United Kingdom; failing to give any reasons as  to  why
    the evidence of two witnesses stating that the property  found  by  the
    Respondent at the visit  in  January  2019  was  theirs  was  rejected,
    particularly as against a lack of evidence from the  Respondent  as  to
    the allegations contained in a minute from the visit.

13. Further to the directions sent on 24 April 2020, the Appellant made two
    sets of further written submissions on 7  May  and  26  May  2020,  the
    latter the Appellant's response to the  written  submissions  from  the
    Respondent submitted on 15 May 2020.   I  deal  with  the  Respondent's
    submissions first and then the Appellant's response.

14. The Respondent opposes the appeal on all grounds and submits that there
    are no material errors  of  law  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  In relation to the first ground of appeal, it  is  submitted
    that although paragraph 69 of the  decision  may  give  a  prima  facie
    impression that the evidence has not been considered in the  round,  it
    is not the only part of the First-tier Tribunal's reasons and when read
    as a whole, there is  no  error  of  law  in  the  assessment  of  this
    evidence.   The  Respondent  highlights  the  self-direction  given  in
    paragraph 33 of the decision to consider the evidence in the round  and
    the reference back to the same in paragraph 64.  Further, in  paragraph
    69, the First-tier Tribunal was evidently referring  to  evidence  upon
    which PM made  no  comment,  with  his  evidence  not  outweighing  the
    numerous areas in which the Appellant's evidence was  unreliable.   The
    Respondent submits that the inherent problem for the Appellant is  that
    PM's evidence was not probative of  the  "internally  inconsistent  and
    contradictory" evidence of the Appellant or the other  witnesses.   The
    Respondent goes on to highlight some 11 examples of areas in which  the
    First-tier Tribunal found inconsistencies and evidence  which  was  not
    credible in the Appellant's claim and that PMs evidence did  not  touch
    on and could not assist to resolve.

15. Finally in relation to the  first  ground  of  appeal,  the  Respondent
    submits that the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to take into  account
    PMs evidence of his advocacy in support of the Pakistani gay  community
    and that his credibility was undermined by not being forthcoming  about
    giving evidence very  recently  for  the  Appellant's  brother  at  his
    appeal.

16. The Respondent submits that the second ground of appeal is misconceived
    as it conflates the quality of evidence with the absence  of  evidence.
    In paragraphs 37 and 38 of the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision,  having
    accepted that self-realisation  is  personal,  it  is  noted  that  the
    Appellant was  not  able  to  describe  his  own  process  and  further
    struggled to even understand the questions.

17. In relation to the third ground of appeal, the Respondent submits  that
    it was open to the First-tier Tribunal to find, in  essence,  that  the
    Appellant's claim was undone in cross-examination.  It was open to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to find the large number of inconsistencies in  the
    Appellant's claim but also to find that there were  some  aspects  that
    were consistent where the Appellant was familiar with his  own  written
    statements.

18. In relation to the fourth ground of appeal, the Respondent submits that
    this is wholly without merit given the Appellant's own evidence that he
    was working illegally and selling mobile phone  products  (recorded  in
    paragraph 24 of the decision) and  therefore  open  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to reject  the  Appellant's  inconsistent  assertions  of  his
    innocence and to reject the evidence of AH and RH.

19. In response, the Appellant submits in relation to the first  ground  of
    appeal that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in a  structural  way  in
    the assessment of the evidence and the self-direction  is  insufficient
    when in substance it has  not  been  followed.   In  particular  it  is
    emphasised that a witness does not need to address  all  parts  of  the
    claim or the evidence of other witnesses and in this case, PMs evidence
    went to the central issue of the truth of the Appellant's claim  to  be
    gay.  The First-tier Tribunal dismissed PMs evidence as unreliable  and
    manufactured before considering or assessing his evidence  and  without
    considering it in the round, considering whether PMs evidence displaced
    the conclusions  already  reached.   If  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
    approached the evidence in the correct way, that may have affected  the
    weight attached to other  evidence  when  the  final  conclusions  were
    reached.

20. Finally, in relation to the  first  ground  of  appeal,  the  Appellant
    maintains that it was not a proper basis to dismiss PMs evidence on the
    basis of advocacy or  because  he  clarified  his  evidence  about  his
    attendance at appeal hearings.

21. The Appellant maintains the second ground of  appeal,  submitting  that
    the Respondent's reliance on paragraph 38 is misplaced as it deals with
    a different  matter  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  expected  the
    Appellant to describe a struggle with his sexuality which not  everyone
    necessarily experiences or is able to express.

22. The third ground of appeal is maintained  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    relied on both consistency and inconsistency in evidence to  find  that
    the Appellant was untruthful.

23. In relation to the final ground of appeal, the Appellant  accepts  that
    he had admitted to some buying and selling of mobile phone accessories;
    but that the witness evidence of AH and RH addressed the  more  serious
    allegations made by the Respondent which went beyond this.

24. In response to the note in the grant of permission that materiality  of
    any error would be  in  issue,  it  was  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant  that  all  of  the  grounds  of  appeal,  individually   and
    cumulatively were relevant to the assessment  of  credibility  and  the
    fact-finding process; which must be taken in the round.

Findings and reasons

 1. In the first ground of appeal, the Appellant challenges the findings in
    paragraph  69  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision  as  showing   a
    structural error of failing to assess the evidence  in  the  round  and
    dismissing the evidence of PM because the other  evidence  had  already
    been found to be unreliable, because of his advocacy work  and  because
    he did not initially say that he had given evidence on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant's brother.  In considering  this  ground  of  appeal,  it  is
    necessary to consider further the structure and detail  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal's decision as well  as  what  is  said  in  paragraph  69
    itself.

 2. There is no dispute between the parties that in  paragraph  33  of  the
    decision, the First-tier Tribunal makes an  appropriate  self-direction
    to look at all of the evidence in the round;  only  as  to  whether  in
    substance that has been applied.  In paragraph 34 of the decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal identifies matters that are taken into  account  in
    the Appellant's favour, including his age at the time and the nature of
    his claim which can involve feelings of shame and cultural  stigma  and
    in paragraph 35 states the overall conclusion with reasons  to  follow.
    That conclusion is that taking into account the matters  identified  in
    paragraph 34, the documentary evidence and the  witness  evidence,  the
    Appellant is not found to be  a  credible  or  reliable  witness.   The
    Appellant has not taken specific issue with the conclusion being stated
    here before the reasons nor suggested that this clouded  or  pre-judged
    any particular evidence before it was reached.

 3. In paragraphs 36 to 53 of the decision, the  First-tier  Tribunal  sets
    out in  detail  internal  inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  claim,
    examples of where his claim was lacking in detail or was  vague  (where
    more detail could reasonably be expected) and where it was implausible.
     This lengthy section identifies a significant number  of  examples  of
    such matters in the Appellant's claim looking at his own  evidence  and
    claim, and his claim as against the written evidence from his father in
    Pakistan.  The decision then  moves  on  in  paragraphs  55  to  59  to
    consider one witness' evidence in detail and in  paragraphs  60  to  62
    considers the Appellant's brother's  evidence.   There  is  no  express
    reference here (or until later in the decision) as to the  evidence  of
    the three remaining witnesses - PM,  RH  or  AH;  although  their  oral
    evidence was referred to in paragraph 30 of the decision as  not  being
    recorded in full in the decision but  salient  points  referred  to  as
    needed.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal then considers documentary evidence about Disco
    Rani and the inconsistencies in the Appellant's  evidence  relating  to
    this in paragraphs 63 and 64 of the decision; followed by consideration
    of the factors in section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of
    Claimants, etc) Act 2004 in paragraphs 66 to 68.

 5. The final reasons and conclusions are in paragraph 69 of  the  decision
    as follows:

         "69. I do bear in mind that the appellant's witnesses took the time
         to attend court and give evidence, and to allow their  evidence  to
         be  tested  under  cross  examination.   However,   I   found   the
         appellant's evidence, and that of his witnesses, to  be  internally
         inconsistent and contradictory.  I found the  evidence  unreliable.
         I bear in mind  that  the  evidence  of  [PM]  was  not  in  itself
         contradictory with that of the appellant, but having found that the
         evidence before me was manufactured, and the other  witnesses  were
         all unreliable, I do have real concerns that all of the appellant's
         witnesses were motivated by a desire to assist  him  with  avoiding
         removal.  Even if they were not, I also find that the appellant  is
         capable of manipulating a witness,  particularly  in  the  case  of
         [PM], who has  also  referred  to  having  strong  sympathies  with
         members of the Pakistani gay community.  I did also note that  when
         asked about other hearings he had given evidence at, [PM]  made  no
         mention of [the Appellant's brother's] hearing  and  said  he  last
         gave  evidence  at  a  Tribunal  hearing  in  2008.   He  was  then
         specifically asked if he had given  evidence  at  [the  Appellant's
         brother's] hearing, a few weeks previously, and only then said that
         he had done so.  I therefore did not find the witness  evidence  to
         be sufficiently reliable to support the appellant's  claim,  or  to
         outweigh the numerous areas in which the appellant's  evidence  was
         unreliable."

 6. Although the First-tier Tribunal does not expressly set out  or  assess
    the evidence of three of  the  Appellant's  witnesses  in  any  detail,
    including PM and focuses on the Appellant and two others, including the
    Appellant's brother; that  does  not  of  itself  indicate  that  their
    evidence has not been considered and assessed in the  round;  nor  that
    findings made over the course of more than 35  detailed  paragraphs  of
    the evidence, focusing mainly on  the  problems  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence prejudged the assessment of these witnesses, including PM.

 7. In paragraph 69 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal finds that PMs
    evidence was not in itself contradictory with  that  of  the  Appellant
    but,  overall,  it  was  not  sufficiently  reliable  to  support   the
    appellant's claim.  That must be read in the context of the significant
    number of examples of inconsistencies and problems with the Appellant's
    own evidence and even if PM was not inconsistent with that (or at least
    the limited parts of it on which his evidence  touched),  it  begs  the
    question  of  which  parts  of  the  contradictory  claim  it  was  not
    inconsistent with.  Although not expressly put in this way by the First-
    tier tribunal, it is difficult to see how  evidence,  limited  only  to
    certain aspects of the detail of the claim, which is  not  inconsistent
    with an  internally  inconsistent  claim  can  be  of  any  significant
    positive weight.  On any view, the evidence of PM could not affect  the
    number of inconsistencies in the Appellant's own account or the  damage
    to the Appellant's credibility caused by those and it can  not  be  the
    case, as suggested by the Appellant that  this  is  immaterial  as  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  may  have  drawn  different  conclusions  on  the
    Appellant's evidence or that of other witnesses  if  positive  findings
    were made about PM in the round.  The point is concisely put at the end
    of paragraph 69 that PMs evidence  was  not  sufficiently  reliable  to
    support the Appellant's claim or to  outweigh  the  numerous  areas  in
    which the Appellant's evidence was unreliable.  I do not find  the  use
    of the word 'outweigh' in the context of this  decision  as  indicating
    anything other than a balancing of all of the evidence taken as a whole
    and in the round - it is simply  an  assessment  that  there  are  more
    factors adverse to the Appellant's credibility and claim than positive.
     On the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal,  that  was  plainly  a
    rational conclusion open to it.

 8. Further, the First-tier Tribunal reduced the weight to be  attached  to
    PMs evidence for two further reasons.  First, that  the  Appellant  was
    manipulating a  witness  such  as  PM  in  particular  because  he  was
    sympathetic to the Pakistani gay community and had advocated on  others
    behalf and secondly, because PM changed his evidence as to when he last
    gave evidence at a Tribunal hearing.  This was not, as suggested by the
    Appellant a clarification, but a change in his evidence as to  when  he
    last gave evidence to admit, contrary to his first answer, that it  was
    only a few weeks ago on behalf of the Appellant's brother.  These  were
    both legitimate reasons which the First-tier Tribunal was  entitled  to
    take into account when assessing the  weight  to  be  attached  to  PMs
    evidence.

 9. For these reasons, I do not find any error of law on the  first  ground
    of appeal.  When read as  a  whole,  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal does not disclose any structural error in  the  assessment  of
    the evidence before it; nor does it suggest that the self-direction  to
    consider all the evidence in the round was not in fact  followed.   The
    First-tier Tribunal gave cogent  and  very  detailed  reasons  for  the
    findings made as  to  the  Appellant's  credibility  and  that  of  the
    majority of his witnesses (I deal below with the evidence of RH and  AH
    in the context of the fourth ground of appeal) showing  that  this  was
    balanced and considered as a whole.  The particular  phrasing  used  in
    paragraph 69 of the decision does not, in context, identify an error of
    law.

10. In any event, for the very detailed reasons  given  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  for  the  adverse  credibility  findings  made  against   the
    Appellant; even if the evidence of PM had  not  been  assessed  in  the
    round as alleged, it could not have been material to the outcome of the
    appeal.  As the Respondent identified and as set out above, the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  identified  a  substantial  list   of   inconsistencies
    (internal and against the  other  witness  and  documentary  evidence),
    vague parts of the account and implausible parts, the majority of which
    were not addressed or touched upon  by  PM  and  upon  which  no  other
    findings could have been reached; on  the  individual  aspects  of  the
    evidence or on the main question as to the Appellant's sexuality.

11. The second ground of appeal is that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  weighed
    against the Appellant  an  absence  of  evidence  of  any  struggle  or
    realisation of his sexuality.   The  First-tier  Tribunal  set  out  in
    paragraph 34, 36 and 37 the background context  to  the  nature  of  an
    asylum claim based on sexuality for a person who comes from  a  country
    where it is not in accordance with  religious  or  societal  norms  and
    where the Appellant claims it puts his life at risk.  Whilst it is true
    that not every person  will  face  a  personal  struggle  or  have  any
    particular experience about the realisation of their  sexuality,  which
    is recognised by the First-tier Tribunal as inevitably personal, in the
    context of an asylum claim it is more likely that a person  experiences
    something in relation to the realisation of their sexuality  that  they
    can articulate and therefore reasonable to expect them to do so.

12. In paragraph 37 of the decision the First-tier Tribunal states that the
    Appellant was unable, even when specifically  asked,  to  identify  any
    such experience, process or realisation  and  in  paragraph  38,  on  a
    related point,  was  unable  to  even  understand  the  question  about
    starting a sexual relationship with another boy let  alone  explain  or
    give any detail about doing so, despite the context in  Pakistan  which
    made such actions dangerous.  Although separate, these two matters  are
    clearly linked both in terms of time and in terms  of  the  Appellant's
    own self-awareness and evidence about his sexuality.  As the First-tier
    Tribunal found, it would be reasonable to expect the Appellant to  have
    given more detail about the realisation that he was gay and  his  first
    relationship in Pakistan; even without any particular  benchmark  being
    available to assess such matters which are  inherently  personal.   The
    point is, the Appellant offered little detail  and  was  vague  in  his
    answers on these first two matters in  his  claim  and  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not err in law in taking this into account.  In any event,
    as above, this was one small part of much more extensive reasons  given
    for the adverse credibility findings made.

13. The third ground of appeal is that the Appellant was found  not  to  be
    credible both because of consistency and inconsistency in his claim and
    that it is an error for the First-tier Tribunal to rely on both.  There
    is no merit at all in this ground of appeal.  The  First-tier  Tribunal
    identifies a significant number of inconsistencies in  the  Appellant's
    account, both internally and against the other evidence which are self-
    evidently damaging to  his  credibility  (and  not  challenged  in  the
    grounds of appeal specifically), even taking into account  the  factors
    initially identified by the First-tier Tribunal such as the Appellant's
    age and nature of his claim.  In paragraph  44  of  the  decision,  the
    First-tier Tribunal gives clear and cogent reasons as to  why  specific
    parts of the Appellant's  evidence  which  were  consistent  were  also
    adverse to his credibility as follows;

         "44. While there were some aspects of the appellant's evidence that
         were consistent, I found the degree of consistency to be  troubling
         and was suggestive of his evidence having been  rehearsed  or  self
         coached.  He plainly knew the contents of  his  various  statements
         and accounts, but when asked for details of specific events out  of
         order at the hearing, he  had  difficulty  answering  the  question
         directly,  without  reciting  what  was  in  his  statement,  which
         included details not relevant to the question."

14. This paragraph in  particular  clearly  identifies  why,  although  the
    Appellant was in parts of his evidence consistent, that was not in fact
    in favour of his account being credible because of the  nature  of  the
    evidence that was consistent and how it was given  (in  terms  of,  for
    example, reciting his statement including irrelevant  details).   There
    is no error of law in the First-tier Tribunal considering in detail the
    Appellant's evidence which was consistent as well as that which was not
    and reaching conclusions on the weight to be attached to both.

15. The final ground of appeal relates only to one reason  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's credibility  was  further  damaged  by  section  8  of  the
    Immigration and Asylum (Treatment of  Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004;  the
    others being the delay in making a claim for  asylum,  giving  a  false
    identity to immigration officers and only  claiming  asylum  after  his
    arrest and detention when faced with removal.  The  Appellant  has  not
    challenged  those  other  reasons  and  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
    required  to  take  them  into  account  as  damaging  the  Appellant's
    credibility under section 8.

16. The single matter in dispute is as to whether the Appellant was working
    illegally, or further, whether he was engaged in money laundering  from
    running a business.  Although  there  may  be  significant  differences
    between the two in terms of criminal penalties,  it  is  in  any  event
    adverse to the Appellant if he was working illegally,  something  which
    he admitted but later contradicted in  his  evidence.   This  issue  is
    dealt with expressly in paragraph  67  of  the  decision,  with  weight
    attached the Appellant's own admission of working  illegally.   Whether
    or not he was doing more than this is at best marginal in  the  context
    of applying section 8 and in the context of the decision as a whole, is
    wholly immaterial.  It is clear from paragraph 68 of the decision  that
    the adverse credibility findings from  the  application  of  section  8
    would not be capable of undermining a wholly  credible  claim,  but  in
    this case, this is not a claim which was considered  credible  at  all;
    the section 8 factors only further damaged the Appellant's credibility.
     In the absence of one factor of section 8 not being  applied,  it  was
    inevitable that the outcome in the appeal would have been the same  for
    the reasons given by the First-tier  Tribunal  and  identified  already
    above.  For these reasons, there is no  error  of  law  on  the  fourth
    ground of appeal and even if there was, it would not be material to the
    outcome of the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   G Jackson                           Date         24th June 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
