
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06367/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2 May 2018                       |On: 8 May 2018                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [g n]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Moriarty, instructed by Luqmani Thompson &
                    Partners Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Uganda born on [ ] 1965. She entered  the
    UK clandestinely on 18 May 2014 and claimed asylum on 20 December 2016.
    Her claim was refused on 20 June 2017 and  she  appealed  against  that
    decision. Her appeal was heard in the First-tier Tribunal on 3  October
    2017 and dismissed in a decision promulgated on 17  October  2017.  She
    has been given permission to appeal against the decision of  First-tier
    Tribunal.

 2. The appellant's asylum claim was made on the basis that she was lesbian
    and feared persecution in Uganda because of her sexuality. She  claimed
    that she realised her sexual orientation in 1979  when  aged  15  after
    sharing a bed with a girl, [J],  at  boarding  school,  and  started  a
    secret relationship with [J] which lasted for several  years.  She  was
    expelled from school when caught with a gay  magazine.  She  started  a
    relationship with a man, [V], in 1997/98 in order to hide her sexuality
    and they had a son together in October 1999. Her family wanted  her  to
    marry [V] and burned her when she refused. [V] became  violent  towards
    her and poisoned her. In 2003 [V] found out about her relationship with
    [J] and reported her to the police. Her family  disowned  her  and  the
    local council evicted her from her village. She went to live  with  her
    cousin and later moved to Kampala. In July 2010 she was attacked  at  a
    wedding party because of her sexuality. She  met  a  woman,  [A],  when
    working in Kampala and was in  a  relationship  with  her  for  several
    years. [A] arranged for her to come to the UK and care for  an  elderly
    man and she worked for him when she arrived here. He did not allow  her
    to leave his home  and  threatened  her  with  return  to  Uganda.  She
    remained with him until he died of renal failure in August 2016,  after
    which his friend took her in. She would be imprisoned or killed if  she
    returned to Uganda.

 3. The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not accept  that
    she was lesbian and did not accept that she had problems in Uganda. The
    respondent considered that she would be at no risk on return to  Uganda
    and that her removal would not breach her human rights.

 4. The appellant's appeal against that decision was  heard  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Grant on 3  October  2017.  The  judge  heard  from  the
    appellant and three witnesses  and  recorded  her  claim  to  be  in  a
    relationship in the UK with a woman named [E] who was  not  present  at
    the hearing. The judge did not accept that the appellant  was  lesbian,
    finding that she was not a credible witness who had  told  a  "pack  of
    lies". The judge did not accept the appellant's account of being locked
    in by the elderly man for whom she worked in the UK and did not  accept
    that she was a victim of trafficking. The  judge  considered  that  the
    appellant had fabricated her claim and had  tried  to  gain  status  by
    'jumping on to "the gay bandwagon"'. She dismissed the  appeal  on  the
    basis that the appellant was at no risk on return to  Uganda  and  that
    her removal would not breach her human rights.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal the judge's decision  on  the
    following grounds: Firstly, that the judge's adverse findings,  arising
    from the fact that  the  appellant  was  not  arrested  in  2003,  were
    contrary to the country information at the relevant time and failed  to
    take account of the deterioration in the treatment  of  gay  people  in
    Uganda since that time. Secondly, that  the  judge  failed  to  provide
    adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's  account   of   her
    background and experiences of sexuality in Uganda since 1979.  Thirdly,
    that the judge had applied the wrong standard  of  proof  by  requiring
    certainty in relation to the appellant's sexuality. Fourthly, that  the
    judge's reference to jumping on the "gay bandwagon" gave the appearance
    of bias. Fifthly, that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the evidence of the witnesses.

 6. Permission was initially refused in the First-tier  Tribunal,  but  was
    subsequently granted in the Upper Tribunal on  a  renewed  application,
    primarily on the question of whether the expression "jumping  onto  the
    gay bandwagon" left an impression of bias on a fair-minded observer.

Appeal hearing

 7. Mr Moriarty confirmed that the main ground of appeal was in relation to
    bias but submitted that the other grounds flowed into that ground.  The
    expression "jumping on to the  gay  bandwagon"  was  inappropriate  and
    unnecessary and a fair minded observer, reading that together with  the
    judge's reference to the only  person  knowing  for  certain  that  the
    appellant was gay would be a lesbian  partner,  would  think  that  the
    judge was biased. The judge failed to analyse and give  weight  to  the
    evidence supporting the appellant's claim. She relied  on  the  current
    situation in Uganda  without  giving  consideration  to  the  objective
    evidence of the situation in 2003 and her  findings  were  inconsistent
    with the relevant country guidance. A fair-minded observer may say that
    the judge took the refusal letter as her starting pint and rejected the
    appellant's evidence without giving it proper consideration.

 8. Mr Wilding accepted that the expression was inappropriate but submitted
    that it was not indicative of bias as the judge had  already  made  her
    findings  of  fact  and  had  already  come  to  her   conclusions   on
    credibility. The judge was well aware of the correct standard of  proof
    and was not looking for certainty. She considered the evidence  of  the
    witnesses. There was nothing to lead a fair minded observer to consider
    that the appellant was treated unfairly. Mr Wilding submitted that  the
    judge's findings were not inconsistent with the background  information
    relating to the situation in Uganda in 2003. The judge was entitled  to
    reach the adverse conclusions that she did and there were  no  material
    errors of law in her decision.

Consideration and findings

 9. In the case of Alubankudi (Appearance of bias)  [2015]  UKUT  542,  the
    President confirmed that the relevant test in relation to apparent bias
    was that set out in Magill v. Porter [2001] UKHL 67 at [103]:

    "The question is whether the fair minded  observer,  having  considered
    the facts, would conclude that there was a real  possibility  that  the
    tribunal was bias."

10. The circumstances in the appellant's  case  are  similar  to  those  in
    Alubankudi, in so far  as  both  cases  involve  an  inappropriate  and
    unnecessary remark made by the judge in the decision. As with the  case
    of Alubankudi, it seems to me that,  whilst  the  judge's  use  of  the
    offending expression was unfortunate  and  inappropriate,  it  was  not
    indicative of bias.

11. In line with the approach taken in Alubankudi, in particular at [10], I
    have considered the matter as a hypothetical  fair  minded,  reasonable
    and properly informed observer. The  hypothetical  observer  would,  in
    this case, find no basis for concluding that this was a judge  who  had
    any predisposition against persons such as the appellant but would find
    that this was a judge whose decision, read as whole, contained  a  full
    recording and assessment of the relevant evidence and cogent  reasoning
    on that evidence. I do not agree with  Mr  Moriarty  that  the  judge's
    observation at [29], that  the  only  person  who  would  know  of  the
    appellant's sexuality for certain would be a  lesbian  partner,  was  a
    requirement for evidence of  same  sex  activity  or  demonstrated  the
    application of a higher standard of proof by the judge. I agree with Mr
    Wilding that the judge was  not  looking  for  certainty  or  requiring
    corroboration, but was well aware of the requisite  standard  of  proof
    and was simply commenting that it was only a partner who  would  be  in
    the position of confirming sexuality and that  there  was  therefore  a
    limit to the weight which could  be  afforded  to  the  evidence  of  a
    witness such as Deacon Ferguson. Accordingly I find  no  merit  in  the
    suggestion that the judge's use of the word "certain" contributed to  a
    perception of bias.

12. Neither do I find any merit in the assertion that the judge  failed  to
    give consideration to the evidence produced in support of  the  appeal.
    The judge set out the evidence of the witnesses and  clearly  had  full
    regard to that evidence. Mr [Ma]'s evidence, as set out in his  witness
    statement, was a confirmation of what the appellant had  told  him  and
    the judge noted the limitations of that evidence at [27]. In so far  as
    Mr [Ma]'s evidence  related  to  the  appellant's  living  and  working
    relationship with Mr [Mu], it is clear that the judge  did  not  accept
    the appellant's account in that regard and she  provided  full  reasons
    for her conclusion at [26]. The appellant summarised  the  evidence  of
    [CK] at [7] and, whilst she did not make specific findings on it, it is
    plain from his statement that it was little more than a confirmation of
    what the appellant had told him. The judge  provided  a  more  detailed
    analysis of the evidence of Deacon Ferguson and provided cogent reasons
    for according her evidence the weight that she did.

13. As for the assertion that the judge's findings at [23] in  relation  to
    events in 2003 were inconsistent with the background  evidence  of  the
    situation at that time, I am in agreement  with  Mr  Wilding  that  the
    matter was not as clear cut as the grounds suggest. It  is  clear  from
    the objective evidence pointed out by Mr Wilding,  namely  the  Finnish
    Immigration Service report, at pages B1 to B3, that  homosexuality  was
    criminalised in Uganda, and the judge was accordingly entitled to  draw
    the inferences that she did at [23] and  [28]  from  the  lack  of  any
    repercussions following the appellant's husband's report to the police,
    irrespective  of  the  findings  on   risk   of   persecution   in   JM
    (homosexuality risk) Uganda CG [2008] UKAIT 00065.

14. It is particularly relevant to  take  account  of  the  fact  that  the
    judge's reasons for finding the appellant not to be a credible  witness
    were based not only upon those matters which she addressed in detail at
    [25]  to  [28],  as  discussed  above,  but  also  upon  the  numerous,
    significant and  material  inconsistencies  and  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's accounts to which she referred at [24]. The judge  did  not
    elaborate upon those matters  due  to  the  focus  of  the  appellant's
    counsel's submissions being on the appellant's experiences in  the  UK,
    but it is clear that she was referring to the matters mentioned at [13]
    which were highlighted in the refusal letter at [26] to [41] and  which
    included wholly inconsistent accounts given by the appellant about  her
    realisation of her sexuality and her past relationships. The judge  was
    fully entitled to find the appellant's claim as to  her  sexuality  and
    her experiences arising from her claimed sexuality to be  significantly
    undermined by  those  matters  and  I  am  entirely  satisfied  that  a
    hypothetical fair minded, reasonable  and  properly  informed  observer
    would have  no  hesitation  in  concluding  that  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility findings did not  derive  from  any  bias  but  from  sound
    reasoning which was fully justified on the evidence before her.

15. For all of these reasons I find no merit in the suggestion  that  there
    was any bias on the part of the judge, apparent or otherwise.  I  agree
    with Mr Wilding that the judge's unfortunate comment at  [29]  did  not
    form any part of her findings of fact  or  her  reasoning  but  was  an
    inappropriate observation following the event. It  is  clear  that  the
    appellant had a full and fair hearing and was given  every  opportunity
    to present her case. Accordingly I find no merit in the challenge based
    on bias and unfairness and find that the judge was  fully  entitled  to
    reach the conclusions that she did and to make the  decision  that  she
    did. I find no errors of law in the judge's decision and I  uphold  the
    decision.

DECISION

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    an error on a point of law. I  do  not  set  aside  the  decision.  The
    decision to dismiss the appeal stands.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 2 May 2018
