

                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06253/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 August 2017                     |On 25 August 2017                    |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

                                     X L
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Katani, of Katani & Co, Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. First-tier Tribunal Judge Mays heard  the  appellant's  appeal  against
    refusal of asylum on 29 September 2016 and dismissed it by  a  decision
    promulgated on 17 October 2016.

 2. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  UT,  stating  12
    grounds.

 3. Ground 1, based on article 8, arises from the position at the  date  of
    the hearing, when the appellant's partner and father of her  child  had
    an outstanding asylum claim, and was not removable.

 4. Grounds 2 - 12 challenge the resolution of  the  facts  of  the  asylum
    claim.

 5. FtT Judge Baker refused permission on 17 November 2016.

 6. The application was renewed to the UT on the same grounds.

 7. UT Judge Canavan granted permission on 17 January  2017,  on  the  view
    that the Judge might have erred by not taking into account that article
    8 issues (ground 1) were "only likely to be engaged for a finite period
    of time", the question being "whether removal pending  the  outcome  of
    the father's asylum claim, by definition a temporary period,  would  be
    disproportionate".   Although  the  grant   of   permission   was   not
    restricted, it observes that grounds  2  -  12  amount  to  a  list  of
    disagreements and submissions, without particularising how these  might
    have made any difference to the outcome.

 8. At the beginning if the hearing in the UT Mr Katani withdrew ground  1.
    He confirmed that was because the appellant's husband's claim has  been
    resolved.  His overall submission was that  each  of  grounds  2  -  12
    disclosed error and that taking those  errors  together,  the  decision
    could not stand.

 9. The Presenting Officer drew attention to the  tenor  of  the  grant  of
    permission and submitted that but for ground 1 it would not  have  been
    made.  However, as argued by Mr Katani, that is neither here nor there.
     The grounds are before the UT and the question  is  whether  they  are
    established to the extent of requiring the decision to  be  set  aside.
    They must be considered both point-by-point,  and  by  looking  at  the
    decision as a whole.

10. Ground 2 is directed against the finding that it "somewhat  undermined"
    the appellant's case that although  she  said  her  father  transferred
    ownership of land to her, the documents showed only transfer of  rights
    of contractual management.  Mr Katani said that the  essence  was  that
    the appellant  had  the  benefit  of  the  land,  the  distinction  was
    insignificant, and the judge irrationally founded on a technicality  of
    an alien legal system.

11. That submission made the best of the point for the  appellant,  but  as
    argued for respondent, there had to be some significance  in  what  the
    documents actually said; the distinction was there, and it was for  the
    judge to examine and evaluate it.

12. I consider that the judge was correct to identify the discrepancy,  and
    that she took it as no more than a minor point against  the  appellant,
    which was well within her scope.

13. Ground 3 criticises the judge for finding credibility was undermined by
    non-production of a power of attorney the  appellant  said  her  father
    held on her behalf, an error of "requiring corroboration".   Mr  Katani
    said that the judge effectively raised  the  bar,  tacitly  imposing  a
    requirement for corroboration, and that the search for documents  could
    become never-ending.

14. I see no error on this point  either.  The  judge  did  not  impose  an
    unjustified legal requirement. She was entitled to note that although a
    considerable volume  of  documentation  was  produced,  an  item  quite
    central to the claim was missing.

15. Ground 4 criticises the  judge  for  finding  it  incredible  that  the
    appellant's father would transfer the land on  her  reaching  majority,
    when she was about to study abroad and would not be in  a  position  to
    manage the land. The ground says that the judge could  not  expect  the
    appellant to explain her father's motives.  Mr Katani added that it was
    natural for parents to gift property to children,  and  the  point  was
    neutral.

16. I tend to agree with this ground. It might be said that the issue  ties
    in with the absence of the power of attorney, but is difficult  to  see
    what is inherently suspicious about the timing of the claimed transfer.



17. Ground 5 says that the judge's  reasons  for  finding  the  appellant's
    explanations unsatisfactory  were  negated  by  evidence  she  accepted
    earlier in the decision; but on  reference,  those  are  narrations  of
    evidence, not findings, and there was  no  self-contradiction.  As  Mrs
    O'Brien pointed out, the passage criticised fits into the flow  of  the
    judge's reasoning and findings.

18. Ground 6 deals with the judge's analysis at page 51  of  the  numbering
    and identification of the land in  one  of  the  documents.  The  judge
    accepted that there was a possibility that the document did include the
    land in which the appellant claimed an interest. It is said this should
    have been taken as a factor in her favour, or at best as neutral.

19. I find the judge's analysis careful and cautious.  She was  correct  to
    say that it was not explained  how  the  appellant's  land  was  to  be
    identified as the subject of compulsory purchase in this document.  She
    took the matter no further than that.

20. At paragraph 54 of  her  decision  the  judge  said  that  it  appeared
    pointless to include in the documents provision for raising  objections
    to demolition, when the documents said that  the  demolition  would  go
    ahead in any event, and that undermined their  reliability.   Ground  7
    says this is speculation and conjecture, there being  "no  material  on
    Chinese contract law or practice to rely on".

21. I accept the submission  for  the  respondent  that  it  was  perfectly
    rational to identify this feature, on the face  of  the  documents,  as
    odd.

22. The appellant might have advanced by evidence and submissions  that  in
    China land development is sometimes  pursued  without  observing  legal
    formalities, a matter of which the tribunal is aware from other  cases;
    but no such line is said to have been put to the FtT. In  its  absence,
    this ground is a weak criticism.

23. Ground 8 is directed against the finding at paragraph 55  that  it  was
    difficult to see  why  the  appellant's  father  and  mother  would  be
    arrested, when this was contradicted by the  explanation  at  paragraph
    16.  Ground 9 is on the same theme,  arguing  that  the  judge  wrongly
    founded on the arrest warrants for the appellant's  mother  and  father
    having different dates, when the explanation was at paragraphs  14  and
    16.

24. These grounds aimed at showing that the Judge  muddled  up  arrests  in
    2011 and in 2013, but that fell away on full reading of  the  foregoing
    paragraphs.  The judge said there was no  explanation  why  two  arrest
    warrants in September 2011 had different dates, when  they  related  to
    the same matter.  The point is another small one, but the judge did not
    get it wrong.

25. Ground 10 is aimed against the finding at paragraph 57 that credibility
    is undermined by non-production of the arrest warrant allegedly  issued
    for the appellant, when her aunt could get whatever she wanted from the
    police bureau where her son worked.   The  ground  says  there  was  no
    evidence of her aunt's ability to do so.  Mr Katani said that the judge
    speculated, and did not engage with the evidence

26. However, there was evidence of the aunt's ability to get  whatever  she
    wanted - that is exactly what the appellant said.

27. Mr Katani in his reply sought to develop  an  argument  that  what  the
    appellant said could not be taken literally, and it was  impossible  to
    know exactly what her aunt could and could not get from police records.
     Those remarks are correct, but they only go so far.  The debate  might
    be extended endlessly, but the judge is not shown to have made any more
    than she was entitled to do of the issue.

28. At paragraph 60 the judge observed that the appellant said in a witness
    statement that her father was injured when attacked  by  officials  and
    gangsters in August 2011, but had not mentioned such matters at  asylum
    interview, when she might have been expected to do.  The argument based
    on ground 11 was that an appellant can answer only  such  questions  as
    she is asked, and it is unreasonable to expect further  information  to
    be volunteered.

29. All such issues depend on the facts and on the evolution of  the  case.
    The appellant has not shown that the judge was wrong in  this  instance
    to think that the case was being added  to,  not  simply  developed  in
    further natural detail.

30. Ground 12 says that the judge was wrong to treat it as adverse that the
    appellant's documents were produced only on the day of the FtT hearing.
     However, the appellant had a long time to get her case  together,  and
    did not try to explain why her documents came as a surprise at the last
    moment. The point was one the judge was plainly entitled to take.

31. The grounds and submissions doggedly maintain the case  on  the  facts,
    and probe for error, selectively and minutely, but they do not  attempt
    to analyse the overall reasoning of the decision, or to  show  that  it
    falls down on critical points without which the rest cannot stand.

32. In the absence of any such overall analysis, the grounds fall short  of
    showing that the decision, read fairly and as a whole, is  wrong  as  a
    matter of law.

33. In any event, on a point-by-point basis there is little in the grounds:
    some force in ground 4 rather less in 7, but nothing in the rest.  That
    is no more than the level of ongoing dissent which might  be  extracted
    from almost any decision on the facts.

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

35. No anonymity direction has been requested or made.


            [pic]


            24 August 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




