

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06054/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 8 November 2019                            |On 19 November 2019          |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     L R
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr K Behbahani, Behbahani and Co. Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Finch on 4 October 2019 against the
          determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Burns, promulgated on 7
          August 2019 following a hearing at Taylor House on 25 July 2019.


       2. The appellant is an Iranian national born on 20  March  1975.  She
          entered the UK with her children on a visit visa in on 12 November
          2016, returning to Iran two weeks later. She then re-entered  with
          her children on 27 March 2017. She maintained that she was  coming
          to enrol them in school but on the last day  of  her  visa,  on  4
          April 2017, she applied for asylum. She  originally  claimed  that
          some  colleagues  in  Iran,  who  had  converted  from  Islam   to
          Christianity, had been arrested and that  a  search  of  the  work
          premises revealed Christian literature which she had been given by
          people in Turkey and which she had brought back to Iran. for  that
          reason, she feared that she wd be at risk on return.


       3. Her appeal was heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ross  on  15
          November 2017.  He  found  that  she  lacked  credibility  and  he
          dismissed the appeal. Permission to  appeal  was  refused  by  the
          First-tier Tribunal but granted by the Upper Tribunal however  her
          appeal was dismissed at an oral hearing.  She  then  made  further
          submissions claiming that in 2018 she  had  started  to  attend  a
          church and that she had been baptised on  16  December  2018.  She
          argued that she had now converted from Islam and  that  regardless
          of the findings in the earlier appeal, she would now  be  at  risk
          because of her own conversion. That application led  to  a  second
          refusal and  a  further  appeal.  Judge  Burns  took  the  earlier
          determination as  his  starting  point.    He  assessed  the  oral
          evidence from the appellant and her  witness,  made  comprehensive
          adverse  credibility  findings  and,  accordingly,  dismissed  the
          appeal.


          The Hearing


       4. Mr Behbahani relied on the  grounds  in  his  submissions  at  the
          hearing before me on 8 November 2019.


       5. Three grounds were put forward.  First,  it  was  argued  that  in
          rejecting  the  appellant's  daughter's  written  evidence  solely
          because he had rejected the appellant's evidence, the judge  erred
          in his approach to the assessment of evidence. Moreover, he failed
          to have regard to what the child had said about her  own  feelings
          of Christianity, and how it had affected her life and  thereby  he
          had disregarded that evidence when considering her best interests.


       6. The  second  ground  was  a  criticism  directed  at  the  judge's
          assessment of the pastor's evidence. It  was  submitted  that  the
          pastor had not based his evidence simply on what the appellant had
          told him but on his observations of the family over  a  period  of
          time.


       7. Third, it was submitted that the judge had based his  decision  on
          assumptions rather than  a  consideration  of  the  evidence  when
          assessing  the  appellant's  journey  to  conversion.   Particular
          sections of the determination (at 28, 32, 46 and 47) were  singled
          out for criticism.


       8. For the respondent, Mr Melvin relied upon the Rule 24 response. He
          submitted that with respect to the first ground, the child  was  a
          dependant on the claim, not a claimant herself  and  the  evidence
          had only been to support the main claim. The judge was entitled to
          consider it as having been put forward at the behest of her mother
          to bolster an unworthy claim. The appellant  had  not  been  found
          credible in two previous appeals. there was no material  error  in
          the judge's consideration of s.55. The fact  that  the  child  was
          doing well in school here meant that she could  also  do  well  in
          school in Iran.


       9. With regard to the second and third grounds, the pastor's evidence
          was considered at length. He  had  written  a  letter  of  support
          without having seen the previous determination.  No  evidence  was
          overlooked by the judge. Paragraph 28 was  not  a  finding  but  a
          recording of the evidence. The same applied to paragraph  32.  The
          first refusal of her claim had been prior  to  her  attendance  at
          church and so the judge was entitled to find that she had  started
          to attend in order to  boost  another  asylum  claim.  It  was  an
          unconvincing and contrived claim. He relied on what  was  said  by
          the Court of Appeal (at paragraph 18) of  Herrera  v  SSHD  [2018]
          EWCA Civ 412, that it is necessary to guard against the temptation
          to characterise as errors of law what are in truth  no  more  than
          disagreements about the weight to be given to  different  factors,
          particularly if the judge who decided the appeal had the advantage
          of hearing oral evidence. The decision should be upheld.


      10. In response, Mr Behbahani submitted that whilst the child was  not
          a claimant herself, her best interests needed protecting. She  had
          developed her religious beliefs over the last two years, and  they
          were now part of her life. The judge was obliged to consider this,
          but he did not do so.  The  determination  was  deficient  in  its
          consideration of the child's evidence. Moreover,  his  remarks  at
          paragraph 71 effectively directed the child  to  lie.  Whilst  the
          judge had looked at the evidence from the pastor, he had not  done
          so properly. His methodology was flawed. The judged had  mixed  up
          his recording of  the  evidence  and  his  assessment  of  it.  Mr
          Behbahani also pointed out that this was  the  appellant's  second
          appeal and not her third as Mr Melvin had submitted. The  decision
          should be set aside and the  matter  remitted  to  the  First-tier
          Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


      11. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          indicated that I would be setting aside the decision of the judge.
          I now give my reasons for doing so.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      12. Having considered all the evidence and  the  submissions  made,  I
          find that although there are several credibility issues  with  the
          appellant's claim, the adverse findings made by  Judge  Burns  did
          not adequately assess the evidence from the appellant's  daughter,
          her school teachers and the pastor.


      13. Part of the evidence before the judge consisted of a  letter  from
          the appellant's 14 year old daughter in which she makes references
          to attending church, how this makes her  happy  and  puts  her  at
          peace. The judge considers this very briefly in one sentence  made
          in paragraph 69, towards the end of his determination. He  states:
          "This letter may well have been dictated or at least been strongly
          influenced in its content by the applicant  for  purposes  of  her
          bogus asylum claim".  The  judge  is  heavily  criticised  in  the
          grounds for this observation and rightly so. There is no basis for
          it, it was not a matter put to the appellant and was not something
          raised by the respondent. Whilst one  might  have  argued  that  a
          child who spoke and read no English on arrival just two years  ago
          had not written this letter, a  consideration  of  the  supporting
          letters from her school teachers prove otherwise. It is plain that
          the appellant's daughter has made remarkable progress  at  school,
          even overtaking her peers in class in  English  lessons.  Had  the
          judge taken account of the evidence from the child's  school,  and
          had he not simply dismissed her lengthy statement  solely  because
          he had not been impressed with her mother's evidence, it is  quite
          possible that he would have come to a different decision.


      14. I also accept Mr Behbahani's complaint that this young girl's  own
          feelings and expressions were utterly disregarded when  the  judge
          considered  her  best  interests.  Moreover,  not  only  does  her
          evidence impact upon any assessment of her own welfare, but it  is
          also important corroborative  evidence  of  the  main  appellant's
          claim and should not have been dismissed in  the  summary  fashion
          that it was (at 69).  For these reasons alone,  the  determination
          is flawed and unsustainable.


      15. The judge is also criticised in respect to  his  approach  to  the
          pastor's evidence. It is, of course, apparent  that  the  evidence
          was considered but the consideration was flawed and did not follow
          the  guidance  in  TF  and  MA  [2018]  CSIH  58.   The   evidence
          demonstrates that  the  pastor  based  his  opinions  on  his  own
          observations of the appellant and her  children  over  the  period
          they attended church and participated in church activities and not
          just on what the appellant told him.


      16.  Given  that  these  criticisms  are  sufficient  to  render   the
          determination I have no need  to  address  the  appellant's  third
          ground.


      17. The judge's determination contains material  errors  of  law  such
          that the decision cannot be saved. It is set aside in its entirety
          except as a record of proceedings.








          Decision


      18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  The  matter
          is remitted for a fresh hearing  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at
          Taylor House or Hatton Cross at a date to be arranged.


          Anonymity


      19. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 14 November 2019












