
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06479/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28 September 2017               |On 27 October 2017                 |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                             HANI KAREEM MOHAMAD
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms M Cleghorn (counsel) instructed by Halliday
                    Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Fox  promulgated  on  7  March  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 26/02/1964 and is a  national  of  Iraq.  On  9
June 2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Fox ("the  Judge")  dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on  30  June  2017  Judge  Pedro
gave permission to appeal stating

      "2. The grounds assert that the Judge failed to  apply  correctly  the
      country guidance in AA (article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544(IAC)
      and made a wrongful assumption regarding relocation to the IKR.


      3. The grounds disclose an arguable error of law capable of  affecting
      the outcome."

The Hearing

5. (a) Ms Cleghorn, for the appellant, moved  the  grounds  of  appeal.  She
told me that the appellant is from Anbar, which is a contested area  outside
the IKR. At [21], [22] and  [34] of the decision the Judge  finds  that  the
appellant can safely return to another area of Iraq and  can  safely  go  to
IKR. Ms Cleghorn told me that  those  findings  are  the  foundation  for  a
material error of law.

(b) Because the  appellant  is  from  Anbar  province,  he  will  return  to
Baghdad. Ms Cleghorn told  that  the  Judge  failed  to  consider  the  pre-
clearance requirement for entry to IKR set out in AA (Iraq) CG  [2017]  EWCA
Civ 944. She told me that the Judge failed to consider the importance  of  a
CSID card, and that the Judge had  failed  to  consider  how  the  appellant
could get from Baghdad to IKR. Ms Cleghorn told  me  that  the  decision  is
devoid of consideration of what would happen to the appellant if  he  enters
IKR. She told me that the decision is fundamentally flawed.

(c) Ms Cleghorn referred me to AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944.  She  asked
me to allow the appeal, to set the decision  aside  and  substitute  my  own
decision allowing the appeal on Humanitarian Protection and article  3  ECHR
grounds.

6. Mr Diwyncz, for the respondent formally opposed the appeal, but  told  me
that he was limited in the submissions that he could make because  the  case
of AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ  944  was  handed  down  after  the  Judge's
decision was promulgated. He conceded that in light of AA (Iraq)  CG  [2017]
EWCA Civ 944 the appellant comes from a  contested  area  and,  if  internal
relocation is unduly harsh, he is entitled to  humanitarian  protection.  He
accepted that a single man from an ethnic minority is unlikely to  be  safe.
He also accepted that a humanitarian crisis is unfolding in  Iraq,  and  the
life of an internally displaced person there amounts to destitution.

Analysis

7. The Judge's decision was written in March 2017 and, relied on  background
materials which were carefully considered by the Judge. The Judge found  (at
[21] and [22] of the decision) that the appellant will not be returned to  a
contested area, but can be returned to the Baghdad  Belts  or  IKR.   On  22
June 2017, the Court of Appeal issued updated country guidance on  Iraq.  In
the annex to the decision of AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944 the  Court  of
Appeal said

      A.     INDISCRIMINATE  VIOLENCE  IN  IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)   OF   THE
         QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE


         1. There is at present  a  state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
              certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
              militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
              ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
              "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
              Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
              such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
              for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
              account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
              being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
              serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
              Qualification Directive.

8. In making that finding the Court of Appeal adheres to what  was  said  in
AA Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC)

9. The Judge's finding at [21] and [22] are not safe. The Judge  finds  that
the appellant's claim fails on all grounds,  however  the  country  guidance
given by the Court of Appeal in June 2017  indicates  that  the  appellant's
claim for humanitarian protection must succeed. The guidance  given  by  the
Court of Appeal three  months  after  the  Judge's  decision  confirmed  the
guidance given in 2015, and is directly contrary to the  background  reports
the respondent relied on.

10. At [24] the Judge finds that the appellant has  family  and  friends  in
the Kurdish Independent Area, and that the Kurdish Independent  area  is  an
area the appellant is familiar with. It is not clear how the  Judge  reached
those conclusions because at [18] the Judge finds that the appellant  claims
Arab ethnicity and that his hometown is Rotba,  in  Anbar  province.  Within
[24] the Judge finds that the appellant's relatives were  liberated  by  the
actions of Iraqi military and allies freeing areas around  Mosul.  Mosul  is
665km from Rotba. Neither Mosul nor Rotba  are  in  IKR.  Mosul  is  in  the
Ninevah governate.

11. Inconsistency creeps into the Judge's findings of fact. It is not  clear
why the Judge finds that the appellant has family and friends  in  IKR  when
the remainder of the Judge's findings of  fact  relate  to  the  appellant's
hometown, which is clearly in Anbar province. The Judge's  findings  between
[21] and  [25]  amount  to  a  material  error  of  law  because  inadequate
consideration is given to the place of return, or the manner  in  which  the
appellant would be  able  to  make  his  way  to  IKR.  The  error  is  that
inadequate consideration is being given to the risks  to  the  appellant  on
return.

12. The  judge  falls  into  further  error  of  law  because,  although  he
considers the appellant's claim on  asylum  grounds  and  ECHR  grounds,  he
gives inadequate consideration to humanitarian  protection  and  reaches  no
conclusions in relation to article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

13. Because what is contained between [21] and [25] crates a material  error
of law I must set the Judge's decision aside. There is  sufficient  material
before me to enable me to substitute my own decision. The Judge's  error  of
law relates to the assessment of risk on return to Iraq.

14. The appellant's claimed fear is of forced  recruitment  into  Daesh.  At
[27] to  [29]  the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  has  never  been  an
individual target of Daesh. The appellant is not known to Daesh. Taking  the
evidence at its highest. All the appellant has done is  discretely  avoid  a
general call to arms. He is not known to Daesh; Daesh are not searching  for
him and have not threatened him. His claim  is  really  that  he  fears  the
internal armed conflict in Iraq. I find, on the facts  as  the  Judge  found
them to be, the appellant cannot succeed under the refugee convention.

15. It is common ground that the appellant comes from Anbar. The  respondent
intends to return him to Baghdad and insists that he can return to his  home
area or find safety elsewhere within Iraq. The guidance given by  the  Court
of Appeal in AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944  clearly  indicates  that  the
respondent's position is wrong. If the appellant return to his home area  he
must succeed both in terms of article 15(c) of the  qualification  directive
and on article 3 ECHR grounds. The question  for  me  to  determine  becomes
whether or not it is reasonable for the appellant to internally relocate.

16. The appellant is a Sunni Muslim of mixed Kurdish/ Arabic ethnicity.  The
background materials indicate that there are so  many  internally  displaced
persons in Iraq that UNHCR refers to  the  plight  of  internally  displaced
people there as a humanitarian crisis. The simple question that  I  have  to
answer is whether or not it is reasonable to make the appellant a  displaced
person anywhere in Iraq.

17. I take the following guidance from AA (Iraq) CG [2017] EWCA Civ 944

    D.     INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)


    14.    As a general matter, it will not be unreasonable or unduly harsh
         for a person from a contested area to relocate to Baghdad  City  or
         (subject to paragraph 2 above) the Baghdad Belts.


    15.    In assessing whether it would be unreasonable/unduly harsh for P
         to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are, however,  likely
         to be relevant:


         (a)      whether P has a CSID or will be able to  obtain  one  (see
             Part C above);


         (b)      whether P can speak Arabic  (those  who  cannot  are  less
             likely to find employment);


         (c)      whether P has family members or friends in Baghdad able to
             accommodate him;


         (d)       whether  P  is  a  lone  female   (women   face   greater
             difficulties than men in finding employment);


         (e)      whether P can find a sponsor to access  a  hotel  room  or
             rent accommodation;


         (f)      whether P is from a minority community;


         (g)      whether there is support available for P bearing  in  mind
             there is some evidence that returned failed asylum seekers are
             provided with the support generally given to IDPs.


    16.    There is not a real risk of an ordinary civilian travelling from
         Baghdad airport to the  southern  governorates,  suffering  serious
         harm en route to such governorates so as engage Article 15(c).


    E.     IRAQI KURDISH REGION


    17.    The Respondent will only return P to the  IKR  if  P  originates
         from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-cleared' with  the  IKR
         authorities. The authorities in the IKR do not require P to have an
         expired or current passport, or laissez passer.


    18.    The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article  15(c)
         risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


    19.    A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain  entry
         for 10 days as a visitor and then renew this entry permission for a
         further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can  remain  for  longer,
         although K will need to register with the authorities  and  provide
         details of  the  employer.  There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities pro-actively remove Kurds from the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end.


    20.     Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably  be  expected
        to avoid any potential undue harshness in that city  by  travelling
        to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely  to  involve  an
        assessment of (a) the practicality of travel from  Baghdad  to  the
        IKR (such as to Irbil by air); (b) the likelihood of  K's  securing
        employment in the IKR; and (c) the availability of assistance  from
        family and friends in the IKR.


    21.     As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a  home
        area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to relocate to the IKR.


18. On the facts as the Judge found them to be, the appellant  is  of  mixed
ethnicity but identifies himself as an Arab. He is  distinguishable  by  his
religion and his mixed ethnicity, and so will be viewed as  a  member  of  a
minority community. He has no network of support in Iraq.  Although  he  may
be able to claim Kurdish ethnicity through his mother, he has not  lived  in
IKR. With that profile, it cannot be reasonable to return the  appellant  to
Iraq. If returned to Iraq the appellant would be an Arab  who  is  not  from
IKR. The appellant no longer has a CSID; he does not have family members  or
friends in Baghdad able to accommodate him; there is no suggestion that  the
appellant can find a sponsor to access a hotel room or  rent  accommodation;
he has no network of support in Iraq.

19. Paragraph 21 of the guidance in the annexe to AA says  that  is  it  not
likely that the appellant would be able to relocate  to  IKR.  Even  if  the
appellant is treated as a Kurd, he is a Sunni Muslim and, as a young  single
Kurd, the appellant would be treated as a man from a minority ethnic  group.
The appellant cannot relocate to IKR. If he  goes  to  Baghdad  it  is  most
likely that he will not have access to accommodation and  employment  within
Iraq. He therefore faces the prospect of destitution if returned to Iraq.

20. Even if the appellant could be admitted to IKR for 10 days, and that 10-
day period may be extended for a further 10 days,  he  would  only  have  20
days to try to establish himself with a job and accommodation. He  would  be
competing with other young men in a region which  is  starting  to  struggle
with an influx  of  refugees.  The  Judge  finds,  when  considering  s.117B
factors, that the appellant is not likely to be attractive to  an  employer.
As a young man from a minority group without a means of support in  Baghdad,
there will be significant obstacles to the  appellant  negotiating  his  way
from Baghdad to IKR. The appellant does  not  have  skills  which  make  him
desirable to an employer. Following the  guidance  given  in  AA  (Iraq)  CG
[2017] EWCA Civ 944, I find that internal relocation is unduly harsh.

21. The appellant is  therefore  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  and
succeeds on article 3 ECHR grounds.

Decision

22. The First-tier Tribunal decision promulgated on 7 March 2017 is  tainted
by material errors of law. The decision is set aside.

23. I substitute my own decision.

24. The appeal is dismissed on asylum grounds

25. The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

26. The appeal is allowed on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 2 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle

