
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06254/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 9 October 2018                  |On 23 October 2018                      |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                  Ms A A T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Malhotra, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast who made  an  application
    for international protection. It  was  refused  and  she  appealed  and
    following a hearing, and in a decision promulgated 27 June 2018,  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal McLaren dismissed her appeal.  At  paragraph
    54 of the decision it is recorded: -

         "54. On  balance  I  do  not  find  that  the  Appellant's  general
         credibility has been established and I do not accept the  incidents
         described in  relation  to  her  family  have  occurred.  There  is
         therefore no reason to fear persecution or harm on  return  to  the
         Ivory Coast."

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal. It was granted by  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Ford on 15 August  2018.  Her  reasons  for  so
    granting were:-


         "1. The Appellant seeks permission to appeal in time, against a
         decision of First-tier Tribunal (Judge Mc Laren) dated 27 June 2018
         whereby it dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Secretary
         of State's decision to refuse her protection claim based on her
         fear of retribution from her diplomat partner who had brought her
         to the UK in circumstances where she thought she would have the
         status of his wife but discovered on arrival that he had a wife in
         the UK.


         2. It was accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant was
         subjected to domestic abuse by her husband.


         3. It is argued that the Tribunal erred in;-
             a. Not making appropriate allowance for the Appellant being a
             victim of trafficking for the purpose of domestic slavery when
             assessing her credibility
             b. Stating wrongly that the Appellant conceded that she had
             used deception in applying for a visit visa when her position
             was that it was her husband who had used deception
             c. Failing to consider that her husband had suffered adverse
             consequences to his status and employment as a diplomat after
             she revealed her presence in the UK, when assessing the risk
             of retribution from him on her return to the Ivory Coast
             d. Its findings on sufficiency of protection even if the
             Appellant's account is true (paras 56and 57)


         4. The grounds are arguable. The Tribunal considered the evidence
         and found "on balance" that the Appellant's credibility had not
         been established and it did not accept that the incidents she
         described in relation to her family had occurred and that therefore
         she had no reason to fear persecution on her return to Ivory coast
         (see paragraph 54).


         5. There is an arguable material error of law. All of the grounds
    arguable"

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset Mr Tarlow acknowledged that on a reading of the  decision
    as a whole the Judge had materially erred  by  applying  the  incorrect
    standard of proof as referred to in paragraph 54 of his decision. That,
    he contended rendered the decision unsustainable and that there was  no
    alternative but for  the  appeal  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal to be reconsidered de novo.

 5. Not unsurprisingly, Ms Malhotra did not disagree with that analysis and
    on that basis urged me to accept  that  any  consideration  of  further
    grounds of appeal was rendered redundant.

 6. I share the analysis of both representatives. The Judge has  materially
    erred for the reason stated above.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge McLaren

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                                                     Date  15  October
2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard



