
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06668/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 December 2018                          |On 15 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                                     and

                                 MISS E A T
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of The Cameroon who made an application  for
    international protection. It was refused and she appealed and following
    a hearing at Birmingham Judge of the First-tier Tribunal A  K  Hussain,
    in a decision promulgated on 5 July 2018, dismissed her appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    but ultimately granted on second application by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Martin. Her reasons for so granting were: -

         "1.  It is arguable that the Judge has based an adverse finding  on
         the basis of a GP letter, which the Judge says  relates  to  sexual
         abuse as a child on the basis that she had previously  referred  to
         beatings. The grounds are correct to say that the GP  letter  makes
         no mention of sexual abuse and the Judge arguably erred in  finding
         that it did.

         2.   Whether that error is material to the outcome will be for  the
         Upper Tribunal to decide. There are other adverse findings  not  so
         tainted."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Ms Rutherford expanded her first ground of appeal. She  submitted  that
    in rejecting the Appellant's claim the Judge had  materially  erred  in
    law. Whilst she accepted that the starting point for the Judge was  the
    earlier decision of another Judge in the First-tier Tribunal there was,
    in fact, new material before Judge Hussain which could have led to  him
    reaching a different conclusion. His approach to that new  material  is
    flawed and discloses errors of law. In particular at paragraph 7 of the
    decision the Judge refers to the report from  the  Appellant's  General
    Practitioner dated 25 May 2018. He concludes  that  the  tenor  of  the
    letter from the GP suggests that the Appellant told the doctor that she
    suffered sexual abuse. This is an  irrational  conclusion.  Nowhere  in
    that letter is there reference to the Appellant suffering  from  sexual
    abuse. There is no basis whatsoever to conclude that she had made  such
    an allegation to her GP. This is entirely speculative on  the  part  of
    the Judge and irrational.  The  error  infects  not  only  the  Judge's
    assessment of whether she has been the victim of  childhood  abuse  but
    also, in light of his conclusions at paragraph 9(a)  of  the  decision,
    that she has obtained falsely a diagnosis that she  is  suffering  from
    severe  anxiety  and  depression  and  possibly  post-traumatic  stress
    disorder in order to enhance her  claim.  The  error  infects  all  the
    credibility findings made. It is a serious allegation of misconduct  on
    behalf of the Appellant and if true  damages  her  overall  credibility
    substantially thus it must infect all other negative findings of fact.

 5. Ms Cunha responded to this first ground by accepting that the Judge had
    made at paragraph 7 of his decision reference to sexual abuse but  that
    in any event such an error was not material  given  the  other  adverse
    credibility findings that  he  was  able  to  come  to  and  that  they
    themselves were not infected by the recognised error. In light  of  the
    earlier decision and other findings the Judge was entitled to  come  to
    the decision that he did.

 6. I find that the Judge's error,  as  identified  in  the  first  ground,
    infects the totality of his credibility assessment. It is  therefore  a
    redundant exercise to consider any of the other grounds. The impact  of
    his error is such that there is no alternative but for this decision to
    be set aside and for the appeal to be reheard. The Judge at paragraph 7
    of his decision states that the tenor of the GP's letter suggests  that
    the Appellant told the doctor that she suffered sexual abuse. This  was
    speculative, as submitted, and erroneous. Beyond that at  paragraph  10
    the Judge states that he is satisfied that the  Appellant  has  mislead
    her GP into giving a diagnosis of severe anxiety, depression  and  PTSD
    on a false premise that she had been subject  to  sexual  abuse.  These
    findings have plainly infected  the  credibility  assessment  that  the
    Judge was obliged to undertake. They give rise to a material error.


Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge A K Hussain.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                     Date  4   January
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard










