

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/06855/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 9 November 2017                         |On 16 November 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   RIGHT HONOURABLE LORD BOYD OF DUNCANSBY
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STOREY


                                   Between

                                     MF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     In Person
For the Respondent:    Mr Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan. He appeals with leave  against
    a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Lal promulgated on 12 September
    2017. He entered the UK  on  a  student  visa  in  2011  but  that  was
    curtailed following the revocation of his sponsor's licence. He made an
    application outside the rules which was rejected in August 2015. He was
    arrested as an over stayer in 2017 and claimed asylum. The  application
    was refused on 10 July 2017. Judge Lal refused his appeal against  that
    decision.

 2. The  appellant  formed  a  relationship  with  a  Ugandan  woman  which
    subsisted between June and October 2016. A daughter was  born  of  this
    relationship at the end of June 2017. His former partner obtained a Non-
    Molestation Order against the appellant and this was  finalised  on  18
    September 2016, the appellant electing not to contest the making of the
    Order while making no admissions.

 3. The appellant hopes to establish contact with his daughter and has made
    an application to the Family Court for the appropriate order. A hearing
    has been set down for 5 December 2017.

 4. In the permission to appeal reasons F-tT Judge Gibb notes  that  it  is
    arguable that the judge gave no consideration to the best interests  of
    the appellant's child and only considered the family  proceedings  from
    the mother's perspective. In doing  so  he  disregarded  the  interface
    between the family  and  immigration  proceedings,  given  that  family
    proceedings  were  underway;   RS   (immigration   and   family   court
    proceedings) India [2012[ UKUT 218 (IAC).

 5. The respondent's Rule 24 response conceded that there was an  error  of
    law and requested  that  the  case  be  remitted  to  the  F-tT  for  a
    rehearing. Mr Duffy explained that the view had  been  taken  that  the
    Judge had failed to consider the possible impact of  the  Family  Court
    proceedings. He suggested that the asylum claim had no merit and it may
    be that the case could remain in the UT.

 6. We are satisfied that this was a material error of law by Judge Lal. We
    considered whether or not to continue the case in the UT  or  remit  as
    requested by the appellant  and  by  the  respondent  in  her  Rule  24
    response. Having considered the matter  we  think  that  it  should  be
    remitted. The appellant will be free to reargue his asylum claim.

 7. Two matters arise. The first is the importance as we see  it  that  the
    Family Court is sighted regarding the pending  proceedings  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal insofar as they relate to his  immigration  status.
    To this end we shall take steps to ensure our decision is sent to  that
    Court. Secondly the rehearing in the F-tT should await the  outcome  of
    the proceedings in the Family court on 5 December 2017.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First tier Tribunal judge is set aside for error of  law
and the case remitted to be reheard in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  before  a
judge other than Judge Lal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                             Date 15 November 2017

Right Honourable Lord Boyd of Duncansby

