
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06818/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 April 2019                              |On 29 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 RUKHSAR [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sidhu
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1985 and is  a  female  citizen  of
    Iran. She is of Kurdish ethnicity and has three children (all under  14
    years of age) dependent upon her appeal. She entered the United Kingdom
    on 5 December 2017. Her claim for international protection was rejected
    by the Secretary of State by a decision dated 23 May 2018. She appealed
    to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision which  was  promulgated
    on 11 July 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The ground of challenge to the decision of the judge is a  narrow  one.
    Mr Sidhu, who appeared for the appellant  before  both  First-tier  and
    Upper  Tribunals,  acknowledged  that  the  judge's  rejection  of  the
    appellant's account regarding her husband's claimed infidelity and  its
    consequences could not be faulted in law. Only the  judge's  subsequent
    analysis of risk on return was, he submitted,  open  to  challenge.  He
    submitted that the appellant had given consistent evidence which  would
    indicate that she would return to Iran as a single woman without family
    support in that country. It not been open to the judge to conclude that
    the appellant had given inconsistent or  unreliable  evidence  on  that
    issue and that she would have family members who may  assist  her  upon
    return.

 3. The problem with that submission is that the judge has clearly recorded
    in his record of proceedings that the appellant said in  evidence  that
    husband had a brother living in Iran. In her asylum interview  at  Q20,
    the appellant answered in response to the  question  'do  you  know  if
    [your husband] has any family in Iran? 'No, his parents passed away, he
    has no one else.' In the face of that evidence,  it  was  open  to  the
    judge to find of the appellant  had  been  inconsistent  on  this  very
    issue; it is not arguable that he has  in  any  way  misunderstood  the
    evidence or made an error of fact. It is not the  case,  therefore,  as
    the appellant now submits,  that  the  judge's  analysis  is  wrong  or
    incomplete because he has failed to find whether she would, as  a  lone
    woman, face a real risk on return. The judge's analysis is  clear;  the
    appellant would  have  family  members  to  whom  she  could  turn  for
    assistance.

 4. In addition, the judge made a finding in the alternative at [18].  Even
    if the appellant does not have family  in  Iran,  the  judge  concluded
    that, on the evidence, 'she has not rebutted the Secretary  of  State's
    evidence about the facilities available in Iran for lone  women.'  That
    alternative finding  was  sufficient  to  dispose  of  the  appellant's
    assertion that, even if her account of  past  events  was  untrue,  she
    would still face a real risk upon return.

    Notice of Decision

 5. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed


Signed                              Date 23 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
