
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06648/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|on 7th December 2018                   |on 15th January 2019          |
|                                       |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

                                  Lifang He
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mr K Forrest, Advocate, instructed by Chung & Rea,
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This appeal is against a decision by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
      Juliet Grant-Hutchison dismissing an appeal on protection and human
      rights grounds.

   2. The appellant is a national of China.  She entered the UK in 2009 as a
      student.  She has a partner and child, who are dependants on her
      claim.  The appellant claims to fear persecution in China because of
      her support for Tibetan independence.  The judge did not find the
      appellant's evidence about her fear of persecution to be credible.

   3. Permission to appeal was granted on two main grounds.  The first of
      these was that the judge had arguably placed too much reliance upon
      the record of the appellant's screening interview.  The second was
      that the judge arguably did not give proper regard to the country
      information.  Other grounds were considered arguable.

Submissions
   4. In his submission at the hearing before me Mr Forrest relied upon the
      two main grounds and a third, which was that the judge had found a
      supposed contradiction in the appellant's evidence where there was
      none.

   5. First, the judge found against the appellant for not disclosing all
      the relevant details of her claim at her screening interview.  The
      judge did not take into account that at the start of this interview
      the appellant was given advice in standard form to the effect that she
      would not have to provide details of her asylum claim and would have
      an opportunity to do this later.  The judge was wrong to attach
      significance to a point which was absent from the screening interview.
       At paragraph 17 of her decision the judge referred to the absence
      from the screening interview of any mention of the authorities looking
      for the appellant because she had designed leaflets for "Free Tibet",
      or that there was an arrest warrant for her issued in 2009, or that
      the police had been visiting her family home.

   6. The second ground on which Mr Forrest relied was that the judge failed
      to have regard to all the evidence including, in particular, the
      country information.  Mr Forrest referred to paragraphs 3, 7 and 8 of
      the grounds in the application for permission to appeal.  At paragraph
      3 it is contended that the appellant's description of how the police
      behaved was consistent with the country information on how the police
      react to persons associated with the Tibet secessionist movement.  Not
      all of those associated with the movement would be persecuted or
      detained for a lengthy period but this did not mean the authorities
      would not seek to gather as much information as possible.

   7. At paragraph 18 of her decision the judge found it "inconceivable"
      that the Chinese authorities would have any continuing interest in the
      appellant nearly nine years after she left China.  According to
      paragraph 7 of the grounds this failed to recognise the extent of
      repression in China, particularly in relation to secessionist
      movements.

   8. At paragraphs 19 and 20 of her decision the judge considered the
      appellant's sur place activity and found that this would not put the
      appellant at risk.  According to paragraph 8 of the grounds, were the
      appellant to be questioned on her return to China because of the
      interest of the authorities in her, the authorities would seek
      confession evidence and admitting her activity in the UK would put the
      appellant at risk of detention and maltreatment.

   9. The third ground relied upon by Mr Forrest arose from paragraph 1 of
      the grounds.  At paragraph 14 of her decision the judge found it
      contradictory that the appellant should have phoned a fellow supporter
      of "Free Tibet" seeking information about arrests fearing that this
      might get the appellant into trouble when the police had already been
      to the appellant's home with an arrest warrant.  According to the
      grounds there was no contradiction here.

  10. Mr Forrest enlarged on these grounds in his submissions.  He pointed
      out that the appellant's responses at her screening interview had been
      enlarged upon in a statement sent to the Home Office before the full
      interview (Annexe G1, Home Office bundle).  According to this
      statement the appellant's mother telephoned her in November 2009 to
      say the police had been to the house and shown her an arrest warrant.
      The appellant then phoned her friend, who told her about some of the
      other supporters having been arrested.

  11. Mr Forrest then referred to Qs 73 & 74 from the appellant's full
      asylum interview.  At Q73 the appellant was asked how she knew the
      police were still looking for her 8 years later.  The appellant
      replied that her mother had phoned her when she first saw the arrest
      warrant and she telephoned the appellant after every visit to the
      house by the police.  At Q74 the appellant was asked why she did not
      mention this event and the continued visits in her screening interview
      and statement.  The appellant replied: "When my lawyer asked me the
      questions, I only answered the questions he asked, so it could be he
      forgot to ask me."  Mr Forrest submitted that at paragraph 17 of the
      decision the judge referred to the appellant not having mentioned
      continuing visits by the police in her statement at G1 and of not
      mentioning the arrest warrant.  There was a lack of clarity over what
      the appellant did not say which she should have said.  Reliance was
      placed upon the decisions in YL (China) [2004] UKIAT 145 and JA
      (Afghanistan) [2014] 1 WLR 4291.  It was wrong for the judge to attach
      weight to a supposed failure to mention a fact at the screening
      interview which was stated at the later more detailed stage.


  12. Mr Forrest then turned to the country information lodged before the
      First-tier Tribunal on behalf of the appellant.  This contained
      information on the attitude of the Chinese authorities to those
      perceived as attached to the Tibet secessionist movement.  If the
      appellant was a member of "Free Tibet" she would be persecuted on
      return even after the lapse of time referred to by the judge.  Mr
      Forrest concluded that if there was anything in any of the three
      grounds to show an error by the judge then the decision was
      undermined, as the appeal had to be considered in the round.  The
      appeal should be allowed and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

  13. For the respondent, Mrs O'Brien submitted that the grounds amounted to
      no more than a disagreement with the findings made by the judge.
      Paragraph 17 of the decision should not be read in isolation from the
      preceding paragraphs.  A proper credibility assessment was conducted.
      As far as the screening interview was concerned, it was not a question
      of a lack of detail.  There was a contradiction between a single visit
      to the family home by the police and continued visits.  Nowhere at her
      screening interview did the appellant say the authorities were looking
      for her or there was an arrest warrant for her.  The judge was
      entitled to question why evidence was not produced when it might have
      been produced.  No omission was held unfairly against the appellant
      but any omission was taken into account in the wider context.
      Contradictions in the evidence meant a positive credibility finding
      could not be made.  The decision should be upheld.

  14. In response Mr Forrest stressed the advice given to an interviewee at
      the start of a screening interview.  The purpose of part 5.6 of the
      screening interview was to ask about offences.  When the appellant was
      asked if she had been accused of an offence the correct answer was
      "no".  It was unreasonable to expect the appellant to refer to
      anything else.

  15. I informed the parties that I would reserve my decision on the
      question of whether the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had erred in
      law.

Discussion
  16. I will start my consideration with the second of Mr Forrest's grounds,
      which was whether the judge had proper regard to all the evidence,
      particularly the country information.  I agree with Mr Forrest to the
      extent that if the authorities had an interest in the appellant
      because of her perceived involvement with "Free Tibet" then their
      interest in her would not necessarily diminish owing to the lapse of
      time while she was out of the country.  As Mrs O'Brien pointed out,
      however, this supposed that the appellant's involvement was genuine
      and not fabricated for the purpose of her claim.  Furthermore, while
      the appellant might be interviewed on return about her activities if
      she was of interest to the authorities, if she is not of interest she
      would not have to answer any questions revealing her involvement in
      demonstrations in the UK.  As was acknowledged in the grounds of the
      application, the judge was entitled to find that, given the
      appellant's low level of involvement and the large size of the
      demonstrations she attended, the appellant's activity in the UK would
      not put her at risk.

  17. Turning to the appellant's screening interview on 13th November 2017,
      according to the record of the interview the appellant would have been
      advised at the start of this interview that she would be asked for
      only a brief outline of why she was claiming asylum.  She would also
      have been advised that, if appropriate, she would be able to give a
      full detail of her experiences and fears at a full asylum interview at
      a later date.  During the interview the appellant mentioned neither
      the existence of an arrest warrant for her nor that the police had
      repeatedly visited her family home.  At paragraph 17 of the decision
      the judge referred to these omissions.  At part 5.3 of the screening
      interview the appellant was asked if she had ever been accused of or
      committed an offence, to which the appellant answered "no", rightly in
      the view of Mr Forrest.  It is worth observing, however, that at part
      5.5 the appellant was asked if she had ever been involved in any pro-
      government groups, political organisations, religious organisations,
      or armed or violent organisation, group or party, to which she also
      answered "no".

  18. Reference is then made to the undated statement at G1, which Mr
      Forrest said was submitted to the Home Office after the screening
      interview but before the full asylum interview.  In this statement the
      appellant referred to the police coming on one occasion to the
      appellant's family home and showing her mother an arrest warrant.  Her
      mother phoned her in November 2009 to inform her of this.  This phone
      call was therefore said to have taken place several years before the
      screening interview.

  19. At Q73 of her full asylum interview, which took place on 8th February
      2018, the appellant was asked how she knew the police were still
      looking for her 8 years later.  The appellant explained that her
      mother phoned her the first time she saw the arrest warrant and added
      that her mother phoned her every so often when the local police went
      to the house asking for the appellant.  At Q74 the appellant was then
      asked: "You didn't mention this in your screening or your statement
      can you explain why you didn't mention the continued visits".  The
      appellant replied: "When my lawyer asked me the questions, I only
      answered the questions he asked, so it could be he forgot to ask me".

  20. This question contained a number of parts.  It was translated into
      Mandarin.  It is not surprising that the appellant answered the
      question only partially.  She appears to have answered by refence only
      to the statement at G1, in which she referred to the first visit by
      the police with an arrest warrant, but not about any further visits.
      Her explanation for this particular omission was that her lawyer did
      not ask her about any further visits when the statement was prepared.
      There is no explanation of why she did not mention the arrest warrant
      at her screening interview, or the repeated visits by the police to
      the family home.

  21. The issue I am asked to consider is whether the judge was entitled to
      found upon these omissions in the way that she did at paragraph 17 of
      the decision.  The judge said that she accepted that the screening
      interview was a short interview but there was no reason why the
      appellant should not have mentioned these details, which appeared to
      be the cornerstone of her claim.  The judge pointed out that the
      appellant's representative could not have forgotten about the repeated
      visits by the police because the representative would not have known
      about the visits unless the appellant had spoken of them.  The judge
      concluded that the appellant omitted to mention in her statement at G1
      that the police continued to visit her home.  Thus the judge found not
      only that the appellant had omitted to mention the arrest warrant and
      police visits at her screening interview but had also omitted to
      mention the continuing visits in her subsequent statement.  The judge
      did not accept the appellant's attempt to blame her representative for
      this omission.

  22. It is important to look at the whole of paragraph 17 of the decision.
      The judge attached weight not only to the omissions from the screening
      interview but also to the omission of the continued police visits from
      the subsequent statement at G1.  The suggestion at the hearing before
      me was that the G1 statement was prepared, at least in part, to
      supplement the account provided by the appellant at the screening
      interview, yet the judge found the appellant failed to mention in this
      statement a fact which was late considered important to her claim,
      namely that the police continued to visit her family home to look for
      her.

  23. If paragraph 17 had referred only to omissions from the screening
      interview, then there would have been more strength in the appellant's
      submissions on this point.  The judge did not just consider the
      screening interview in this paragraph, however, but also considered a
      significant omission from the appellant's statement at G1, and
      rejected the appellant's proffered explanation at the asylum interview
      for this omission.  In the circumstances these were matters which the
      judge was entitled to take into account in her assessment of the
      evidence.  In addition, this was not an instance of a screening
      interview carried out on arrival in the UK with a claimant who was
      tired, disoriented or even ill.  The appellant had been living in the
      UK for several years and had supposedly known of the arrest warrant
      since her mother phoned her in November 2009.  The circumstances of
      this screening interview were very different from those described in
      JA (Afghanistan).  It was for the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal to
      decide what weight should be given to what was said at, or omitted
      from, the screening interview and the judge did this in a fair and
      proper manner.

  24. The remaining matter to be addressed is the contradiction in the
      appellant's account, to which the judge referred at paragraphs 13 and
      14 of the decision.  This contradiction seems to have arisen from the
      statement at G1 and from further information provided by the appellant
      at her asylum interview.    In her statement at G1 the appellant said
      that her mother informed her by phone in November 2009 that the police
      had visited the family home with an arrest warrant.  The appellant
      then phoned her friend, who told her arrests had been made.  At her
      asylum interview the appellant said she telephoned her friend again
      but her friend's parents said she was in prison.  The appellant
      telephoned several more times but then stopped because the appellant
      was worried that if she kept calling her friend the appellant herself
      could be in trouble.  The judge pointed out that the appellant already
      was in trouble, according to her evidence, because the police had an
      arrest warrant for her.

  25. According to ground 1 of the application it should have been obvious
      to the judge that by contacting another person in the "Free Tibet"
      group the appellant could be corroborating her association with the
      group.  It was contended that there was no contradiction in the
      appellant's evidence on this matter.  I disagree.  There was indeed an
      apparent contradiction, as explained by the judge at paragraphs 13 and
      14.

  26. Certain other matters were raised in the application for permission to
      appeal.  They do not disclose any error of law requiring the decision
      to be set aside.  The position is that the judge was entitled to
      assess the evidence in the manner in which she did and did not err in
      law in her findings or in the reasons given for disbelieving the
      appellant.  The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.

Conclusions
  27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
      the making of an error on a point of law.

  28. The decision dismissing the appeal shall stand.


Anonymity
The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and see no reason of substance for
doing so.



M E Deans
                      4th January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
