
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06678/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2019                   |On 19 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     h E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr H Sadiq, Adam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity, has  permission
    to challenge the decision of Judge Hillis of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sent on 16 September 2019 dismissing his protection claim.

2.   The basis of the appellant's claim was that he was  a  border  smuggler
    who would be at risk from the Iranian authorities because via a  friend
    called Mohammed  he  had  become  involved  in  helping  the  KDP-I  in
    distributing leaflets and they had arrested  two  men  he  was  working
    with, resulting in a raid on his home.   The  respondent  rejected  his
    claim as not being credible.

3.   The judge too did not accept that the appellant had  given  a  credible
    account.  The judge was also  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant  had
    demonstrated that he had engaged in sur place activities in the UK.

4.   The appellant's  grounds  contend  that  the  judge's  findings  (which
    identified lack of detail and factual content) failed to  delineate  at
    all what specific details or factual contents were lacking and are thus
    wholly inadequate.

5.   The grounds  also  contend  that  the  appellant's  actual  account  as
    detailed in his asylum interview and his appeal witness statement  were
    matters upon which the judge made no findings.  "It was clear that  the
    appellant's own account is that he was motivated by Mohammed  and  knew
    full well that Mohammed was a KDP-I member  and  indeed  the  appellant
    himself was fully aware that he was distributing KDP-I leaflets".

6.   In granting permission Judge Martin stated that it  was  arguable  that
    the judge had not considered "the core of the appellant's claims as  to
    what he said took place in Iran and whether that is credible".  I heard
    submissions from both representatives, Mr  Sadiq  contending  that  the
    judge's findings were effectively limited to those set out in paragraph
    39 and Mr McVeety submitting  that  the  judge's  findings  encompassed
    paragraphs 25 - 39 (and also 40 - 47 on the sur place aspects) and  had
    to be read as a whole.

7.   I am not persuaded that the judge  materially  err  in  law.   I  would
    observe that Mr Sadiq was not assisted by having to elaborate on poorly
    drafted grounds.  The written grounds raise no  specific  challenge  to
    the judge's findings at paragraphs 25 - 33 (or at 40-47), yet  complain
    in broad terms that there was a lack of findings in paragraph 39.   Yet
    even focussing on Mr  Sadiq's  more  logical  reformulaton,  I  do  not
    consider the grounds are made out.

8.   I note first of all that the appellant's grounds raise no challenge  to
    the judge's adverse findings in respect of the appellant's claimed  sur
    place activities in the UK.  Hence the  only  basis  in  which  he  can
    succeed before me is by establishing an error of  law  in  the  judge's
    treatment of the appellant's claimed experiences in Iran.

9.   Turning to consider the latter, I would accept  Mr  Sadiq's  submission
    that the judge's  findings  at  paragraphs  25  -  33  lack  structure.
    However, these - and indeed all the succeeding  paragraphs  -  must  be
    read  in  light  of  the  decision  as  a  whole.   In  this  case  the
    respondent's refusal decision had identified a number  of  shortcomings
    in the appellant's  account,  including  inconsistencies  and  lack  of
    detail.  Having heard from the respondent, the judge then sets out both
    parties' submissions.  At paragraphs 10 - 15 the judge notes  that  the
    Presenting Officer identified a lack  of  consistency  as  regards  the
    appellant's account of having kept his political activities secret  and
    an implausibility in the appellant's  account  of  having  exited  Iran
    within 24 hours.  The PO also noted that the authenticity of the  KDP-I
    letter was not accepted.  The judge then detailed the submissions  made
    on behalf of the appellant which were in essence that the appellant had
    satisfactorily explained these alleged shortcomings.

10.  Against this backdrop it is clear that in paragraphs 25 - 33 the  judge
    gave specific treatment to the appellant's attempted explanation of the
    two main difficulties the respondent had identified in his account.  At
    paragraph 29 the  judge  makes  very  clear  his  assessment  that  the
    appellant had not been able to explain how it was that  his  uncle  had
    been able to arrange an agent and for the appellant to leave Iran  less
    than 24 hours after the appellant claims his home  was  raided  by  the
    authorities,  nor  had  he  been  able  to  give  any  details  of  the
    arrangements made with the agent or the cost.  I note that Mr Sadiq was
    not able to shed any further light on this aspect  of  the  appellant's
    evidence.

11.  The judge then turned to consider the appellant's explanation  for  why
    the appellant and two  men  whom  he  said  had  agreed  to  distribute
    leaflets at the behest of his friend  Mohammed,  would  not  have  kept
    their true identities secret from each other in case one  of  them  was
    caught and interrogated by the authorities.  The judge obviously had in
    mind the explanation provided by the appellant in terms of his trusting
    the  assurance  of  his  friend  Mohammed  that  these  two  men   were
    trustworthy: that explanation had been noted at  paragraph  18.   Given
    that the appellant knew it  was  still  obviously  dangerous  to  share
    identity and family name - he had said in his interview that he knew if
    anyone was caught, the consequences would be  very  serious  -  it  was
    entirely open to the judge to reject the  appellant's  explanation  and
    regard it as at odds with the great  concern  he  had  expressed  about
    keeping his activities secret when speaking with his wife.

12.   Accordingly,  I  agree  with  Mr  McVeety  that  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility finding on the appellant's history in Iran are to be  found
    in paragraphs 25 - 39 and not just in  paragraphs  34  -  39.   I  also
    consider that the judge's findings in these paragraphs were ones he was
    reasonably entitled to make on the evidence.

13.  Turning to paragraphs 34 - 39, it can be  seen  they  fall  into  three
    segments.  At paragraph 34 the judge rejects the respondent's  argument
    that the appellant had been inconsistent  in  failing  to  disclose  or
    prove that he had been involved with the KDP-I, but makes clear at  the
    end that  this  was  not  determinative  of  whether  his  account  was
    credible.  The second and main segment is comprised of paragraphs 35  -
    38 and focuses on the reliability of the letter the appellant  produced
    from KDP-I dated 29 May 2019.  The judge gives several reasons  why  he
    considered he would place no evidential weight on  it.   In  substance,
    the letter was seen to  damage  the  appellant's  account  rather  than
    substantiate it, since implausibly it did not confirm  key  particulars
    of the appellant's account,  despite  the  appellant  saying  that  the
    author had been in direct contact with Mohammed who was fully aware  in
    every respect of the claimed leaflet distribution and the arrest of the
    two collaborators and the claimed raid on the appellant's home.

14.  Thus, read together with paragraphs 34-38, paragraph  39  (  the  third
    and final segment of the  judge's  findings  on  the  appellant's  past
    experiences in Iran) is clearly  a  summary  of  the  judge's  previous
    adverse findings; and the assessment it contains - that the appellant's
    account was "lacking in detail and factual content"  -  clearly  refers
    back to the three  main  shortcomings  identified  in  the  appellant's
    account in paragraphs 29, 31 and  37.   These  findings  were  properly
    reasoned and amounted to a  proper  assessment as to why  the  core  of
    the appellant's claim was found to be lacking in credibility.

15.  For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and hence the decision of the judge must stand.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:
             [pic]
                                                      Date: 14 December 2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                                  Date: 16 December 2019

                [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




