
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA060642016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 June 2017                               |On 17 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                                  S--- S---
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Solomon, Counsel, instructed by Chelian Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.
      Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
      this order because of the risk  inherent  in  protection  claims  that
      publicity could itself cause the appellant harm in the  event  of  his
      return to his country of nationality.

   2. This is an appeal brought with the permission of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  (First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge Frazer) to dismiss the appellant's appeal against  the  decision
      of the Secretary of State that the  appellant  is  not  a  refugee  or
      otherwise entitled to international protection  and  can  be  deported
      from the United Kingdom.

   3. The appellant is subject to  deportation  proceedings  because  on  15
      April 2013 at the Crown Court sitting at Harrow he  was  convicted  of
      wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm.  He was sentenced  to
      seven years'  imprisonment.   The  sentence  was  increased  from  the
      guideline figure of six years  because  the  appellant's  offence  was
      racially motivated.  The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka but is of
      Tamil ethnicity and his victim was of Sinhalese ethnicity.

   4. Given the conviction the respondent decided that by reason of  Section
      72(2)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  the
      appellant was disqualified from protection as a refugee.   However  he
      still could not be returned to Sri Lanka if there was a real risk that
      he faced serious ill-treatment as a consequence.

   5. In outline it was the appellant's case that the father of  the  victim
      of the attack had been an army officer in Sri Lanka and was a  man  of
      influence.  Further a newspaper had published his activities  so  that
      his criminal act would be known in Sri Lanka.  He believed that he had
      made a powerful enemy who could not be avoided by internal  relocation
      and who the police would not hesitate to help.  On the last day of his
      court hearing the victim threatened him and said that he  would  "deal
      with him" if the appellant returned to Sri Lanka.

   6. Additionally he had risked some adverse attention by  taking  part  in
      the demonstration in 2013 against the genocide in Mullaitivu that  was
      publicised on the TTN television channel.

   7. The  appellant  had  previously  claimed  asylum  unsuccessfully.   He
      appealed and the appeal was heard by Mrs C M  Kennedy  sitting  as  an
      Adjudicator.  Mrs Kennedy accepted part of the appellant's story.   In
      particular she accepted that the appellant's  uncle's  boat  had  been
      commandeered by the LTTE and that the appellant and his uncle had been
      arrested and detained.  She further found that the appellant had  been
      released  to  live  at  his  home  subject  to  being  available   for
      questioning.  She did not believe the appellant remained  of  interest
      to the authorities in Sri Lanka.  Mrs Kennedy  made  her  decision  in
      July 2002 at a time when the  security  situation  in  Sri  Lanka  had
      changed and it was generally thought that  people  who  had  not  been
      particularly active in the LTTE  would  not  be  of  interest  to  the
      authorities.

   8. If I may say so First-tier Tribunal Judge Frazer summarised  the  task
      before her with particular clarity.  She said:


  "There are three strands to the appellant's  asylum  claim.   Firstly  he
  claims to be at risk in Sri Lanka on  account  of  events  that  occurred
  prior to  his  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom  in  2002.   These  were
  considered  and  determined  by  Immigration  Judge  Kennedy   in   2002.
  Secondly, he fears the father of the man he assaulted, who he claims is a
  man of influence in Sri Lanka, and thirdly, he fears that he will  be  at
  risk for having taken part in a demonstration in the  United  Kingdom  in
  2009."

   9. Judge Frazer found no reason to depart from  Mrs  Kennedy's  findings.
      She further noted that in 2008, that  is  before  the  civil  war  was
      resolved, the appellant applied for assisted voluntary return  to  Sri
      Lanka.  She concluded that the appellant had  no  subjective  fear  of
      return to Sri Lanka and she did  not  believe  that  he  was  at  risk
      because of past activities.

  10. The judge then turned to the appellant's  present  claim,  namely  his
      professed fear of revenge  from  the  father  of  the  victim  of  his
      criminal act.  Again Judge Frazer  summarised  the  case  particularly
      well.  She said of the appellant:


  "He claims that the victim's father is in  politics  and  is  an  ex-army
  officer.  He states that the victim went back to Sri Lanka and is waiting
  for him to return.  He claims that his name is in the media in connection
  with the offence and that the matter is widely known in  Sri  Lanka.   He
  fears that he will be killed upon his return."

  11. Judge Frazer did not believe that the appellant had been threatened by
      his victim at the end of the trial.  The appellant had not  complained
      at the time and had produced little or  no  evidence  to  support  his
      claim.  Similarly there was no evidence to support the claim that  his
      victim's father was an army officer.  Judge Frazer acknowledged he had
      heard from a friend of the appellant's, a Mr Mayandi, but  found  that
      witness to be of little assistance.  He could only give  a  subjective
      view about the appellant which did not assist the judge.

  12. Judge  Frazer  then  considered  the  evidence  that  the  appellant's
      criminal acts were well-known in Sri Lanka.  The  appellant  has  used
      other names.  There was evidence that a  "Google"  search  of  a  name
      similar to the appellant's produced an article reporting the attack on
      the Sinhalese man and there are reports in the Sri Lankan news  portal
      and the Colombo Gazette.  The judge described the concern  that  these
      articles  would  lead  to  trouble  for  the  appellant   as   "highly
      speculative".

  13. The judge noted that the articles were not in the name or at least not
      the English spelling of the name used by the appellant and there  were
      no photographs  of  him.   There  would  be  nothing  to  connect  the
      appellant with the articles and the news was now four years old.   The
      judge did not accept that the appellant would be on any kind  of  list
      at the airport because of his criminal acts and he did not believe the
      appellant would be at risk if he established himself amongst the Tamil
      community in Sri Lanka.

  14. Neither did the judge accept that there was any risk  because  of  his
      part at a demonstration in 2009.  The judge did not accept  that  even
      if the matter had been broadcast and the appellant had been noticed it
      was sufficient activity in the United Kingdom to create a real risk.

  15. She then dismissed the appeal.

  16. She also confirmed that the appellant was  disqualified  from  refugee
      protection because of his criminal conviction.  She  was  particularly
      concerned that the appellant had continued  to  deny  aspects  of  the
      offence and he noted the evidence that the  appellant  "poses  a  high
      risk to the public in a community setting".

  17. It is not necessary for me to examine each of these points in  detail.
      I do note that the judge was aware that the appellant had professed  a
      change of heart and had offered an apology.   These  points  were  not
      overlooked.

  18. The judge noted there was "no positive case" advanced under Article  8
      of the European Convention on Human Rights.  The appellant had  relied
      on a partner but she had left him and gone to Germany  and  the  judge
      found that he had no basis to stay on Article 8 grounds.

  19. Mr Solomon did not appear  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  but  he  did
      prepare the grounds of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the
      grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal  and  I  have  considered  his
      grounds carefully.

  20. Nothing turns on the judge's possible failure to consider expressly if
      the appellant had shown that removal created a real risk to the rights
      protected by Article 3 of the European  Convention  on  Human  Rights.
      That part of the claim was  relevant  if  there  was  a  risk  to  the
      appellant but he was  not  entitled  to  refugee  status.   I  am  not
      satisfied that the judge  did  not  consider  Article  3  although  Mr
      Solomon rightly draws attention to a lack of  detail  on  this  point.
      There is no material error.  The judge plainly had in mind  the  risks
      on return and decided there was no real risk.

  21. The finding that there was no real  risk  is  itself  the  subject  of
      challenge.  Ground 2 contends that the judge erred  by  not  assessing
      the facts cumulatively.  This seems to me the appellant's  best  point
      and I return to it below.

  22. Ground 3 echoes the above.

  23. The judge is criticised for deciding that the appellant had not  shown
      that his father was a former army officer.  I do not  agree  that  the
      judge was requiring corroboration.  It is trite law that corroboration
      is not needed in asylum cases (or much else in law these days  as  far
      as I can see).  It was open to  the  judge  to  note  that  there  was
      nothing to support the appellant's claim that his victim's father  was
      a man of influence in Sri Lanka.  Whilst it might be very difficult to
      produce evidence to support a claim as nebulous as the victim's father
      having influence, the judge was entitled to note  that  there  was  no
      evidence at all, other than the observations of an unnamed friend  who
      could  not  give  evidence.   The  judge  was  not,  wrongly,  seeking
      corroboration.  She explained at paragraph 35  that  she  attached  no
      weight to the hearsay evidence.   Her  point  was  that  the  evidence
      relied on was just not very good and this was a finding  clearly  open
      to her.

  24. The judge was similarly entitled to comment adversely on  the  absence
      of direct evidence from a friend who was supposed to  have  heard  the
      threat that was made to the appellant at the end of the trial.

  25. It is  right  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  engage
      directly, or at all, with the explanation offered for not raising  the
      complaint that he was threatened when, or soon after, the threats were
      said to have occurred. The appellant says that he did  not  want  more
      trouble.  However the complaint was not raised at the time  and  there
      was no independent evidence to support the appellant's claim  that  it
      was ever made except in the context of these proceedings.   There  had
      been ample time for the signs of anger and revenge to show  themselves
      and none were reported.

  26. At paragraph 6 of the grounds the judge is criticised for saying  that
      there were no photographs of the appellant in Sri Lankan  publications
      and so there would be nothing to connect him to the  person  mentioned
      in the articles.  The grounds complain  that  this  is  an  inadequate
      summary of the evidence.  The grounds  contend  that  the  appellant's
      alias  appears  in  UK  and  Sri  Lankan  publications  and  that  his
      photograph appears on the web and paper version of the  Kilburn  Times
      in the United Kingdom.  The grounds refer to pages 77 and  78  in  the
      bundle.  The pages in my bundle are  inadequately  copied  but  it  is
      certainly clear that they are photographs and, on the assumption  that
      the appellant's solicitors are acting in  good  faith  (which  I  have
      absolutely no reason to doubt), I must accept that  better  copies  of
      the papers would show the appellant.

  27. It was established in GJ v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
      (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CJ [2013] UKUT  319  (IAC)  that
      the Tamil authorities rely on sophisticated intelligence  of  activity
      within the diaspora, as well as within Sri Lanka and that the diaspora
      are heavily penetrated by security forces.  Photographs are  taken  at
      public demonstrations and face recognition technology may be used.

  28. It was contended that failing to appreciate  these  points  meant  the
      determination was unsound.

  29. The judge was also criticised for failing to make proper  findings  on
      the sufficiency of protection available in Sri Lanka.

  30. The grounds then rework the suggestion that the judge  has  failed  to
      consider matters cumulatively.

  31. I have not been able to find anything in the Decision and  Reasons  to
      satisfy me that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  assessed  the  risk  of
      further persecution by considering the evidence as a whole.   She  did
      say at paragraph 28 that it was necessary for the  judge  to  "make  a
      global assessment of credibility in each individual case".  Mr Solomon
      answered this particularly aptly.  He said that the need  to  consider
      risk factors cumulatively is not the same as considering the  evidence
      as a whole.  The point is that the findings of fact must be made after
      an assessment of the  evidence  as  a  whole.   That  is  a  different
      exercise from assessing what risk if any follows from the  facts  that
      have been found.

  32. That said I see no basis at all for criticising  the  judge's  finding
      that the appellant's past involvement with the security forces in  Sri
      Lanka will not put him at risk now.  He was one of a very large number
      of people in the Tamil community who found  themselves  on  the  wrong
      side of the law in a time of national crisis.   The  authorities  then
      were not particularly concerned about him.  After a  short  period  of
      detention he was allowed home provided he  submitted  to  questioning.
      It may be that he breached his terms of bail by disappearing but  that
      was a long time ago.  He would not be suspected of being  a  terrorist
      on that account now.

  33. Similarly there is nothing whatsoever wrong with the  judge's  finding
      that the appellant would not be at risk just because he  had  attended
      one demonstration.  It is recognised that the security forces  have  a
      sophisticated system of intelligence.  It may be that  he  would  have
      been recognised as a person who attended one demonstration but that is
      the extent of his involvement and there really is no reason  to  think
      that that involvement would lead to more.  Neither do  I  accept  that
      the two  cumulatively  increase  the  risk  in  any  significant  way.
      Assuming that each of these elements of his history came to  light  he
      would be found as someone who was of interest to the authorities  many
      years ago and whose involvement in Tamil  separatism  was  limited  to
      attending one demonstration.   I  am  very  aware  that  the  security
      situation in Sri Lanka is far from  ideal  and  that  Tamils  who  are
      perceived as a threat  to  the  unity  of  the  state  may  well  risk
      persecution but I do not see it is sensible  to  move  from  there  to
      conclude that the appellant is a person who is at risk because of  his
      two known brushes with the authorities.

  34. I cannot accept the judge's finding that there was no real possibility
      of the appellant's criminal involvement coming to the attention of the
      authorities in Sri Lanka.  It is well established  that  the  security
      forces have an intelligence network through the United Kingdom and  it
      seems to me a matter of plain common sense that any Tamil citizen  who
      comes to the attention of the authorities  for  committing  a  serious
      criminal offence might be noted or recorded in some way.   As  I  have
      indicated above the judge was,  I  find,  wrong  to  brush  aside  the
      possibility of his being identified.  There was photographic  evidence
      of the appellant and if the security  forces  in  the  United  Kingdom
      return data there may be something about the appellant.  This is  very
      speculative but it seems to be so inherently reasonable  that  I  must
      assume that it could happen.  What I cannot do is see that  even  that
      additional factor would elevate the appellant into  a  person  who  is
      perceived as an enemy of the unity of the state.  Racism, regrettably,
      is a human characteristic infecting many  people  from  a  variety  of
      cultures and backgrounds.  Although the appellant is now claiming some
      insight he attacked somebody for no better reason than the  fact  that
      he found his use of the  Sinhalese  language  offensive.   That  is  a
      horrible way to behave and one that in the  United  Kingdom  at  least
      will attract condign punishment.  It shows that the appellant on  that
      occasion at least was a violent racist.  It does not show that he  was
      a  Tamil  separatist.   I  cannot  accept  that  these  factors  taken
      cumulatively elevate the appellant to a person in a position of  risk.
      The only relevant thing that has changed since 2002  is  that  he  has
      attended one demonstration.   I  see  nothing  wrong  in  the  judge's
      finding that the appellant has not established that the father of  his
      victim has the power or inclination to nurse a grievance or "mark  his
      card" so that the authorities are waiting for him in the event of  his
      return.  That is just speculation and is unjustified.

  35. It follows that it is clear to me that if the judge had  assessed  the
      risk factors cumulatively (perhaps she did although she has not  shown
      that she did) she would have made the same decision.

  36. The error identified by Mr Solomon's  careful  scrutiny  is,  I find,
      immaterial.  There is nothing in the background  material  to  support
      the contention that the factors cumulatively would create a risk.

  37. There is nothing wrong in the judge's finding that the  appellant  has
      disqualified himself from the protection of  the  Refugee  Convention.
      Clearly he has prima facie  disqualified  himself  by  reason  of  the
      severity of the offence and although there is some  evidence  that  he
      has rethought his attitudes it was clearly open  to  the  Tribunal  to
      find that he remains at risk.  In the  circumstances  any  failure  to
      engage with internal relocation or protection is immaterial.

  38. Although I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal did err I am  not
      satisfied the error was material.  If I am wrong then I  am  satisfied
      by having applied my mind to the facts as  found  and  by  considering
      them cumulatively that no real risk has been established in the  event
      of return.  Either way I dismiss the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated  14 July 2017                  |

