
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)        Appeal ref: PA/06057/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules   |On 02 July 2020                |
|2008                                        |                               |
|On 02 July 2020                             |                               |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     J R
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The respondent refused the appellant's asylum claim by a  letter  dated
    31 May 2019.  The reasons, in summary, were as follows:

      [5 - 8] appellant found not credible, and documents found  unreliable,
      in previous proceedings before the FtT and UT;

      [14] further documentary evidence from  Sri  Lanka  about  LTTE  links
      unreliable;

      [15 - 26] no significant role in Tamil  separatism  which  might  draw
      adverse attention on return;

      [27 - 35] evidence of PTSD accepted, but does not add weight to  claim
      of risk on return, or bring appellant within a risk category;

      [41 - 66] no valid claim on humanitarian protection, article 2  and  3
      ECHR, family and private life;

      [62-66] no exceptional circumstances, including medical circumstances,
      for a grant of leave outside the rules under articles 3 and 8;

      [67 - 86] no medical grounds for a grant of leave; and

      [86-89] no exceptional  circumstances  under  paragraph  353B  of  the
      rules.

 2. The appellant's grounds of appeal to the FtT, dated 24 June  2019,  are
    rather unclear.  They maintain firstly that the SSHD failed to consider
    the documents provided with the  further  submissions,  but  are  along
    lines relevant to a judicial review challenge to certification,  rather
    than to an appeal.  They maintain secondly  that  the  SSHD  failed  to
    consider the sur place claim in context of evidence which  showed  that
    involvement with a proscribed organisation, short  of  membership,  was
    enough.

 3. The appellant's appeal to the FtT was listed  on  25  July  2019.   His
    counsel obtained an adjournment at the hearing, on the grounds that  he
    was to obtain a report about his scarring.

 4. The case came before FtT Judge Aujla for hearing on 17  December  2019,
    at the beginning of  which  the  appellant  was  represented  by  other
    counsel.  The  Judge's  decision,  promulgated  on  19  December  2019,
    records that counsel said that  she  had  been  taken  by  surprise  on
    hearing from the appellant that his previous appeal had been dismissed.
     She was  given  time  to  speak  further  to  the  appellant,  but  on
    resumption she applied for adjournment to  take  further  instructions.
    On refusal of that application, she withdrew.  The  hearing  proceeded;
    see [14 - 17 of the decision].

 5. The appellant applied to the FtT for permission to appeal on 3 grounds:

         [1] misdirection on the correct approach in terms of Devaseelan;

         [2] failure to  consider  the  appellant's  evidence  in  terms  of
         Presidential Guidance on Vulnerable Persons; and

         [3] failure to consider or make findings on a scarring report,  for
         which the case had previously been adjourned.

 6. The grounds of  appeal  were  prepared  by  counsel  who  obtained  the
    adjournment on 25 July 2019, not counsel who withdrew  on  17  December
    2019.

 7. The grounds are silent on how or when the report was put to the FtT for
    consideration.

 8. On 17 January 2020 FtT Judge Osborne refused permission,  finding  none
    of the grounds arguable.  He said:

         "There was no scarring report before the Judge even  although  [it]
         is dated 13 October 2019; that is a matter  between  the  appellant
         and his solicitors.  As the scarring report was submitted with  the
         grounds [of appeal to the UT], the Judge could not consider it  and
         so did not err in not doing so."

 9. The appellant sought permission from the UT, on the same  grounds.   UT
    Judge McWilliam granted permission on 26 February 2020.  She said:

         "It is arguable that the Judge did not  properly  apply  Devaseelan
         taking into account all the evidence, including that  from  Dr  Al-
         Waqeel [the author of the scarring report].  The  appellant  states
         that the report was faxed to the FtT on the day of the hearing.  It
         is arguable that it was not put before the Judge."

10. The grant of permission was issued  with  the  UT's  usual  directions,
    including a direction reminding parties of the need for an  application
    to consider any evidence which was not before the FtT.

11. On 21 April 2020, the UT issued a note and directions with  a  view  to
    determining without a hearing whether the FtT erred in law and, if  so,
    whether its decision should be set aside.

12. The response from the appellant's solicitors is dated 5 May 2020.  They
    do not add to the grounds, except by saying:

         "We ... attach ...  a copy of the fax transmission sheet that shows
         ... the report was sent to the FtT on 16 December 2019."

13. The report is dated 11 October 2019 on its first page  and  13  October
    2019 on its last page.  The fax includes a copy of a covering letter to
    the FtT dated 13 December 2019.  The covering letter does not state the
    date of the hearing, and makes no mention of any urgency.

14. The SHHD in response submits as follows  (numbering  according  to  the
    grounds)

         [1] in terms of Devaseelan, previous decision correctly taken as  a
         starting point;

         [2] FtT was not required to cite the Guidance explicitly; FtT aided
         appellant to give evidence, see [18] and [34], and took account  of
         PTSD diagnosis, see [39]; evidence found deficient for  reason  not
         related to vulnerability of the appellant; and

         [3] not clear if report before  the  FtT,  but  immaterial  as  its
         findings "did not go towards establishing  a  profile  of  risk  on
         return".

15. While responding to directions, neither party has suggested any  reason
    why a hearing might be necessary to determine whether the FtT erred  in
    law and, if so, whether its decision should be set aside.

16. The UT may now proceed justly to determine those  questions  without  a
    hearing.

17. Ground [1] does not specify anything to show that Judge Aula misapplied
    Devaseelan, gave the previous decision any  more  weight  than  he  was
    entitled to do, or failed to consider the case before him in the round.
     His decision is in line with principle.

18. Ground [2] is similarly  vague,  and  does  not  fairly  represent  the
    decision.  The 3 passages cited by the respondent, and the decision  as
    a whole, show that the Judge was at pains (the  appellant  having  been
    deprived of representation) to take him slowly and patiently though his
    evidence, and to assess it in light of the psychiatric reports.

19. The grounds of appeal make no criticism of Judge  Aula  for  proceeding
    with the hearing; rightly so, as there was no basis for an adjournment.

20. The grant of permission on ground [3] was  plainly  on  the  view  that
    there might have been inadvertent procedural  unfairness,  without  any
    fault of Judge Aula, if he had not seen the report.

21. It is now clear that the report was not mentioned at the  hearing,  and
    did not reach the file until well after the decision was issued.

22. The ground is careless in its absence of specification of  whether  the
    report was actually before Judge Aula; but I treat it  as  raising  the
    issue whether there may have been a mishap, through  no  fault  of  the
    judge, constituting procedural unfairness to the appellant.

23. Appellants in this jurisdiction enjoy more latitude than in  others  by
    way of excuse from procedural lapses, given the nature of  the  issues,
    and the fact that redress against representatives will often not  be  a
    useful remedy.  However, there are limits.

24. The appellant had been pursuing his claim, and  had  been  represented,
    since 2013.  The record does not disclose why he raised the possibility
    of obtaining a scarring report only at the point of his  second  appeal
    to the FtT, 6 years later.  (It is not now relevant why an  adjournment
    was granted; but that was a generous opportunity.)

25. The report is dated 11 and 13 October 2019. No attempt has been made to
    explain why the appellant did not send it to the FtT  until  13  or  16
    December 2019.

26.  There is no explanation for not  sending  the  report  along  with  an
    urgent indication of the imminent date of hearing.

27. The appellant did not apply to have the report  accepted,  although  it
    was not submitted timeously in terms of the FtT's directions  requiring
    filing and service no later than 5 working days prior to the hearing.

28. The appellant has not sought to remedy that deficiency.

29. The appellant has not applied for the UT to consider evidence which was
    not before the FtT.

30. The appellant's  solicitors  do  not  say  whether,  while  instructing
    counsel to appear on 17 December 2019,  they  made  her  aware  of  the
    report (an obvious part of their duties).

31. (It is extraordinary that counsel instructed for that hearing may  have
    been unaware of previous proceedings, which were the starting point  of
    the respondent's decision.  Even if so, that does not explain  why  she
    was rendered unable to present  the  case,  why  she  remained  at  the
    hearing centre, visible to the appellant through the door  but  not  to
    the judge, or why she re-entered the room to take notes;  see  [16-17].
    However, the Judge has not been criticised  for  electing  to  proceed,
    despite the difficult circumstances in which he was placed; so none  of
    that affects the resolution of the remaining issue.)

32. Given the lengthy catalogue of shortcomings on his side, it  cannot  be
    held that the appellant suffered  from  a  procedural  collapse  or  an
    unfair hearing through any shortcoming on the part of the FtT.

33. My decision is based on there having been no procedural unfairness; but
    on materiality,  the  appellant  has  advanced  no  argument  by  which
    consideration of the scarring report might have led to another outcome.

34. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

35. The FtT made an anonymity direction.  Parties have  not  addressed  the
    matter in the UT.  Anonymity is preserved herein.

36. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.




    Hugh Macleman


    UT Judge Macleman
    Date 02 July 2020






                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS


1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:


2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).


3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).


4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).


5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.


6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email.

