

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                   Appeal
Number: PA/06655/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal       |Decision promulgated         |
|on 15 August 2017                             |on 17 August 2017            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr A Barnfield instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co,
Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mrs Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of  First-tier  Judge  Hawden-
        Beal (the Judge) promulgated on 31 January 2017 in which the  Judge
        dismissed the appeal on both protection and human  rights  grounds.
        The appellant sought permission to appeal which was granted  by  an
        acting resident judge of the First-tier Tribunal who found  it  was
        arguable that in dismissing the appeal the Judge failed to consider
        whether upon return to Iran the appellant's  online  activity  will
        come to the attention of those who are  interrogating  him  at  the
        airport.  Permission was granted solely on this ground.
     2. The Secretary of State in her Rule 24 response, dated 22 June 2017,
        accepts that the Judge has not adequately dealt with the  potential
        risk  to  the  appellant  arising  from   his   Internet   activity
        notwithstanding her finding that it has been done simply to bolster
        the asylum claim.
     3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is,  therefore,  set  aside
        although all findings of the First-tier Tribunal other  than  those
        relating to any  risk  on  return  to  Iran  as  a  result  of  the
        appellant's online activities shall be preserved findings.
     4. The advocates confirmed there was no  need  for  any  further  oral
        evidence. Additional copies of posts placed  upon  the  appellant's
        Facebook account were provided and admitted pursuant to Rule 15(2A)
        of the Upper Tribunal procedure rules. The Upper Tribunal proceeded
        with the hearing to allow  it  to  remake  the  decision  based  on
        further submissions made by the advocates.



Background


     5. The appellant is an Iranian national born in 1986  who  claimed  to
        have left Iran in November 2015.  The appellant  travelled  through
        various European countries and was fingerprinted  in  Germany.  The
        appellant arrived in the UK on 16 January 2016 and  claimed  asylum
        after he had been arrested.
     6. The Judge considered the  evidence  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny and sets out findings of fact  from  [30]  of  the
        decision of the First-tier Tribunal. The preserved findings can  be
        summarised in the following terms:


   i. It is not accepted the appellant is wanted by the Iranian  authorities
      because of his involvement with the Workers Communist  Party  of  Iran
      (WPI) [30].
  ii. The Judge did not accept the appellant was involved with  the  WPI  in
      Iran as claimed, that his family home had been raided and  his  laptop
      and WPI leaflets confiscated by the authorities, or that he is  wanted
      by the authorities [35].
 iii. The appellant is not at risk of persecution or  serious  ill-treatment
      upon his return to Iran because of his claimed involvement  with  this
      group [35].
  iv. Having considered the case of SSH [2016] UKUT 308,  in  light  of  the
      fact the appellant is an Iranian Kurdish ethnicity, and  in  light  of
      the fact there has been no adverse interest in the  appellant  by  the
      authorities, the Judge concludes the appellant would not be at risk on
      return as a failed asylum seeker who left Iran  illegally  of  Kurdish
      ethnicity.


     7. The appellant claimed a real risk on return,  in  addition  to  the
        above, as a result of his attending the 1st  May  demonstration  in
        London and posting his  photograph  on  what  was  described  as  a
        Facebook account of a well-known anti-Iranian government  activist.
        The appellant has produced in his evidence  a  list  of  his  eight
        Facebook friends including in the list WPI leaders  and  organs  of
        the party as of 2007. The Judge noted the  appellant  has  attended
        the 1st May event in London along  with  many  thousands  of  other
        people which was not a demonstration against Iran but  a  Socialist
        demonstration in which many groups to part and not a  demonstration
        solely against the Iranian regime which only took place outside the
        Iranian embassy.  The Judge refers to a photograph with the  leader
        of the WPI the following day of which there was no evidence it  had
        been posted on Facebook and no  evidence  the  Iranian  authorities
        will be in the slightest bit interested in the appellant. The Judge
        noted the appellant claimed that his Facebook is public which means
        that anybody can see his photographs including the  authorities  in
        Iran which means he has to be at risk on return.
     8. In the  skeleton  argument,  prepared  for  the  purposes  of  this
        hearing, it is claimed the appellant's case is that his  activities
        online will be of note and interest to the authorities giving  rise
        to a real risk on return. It is  asserted  the  appellant  will  be
        interrogated on return.
     9. The claim in the skeleton argument at [6] that  the  appellant  has
        previously come to the attention of the Iranian authorities because
        of his political activities is contrary to  the  preserved  finding
        set out above and is not accepted as having been proved.




Discussion



    10. It is not  disputed,  as  contended  by  the  appellant,  that  the
        Tribunal in AB and others (Internet activity-  state  of  evidence)
        Iran [2015] UKUT 257 (IAC) found:


   i. Iran is a country which persecutes some people  who  oppose  it  (para
      449);
  ii. Mild concerns and/or evidence of 'westernisation' can be sufficient to
      attract disapproval and might attract persecution (paragraph 451);
 iii. Some monitoring of activities outside of Iran is possible  and  occurs
      (453);
  iv. It is probably the case that the  more  active  the  person  the  more
      likely they are to be persecuted, but the reverse does not  apply.  If
      an opponent comes to the authorities attention for some  reason,  then
      that person might be in quite serious trouble for conduct which to the
      ideas of Western liberal society seems  of  little  consequence  (para
      455);
   v. Some people are asked about their  Internet  activity  and  for  their
      Facebook passwords (para 457);
  vi. The Iranian state is increasingly touchy  and  concerned  by  Internet
      activity (particularly blogging and Facebook posts) and is very  aware
      of the power of the Internet and determined to restrain it (paras 456,
      457, 458);
 vii. The act of returning someone creates a 'pinch-point' so that returnees
      are brought into direct contact with the authorities in Iran who  have
      both the time and inclination to interrogate them. It is  likely  they
      will be asked about their Internet activity and likely  if  they  have
      Internet activity for that to be  exposed  and  if  it  is  less  than
      flattering of the government to lead a real risk of persecution  (para
      457). This 'pinch point' was the main concern of  the  Upper  Tribunal
      (para 470);
viii. Of particular concern as to this,  are  people  returning  after  some
      time in the UK or for example on special travel documents (i.e.  often
      those who have been before the tribunal) (para 460, 470 - 471);
  ix. Claiming asylum may enhance the risk further (para 472).


    11. Mr Barnfield accepted that the decision in  AB  is  not  a  country
        guidance case but explains issues  concerning  the  'pinch  point',
        which he claims will happen in any event.
    12. The appellant is likely to  be  returned  other  than  on  a  valid
        Iranian passport which may enhance the risk of questioning  by  the
        Iranian authorities.
    13. The issue in this case is whether, if the appellant  is  questioned
        and asked about Internet activities on return, his  responses  will
        give rise to a real risk sufficient to entitle the appellant  to  a
        grant of international protection.
    14. Mr Barnfield submitted the Iranian authorities are  very  concerned
        about  their  image  abroad  and  not  that  concerned  about   the
        motivation for why an individual may have posted entries  in  their
        social media accounts. The First-tier  Tribunal  judge  found  "The
        fact that the appellant has left his  Facebook  page  open  to  the
        world to see, when there are  various  privacy  settings  which  he
        could  utilise,  such  as  allowing  only  friends   to   see   his
        photographs, his timeline or tag him in photographs, suggests to me
        that this has been deliberate in an attempt to bolster  his  asylum
        claim".  Such sur plas activities may be disingenuous but it is how
        they are viewed through the eyes of any potential  persecutor  that
        is the relevant issue. In this respect, if information is disclosed
        that the Iranian authorities consider to be  sufficiently  contrary
        to the interests of the Iranian State a real risk of  ill-treatment
        may arise.
    15. The claim to have attended a Labour Day rally on 1st May in the UK,
        International Labour Day, is noted.  This  occasion  is  celebrated
        throughout the world and is unlikely, per se, to create a real risk
        to the  appellant.  As  the  First-tier  Judge  noted  this  was  a
        celebration attended by many groups not conducted in front  of  the
        Iranian embassy and not a specifically  anti-Islam  or  anti-  Iran
        demonstration. The writer has judicial knowledge that  the  Islamic
        Republic News Agency (IRNA) in an article published on 1  May  2015
        carried a headline "Iranian workers hold rally on Labor Day after 8-
        year interruption". In many countries, Labour  Day"  is  synonymous
        with, or linked with, International Workers' Day, which occurs on 1
        May.
    16. Mr Barnfield was asked at the conclusion  of  his  submissions  and
        reply whether, even though the appellant had made  the  entries  in
        his Facebook account detailed in the evidence, he could not  simply
        delete such entries before his return, meaning  that  even  if  the
        Facebook account was accessed there would be nothing adverse to the
        Iranian authorities  to  discover.  Mr  Barnfield's  reply  can  be
        summarised in terms:


   i. Although the appellant could delete some  entries  from  his  Facebook
      account there could be evidence of posts  made  which  could  be  "out
      there".
  ii. The authorities could have seen the entries already as result  of  the
      fact they monitor Internet activities.
 iii. As the appellant's Facebook account shows he shares posts such as  the
      May Day protest with others, this shows this has happened and  so  his
      activities are "out there".


    17. When asked where the individuals the  appellant  is  said  to  have
        shared his activities actually are, Mr Barnfield indicated that  he
        believed that the people are politically  active  within  Iran  but
        there was insufficient evidence to support such a contention.
    18. The relevance of social media  in  the  field  of  immigration  and
        asylum cases has grown considerably in recent  years.  Many  asylum
        seekers, particularly from countries such as Iran, are "tech savvy"
        with access  to  devices  enabling  them  to  create  social  media
        accounts such as Facebook and to be able to operate those  accounts
        recording, posting, and sharing information. Such  activities  have
        given  rise  to  a  further  aspect  of  claims  for  international
        protection based upon a risk that may arise as  a  result  of  such
        activities.
    19. I accept the submission that however disingenuous an  activity  may
        be, it is how such will be viewed through the eyes of any potential
        persecutor that must be considered.
    20. In AB, the Upper Tribunal held that the material  put  before  them
        did not disclose a sufficient evidentiary basis for  given  country
        or other guidance upon what, reliably, can be expected in terms  of
        the reception in Iran for those returning  otherwise  than  with  a
        "regular" passport in relation to interest that may be excited from
        the authorities into Internet activity, as might be revealed by  an
        examination of blogging activity or a Facebook account. The  reason
        that decision  was  reported  is  solely  to  enable  the  evidence
        considered by the Upper Tribunal to be placed in the public domain.
    21. The Court of Sessions,  Outer  House,  in  the  decision  in  EZ  v
        Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] CSOH 29  repeated
        that AB is not a country guidance case and that to say that a great
        deal of activity was not necessary for someone to become prominent,
        which was the import of the last sentence in paragraph 466  of  AB,
        was not the same as saying that all one needs to show was that  the
        applicant carried on a little activity and that the risk could  not
        be excluded that he had become known to the authorities.  The  onus
        was always on the applicant to establish his claim.
    22.  It  is  not  disputed  that  the  Iranian  authorities  operate  a
        sophisticated Internet monitoring  system  which  enables  them  to
        identify individuals accessing  specific  websites,  using  certain
        search terms in email correspondence or posting certain  multimedia
        files  and  that  such  online  use   activity   may   be   readily
        identifiable, the user traced, and/or the relevant online  activity
        blocked.  It  is  not  suggested  in  this  case  that  either  the
        appellant's own Facebook account or those with whom  he  claims  to
        have shared content with have been blocked,  indicating  they  have
        not come to the attention of the Iranian authorities to the  extent
        that such action had been deemed necessary, unlike  many  activists
        in Iran.
    23. Recent news reports regarding companies  such  as  Google  and  the
        Iranian authorities, in relation to privacy  issues,  informed  the
        extent of Iranian data  retention  legislation  mandating  Internet
        service providers maintain logs of all user  activities  for  three
        months, although it is also the  case  that  due  to  security  and
        privacy controls in place, as well as the sheer volume of  data  on
        the Facebook platform it must be extremely technically  challenging
        to  copy  meaningful  amounts  of  Facebook  data.   It   was   not
        established, even though it may be theoretically possible, that the
        Iranian government could have comprehensive copies of all  Facebook
        content that has been generated or accessed globally or even within
        Iran. This finding is supported by the reference in AB to the  need
        for an individual to provide their Facebook password to the Iranian
        authorities to allow the authorities to access the Facebook account
        in question to  consider  whether  any  of  the  content  contained
        therein gives rise to a cause for concern. If the  authorities  had
        access to this information through  their  own  internal  controls,
        arguably, there would be no need for an individual's assistance  in
        accessing such data.
    24. The finding of the Judge that the appellant has  not  come  to  the
        adverse attention of the Iranian authorities, and  no  evidence  of
        any adverse attention since,  is  of  importance  as  it  does  not
        establish that the Iranian government are likely to have been  more
        focused with data collection endeavours by targeting the appellant.
    25. It is accepted some of those named by the appellant in his  contact
        list may fall within a group  of  targeted  individuals  or  groups
        using Internet inspection  capabilities  based  upon  websites  and
        Facebook pages which could result in a broadening  to  include  all
        members of a specific group or individuals that are friends  of  or
        have commented on content  posted  by  a  specific  person.  It  is
        accepted that targeted groups can be monitored extensively and  all
        online activity inspected in real-time and actively archived on the
        basis of previous decisions relating to this issue. No evidence was
        provided, however, that this is the case in relation to  the  named
        individuals in this appeal.
    26. The reason the question was put to  Mr  Barfield  relating  to  the
        ability of the appellant to delete Facebook entries was to  provide
        him with the opportunity to comment upon an  issue  of  which  this
        Tribunal has specific knowledge namely that  a  Facebook  user  can
        remove their account in its entirety, including all  posts/comments
        made, articles saved, media uploaded etcetera via a dedicated  page
        on the Facebook website and initiate an account  deletion  process.
        In this case, it was held by the Judge that the appellants claim to
        have an adverse political profile was not credible and so it is not
        made out that deleting  the  entries  on  the  appellants  Facebook
        account would infringe the HJ (Iran) principle as it would not  be,
        in effect, asking the appellant to deny a fundamental aspect of his
        make-up, namely a genuinely held political belief.
    27. The effect of deleting a post also has an  impact  upon  whether  a
        post can still be viewed. The reference to "post" on Facebook is  a
        reference to user generated content, typically a  picture,  website
        link, and/or text. The effect of  deletion  is  that  the  original
        Facebook post and any copies shared by other users cannot be viewed
        after being deleted.
    28. It is accepted that Facebook retains data about accounts created on
        social network for analytical purposes but it is not made out  that
        it retains accessible or publicly visible information  for  deleted
        or erased accounts. Data on Facebook held by Facebook is  encrypted
        and it has not been made out that this information is available  to
        either  the  public  or  law  enforcement  agencies  or  could   be
        reconstructed into any meaningful form.
    29. Whilst the appellant may have shared media made by a third party by
        clicking the  "share"  button  or  that  media  on  the  appellants
        Facebook account may have been labelled "like", upon  the  deletion
        of a Facebook account all  comments  such  as  "likes"  and  shared
        content is removed. This means the content is no longer visible  to
        users of the Facebook service or members of the public  and  people
        references to content being shared is removed.  Similarly,  when  a
        person deletes their account all references that may identify  that
        person are no longer visible to Facebook users, the public  or  any
        lawful access by investigating agencies  meaning  names,  comments,
        likes and user IDs are no longer available.
    30. Similarly, it is known that if a person deletes a  post  that  they
        originally created not only the first person  but  also  subsequent
        persons who reviewed the post will no longer be able to  view  them
        for, in effect, the original post will  have  vanished  from  their
        respective timelines.
    31. It is accepted that copies of posts printed  for  the  purposes  of
        these proceedings, and therefore in hardcopy, will not be  affected
        by any electronic data removal but it is also not made out that any
        hard copies of such documents  are  likely  to  have  come  to  the
        attention of the Iranian authorities.
    32. The Judge was correct to refer to accessibility to the  appellant's
        account and to have found that the fact no restrictions  on  access
        had been included supports the suspicions of  the  Judge  that  the
        adverse  entries  have  been  made  solely  for  the  purposes   of
        bolstering an otherwise weak asylum claim. Users of  Facebook  will
        be aware of restrictions available to them in the following terms:


    . Public           anyone on or off Facebook
    . Friends          user's friends on Facebook
    . friends except       don't show some friends
    . specific friends only show to some friends
    . only me          only the user can view


    33. The restriction "friends" is the default setting on Facebook. It is
        also known that a person  can  be  a  member  of  a  private  group
        composed  of  approved  membership  by  a  group  administrator  in
        relation to which no content will be publicly visible as any  posts
        and comments are only visible to members  of  that  private  group.
        Individuals of any party with an adverse  political  opinion  could
        therefore create such a group.
    34. It is accepted that a public post can  be  viewed  using  a  search
        function on Facebook, through third-party services where the public
        Facebook post has been  shared  by  news  media  outlets  blogs  or
        commercial websites, or using search  engines  such  as  Google  to
        search for specific people groups on  organisations,  although  for
        each of these methods once a Facebook post or  account  is  deleted
        the content will not be visible/accessible to the public or any law
        enforcement agency.
    35. This is clearly a complex issue but as recognised  by  the  Courts,
        the onus is always upon the appellant to establish  his  claim.  It
        has not been made out that the appellant is of any adverse interest
        to the Iranian authorities. It is not made  out  that  it  will  be
        unlawful or improper for  the  appellant  to  delete  his  Facebook
        entries or delete his account in its entirety which will  have  the
        effect  of  making  any  previous  entries  not  visible  and   not
        accessible to the public or any law enforcement  agencies  even  if
        the same have been shared with others. It has  not  been  made  out
        that others named within the  appellants  list  will  have  created
        copies of any entry made by the appellant or  have  any  data  that
        could be linked to the appellant that has been  discovered  by  the
        Iranian authorities. Notwithstanding the activities of the  Iranian
        authorities it has not been made  out  that  every  post  has  been
        copied or viewed or that this is  physically  possible  considering
        the volume of data passing through Facebook. It is  not  made  out,
        that the appellant has established any credible  real  risk  of  an
        adverse profile being attributed to him  prior  to  any  return  to
        Iran. It has not  been  made  out  that  there  is  any  reasonable
        likelihood of the Iranian authorities being aware of monitoring the
        appellants Facebook entries.
    36. The appellant will therefore return to  Iran  as  no  more  than  a
        failed asylum seeker of Iranian Kurdish  ethnicity.  The  appellant
        will return on a special travel document and may be  questioned  by
        the authorities of return at what is described in AB as the  'pinch
        point'.   The  appellant  is  not  expected  to   lie   about   any
        fundamentally held belief contrary to the HJ (Iran)  principle  but
        he would not be expected to do so as his claim to have  an  adverse
        political opinion was not found to be credible. The  appellant  may
        be asked, as he is returning from the UK,  if  he  has  a  Facebook
        account. It is not a fundamental right for an individual to have  a
        Facebook account the denial of which amounts to any breach  of  the
        HJ  (Iran)  principle.  Mr  Barnfield's  submission  that  if   the
        authorities know the  appellant  has  a  Facebook  account  but  he
        refuses to provide his password he may be damned  by  his  lack  of
        cooperation may have merit,  but  it  is  not  made  out  that  the
        authorities are where the appellant has a Facebook account  on  the
        evidence before this Tribunal.  Whilst  it  is  accepted  there  is
        nothing to stop the appellant opening a new Facebook account  there
        is  no  reason  why  this  should  contain  any  adverse  postings.
        Therefore, even if the appellant provides  a  password  for  a  new
        account to the Iranian authorities there is no evidence there  will
        be a need for anything to be on a new account which creates a  real
        risk of ill-treatment.  None of the existing case law goes  as  far
        as finding that merely having a Facebook account gives  rise  to  a
        plausible real risk of persecution or entitlement  to  a  grant  of
        international protection.  There is  no  evidence  that  opening  a
        fresh account will cause previous entries  to  be  linked  to  that
        account.
    37. It has not been made out that the appellant will face a  real  risk
        of adverse treatment on return as a result  the  entries  currently
        posted on his Facebook account once they have been deleted. It  has
        not been established on the evidence that is not reasonable in  all
        the circumstances to expect the appellant to delete such entries.
    38. The appellant will be no  more  than  a  failed  asylum  seeker  of
        Kurdish ethnicity in relation to whom it has not been established a
        real risk of ill-treatment sufficient to amount to persecution or a
        breach of the appellant's article 3 rights is made out.
    39. On the evidence and submissions made available  to  this  tribunal,
        the appellant has failed to discharge the burden of proof upon  him
        to the required lower standard of proof  applicable  to  protection
        appeals to establish he is entitled to  a  grant  of  international
        protection. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

Decision

    40. The First-tier Tribunal Judge materially erred in law. I set  aside
        the decision of the  original  Judge.  I  remake  the  decision  as
        follows. This appeal is dismissed.


   Anonymity.


    41. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 16 August 2017












