
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/06567/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On January 19, 2018                          |On January 23, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS

                                   Between

                                  MR D O U
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sesay (Legal Representative)
For the Respondent:    Mr Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. I extend  the  anonymity  direction  under  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Nigeria. He entered the United Kingdom on
    false documents in 2009. Between April 21, 2010 and  May  30,  2014  he
    applied for an EEA residence card firstly based on his relationship  to
    his uncle, secondly based on his marriage to VE and  thirdly  based  on
    his marriage to MR. Each application  was  refused  and  following  the
    refusal of his last application on September 15, 2015 the appellant was
    served with an enforcement notice and detained.

 3. The appellant then applied to remain based in private and  family  life
    grounds but this was refused and his decision was certified on  October
    6, 2015.

 4. On December 31, 2015  the  appellant  applied  for  asylum/humanitarian
    protection. The respondent refused his application on June 6, 2016.

 5. The appellant appealed that decision on June 24, 2016  and  the  appeal
    came  before  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal   Shaerf
    (hereinafter called  the  Judge)  on  July  28,  2017.  In  a  decision
    promulgated on August 4, 2017 the Judge dismissed  his  appeal  on  all
    grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed that decision on August  21,  2017  arguing  the
    Judge had erred. Permission to appeal was given by Designated Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy  on  November  7,  2017.  No  Rule  24
    response was filed.

 7. The case came before  me  on  the  above  date  and  the  parties  were
    represented as set out above. Having heard submissions  I  reserved  my
    decision.

    SUBMISSIONS

 8. Mr Sesay adopted grounds one and two  of  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    submitted the Judge had erred materially. He submitted that  the  Judge
    had misdirected himself at [72] of the decision because  he  failed  to
    have regard to the evidence of Mr N that he and the appellant  were  in
    same  sex  relationship.  Alternatively,  the  Judge  should  not  have
    expected such a disclosure as such  a  request  went  contrary  to  the
    decision of A, B and C v Staatssecretaris van  Veiligheid  en  Justitie
    (Cases C-148/13, C-149/13 and C-150/13).  He  submitted  requiring  the
    appellant to answer questions about  his  sexuality  breached  European
    Law. The Judge erred by holding against the appellant the fact  he  had
    not adduced evidence of any LGBT activity. This also breached the  same
    principle. The second ground argued concerned the fact the Judge should
    not have allowed the hearing to  proceed  in  light  of  the  fact  the
    respondent failed to serve evidence. The  onus  was  on  the  Judge  to
    ensure the hearing was fair.

 9. Mr Nath opposed the application. Dealing with Ground One  he  submitted
    no inappropriate questions were put to the appellant or his  witnesses.
    The Judge set out  the  evidence  and  thereafter  made  findings.  His
    findings on the appellant's sexual relationships were open to  him.  As
    regards the LGBT issue it should be noted that the  appellant  put  the
    letter in as evidence and it was open to the Judge to  make  a  finding
    that there was no activity with  the  organisation  before  that  date.
    Turning to the second ground of appeal  Mr  Nath  submitted  the  Judge
    clearly adjourned the hearing until the parties were  happy  with  what
    they had. It was  wrong  to  now  argue  that  the  Judge  should  have
    adjourned the hearing when the opportunity to  do  that  was  when  the
    Judge stood the matter down and on resuming the hearing  asked  if  all
    parties were ready to proceed. The time for complaining  about  missing
    documents was at that point and not today.

    ASSESSMENT OF ERROR IN LAW

10. Mr Sesay has submitted there were two grounds he wished to address  the
    court on. The first  ground  concerned  the  Judge's  approach  to  the
    evidence of the appellant's relationship with Mr N.  His  argument  had
    two points. The first point concerned whether  the  Judge  should  have
    requested the information as it breached the decision of A, B and  C  v
    Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie. This case was  highlighted
    by Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal McCarthy  when  granting
    permission but I am satisfied the case does not  support  the  argument
    being advanced in this particular case. The court  in  that  case  held
    that when verifying an asylum seeker's claimed sexual  orientation,  on
    account of which that asylum seeker feared persecution in  his  country
    of origin, Member States' freedom of  action  was  constrained  by  the
    Charter of Fundamental Rights of the European  Union.  Although  Member
    States did have the right to verify the  credibility  of  such  claims,
    certain  verification  methods  such  as  medical  and   pseudo-medical
    examinations, intrusive questioning and requiring  evidence  of  sexual
    activities were all incompatible with the Charter. Questions concerning
    details of  an  applicant's  sexual  practices  were  contrary  to  the
    Charter.

11. Having read the Judge's decision I find  no  evidence  that  the  Judge
    contravened any of the matters highlighted by the Court.

12. I now turn to the second limb of the first ground. The Judge  noted  at
    [16] the appellant's testimony about him being gay. The Judge  recorded
    in some detail his testimony and  thereafter  the  Judge  set  out  the
    evidence from other witnesses including Mr N who  claimed  he  was  the
    appellant's current boyfriend.

13. I am in no doubt that most of the findings would be sustainable  but  I
    find there is a major difficulty  with  one  important  aspect  of  the
    Judge's findings which goes to the heart of whether  the  appellant  is
    either gay or bi-sexual.

14. At [72] of his decision the Judge found that neither his  previous  nor
    present boyfriend expressly or explicitly admitted to having  a  sexual
    relationship with the  appellant.  However,  this  finding  contradicts
    firstly, the Judge's decision at [39] of the decision  when  he  wrote,
    "He (Mr N) confirmed their relationship was sexual"  and  secondly,  it
    contradicts the Judge's handwritten record of proceeding where at  Q187
    he recorded the question put  to  the  witness  as,  "Is  it  a  sexual
    relationship" to which the witness replied "yes".

15. The Judge could have rejected that evidence and I am in no  doubt,  due
    to the otherwise thorough reasoning of  the  decision,  he  would  have
    given reasons for reaching that conclusion. On the face of it the Judge
    assessed the evidence incorrectly and as it goes to the core  issue  of
    his sexuality the error must be material.

16. By way of completeness I find no merit in the second ground of  appeal.
    The Judge delayed the hearing until he was satisfied everyone  had  the
    same  paperwork.  It  was  only  then  that  he  proceeded   and   both
    representatives  indicated  their   happiness   to   proceed.   Raising
    unfairness in these circumstances has no merit.

17. The decision is therefore set aside and remitted back to the First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

    NOTICE OF DECISION

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on  a  point  of  law.   I  set  aside  the  Judge's
    decision.

Signed                              Date     January 19, 2018


[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is payable because no fee was paid.


Signed                              Date     January 19, 2018


[pic]



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis

