
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number:   PA/06881/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 July 2020                       |On 21 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                    O I D
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONFIRMED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Henderson ('the Judge') sent to the parties  on  26  September
    2019 by which the  appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent  to  refuse  to  grant  him  international  protection   was
    dismissed.

 2. By a decision dated 7 February 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb  granted
    permission to the appellant to appeal  on  two  of  the  three  grounds
    advanced.

 3.  The  appellant's  legal  representatives   are   Ashwood   Solicitors,
    Manchester.

'Rule 34'

 4. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

 5. In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19, and the overriding objective expressed at rule  2(1)  of  the
    2008 Rules, and also at rule  2(2)-(4),  I  indicated  by  a  Note  and
    Directions sent to the parties on 11 May 2020 my provisional view  that
    it would be appropriate to determine the following questions without  a
    hearing:

         i)  Whether  the  making  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
            involved the making of an error of law, and if so


        ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

 6. In reaching my provisional view I was mindful as to  the  circumstances
    when an oral hearing is to be held in order to comply with  the  common
    law duty of fairness and also as to when a decision  may  appropriately
    be made consequent to a paper consideration: Osborn v. The Parole Board
    [2013] UKSC 61; [2014] AC 1115.

 7. I detailed at para. 3 of the Note and Directions:

         I observe the grounds of  appeal  drafted  by  Counsel.  I  further
         observe the grant of permission to appeal by UTJ Grubb who  granted
         permission on grounds (i) and (iii) alone, both of which have  been
         identified with clarity by counsel. I have in  addition  noted,  as
         did  UTJ  Grubb,  the  transcription  of  the  relevant   interview
         questions and answers by Mr. Tariq Hassan.'

 8. The parties were requested to  inform  the  Tribunal  if,  despite  the
    directions, a face-to-face hearing was required.  The  time  limit  for
    such objections has passed and neither party raised an objection to the
    Tribunal's provisional view.

 9. Neither party was required to file written  submissions,  the  Tribunal
    having been provided with the appellant's grounds  of  appeal  and  the
    respondent's rule  24  response,  authored  by  Ms.  Isherwood,  Senior
    Presenting Officer, dated 17 March 2020. The parties were permitted, if
    they so wished, to file written submissions. The time for  filing  such
    documents has expired and no written submissions were received  by  the
    Tribunal.

10. In the circumstances, and being mindful  of  the  importance  of  these
    proceedings to the appellant and also to the overriding objective  that
    the Tribunal deal with cases fairly and justly, I am satisfied that  it
    is just and appropriate to proceed under rule 34.


Anonymity

11. The Judge issued an anonymity direction. No application was made by the
    parties to set aside this direction and I confirm that  it  remains  in
    place.

12. The direction is confirmed at the conclusion of this decision.

Background

13. The appellant is a national of Jordan and presently aged 36. He arrived
    in this country as a visitor in  2018,  accompanied  by  his  wife  and
    daughter. He claimed asylum two months later.

14.  The  basis  of  the  claim  is  that  consequent  to  the  appellant's
    bisexuality becoming known to his wife's family, he has been  subjected
    to threats and he is fearful that he will be killed by his  brother-in-
    law or by the Jordanian authorities. His wife is aware of the appellant
    having  had  a  same-sex  relationship  and  continues  to  be   in   a
    relationship with him.

15. It is further asserted that  the  appellant's  father  wishes  for  the
    appellant's daughter to undergo FGM.

16. The respondent refused the appellant's  application  for  international
    protection by means of a decision dated 5 July 2019.

Hearing Before the FtT

17. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Bradford on 28 August 2019.
    The appellant attended and was represented.

18.  The  Judge  addressed  several  inconsistencies  identified   by   the
    respondent as arising in this matter. On occasion she found  in  favour
    of the appellant as to purported inconsistency in evidence, for example
    at [40] of the decision:

         40. The appellant's identity  and  nationality  are  accepted.  The
            appellant's bisexuality was not accepted primarily  for  several
            reasons - the first concerned the  decision  maker's  view  that
            [T's] response to the relationship ending  was  unemotional  and
            inconsistent with the appellant's description of the length  and
            genuine nature of the relationship. This is not an inconsistency
            and the decision maker has made an assumption about the reaction
            of [T] which does not take into account the circumstances of the
            appellant and the  culture  he  and  [T]  lived  in  where  such
            relationships face societal discrimination and possible violence
            and where there would appear to be a pressure to marry and  have
            children and conform to religious and cultural norms.  I  accept
            that given the environment and culture that such a  reaction  is
            not 'inconsistent'. The respondent appears to be using the  word
            inconsistent rather than stating that this is something which is
            not believed.

19.  The  Judge  considered  a  further  purported  inconsistency  in   the
    appellant's evidence at [41]:

         41.  A further inconsistency was stated to  be  the  issue  of  the
            receipt of a condom - again the use of  the  word  inconsistency
            appears to be misapplied as the respondent refers  to  the  fact
            that it is not believed that the appellant would be so  careless
            about the receipt. The appellant did state at question 98 of his
            substantive interview that he put the receipt inside the bag. He
            changed this evidence in a letter  sent  by  his  representative
            straight after the interview in which it  was  stated  that  the
            receipt was placed inside the bag and he did not see there was a
            receipt or see the shopkeeper place it in the bag. The appellant
            views this as an interpreting error. I note  the  appellant  did
            attempt to  rectify  this  error  at  the  earliest  opportunity
            available to him and prior to  the  reasons  for  refusal  being
            issued.  It  is  however  quite  a  different  version  of   the
            information given at the interview.

20. The Judge accepted  that  the  appellant  had  engaged  in  a  same-sex
    relationship, at [45] of the decision, but did not accept that his wife
    has encountered him in a hotel room with 'T', at [46].  The  Judge  did
    not accept that the appellant's brother-in-law  was  of  such  military
    rank to enjoy  sufficient  influence  as  to  be  able  to  target  the
    appellant if upon his return to the country  the  appellant  internally
    relocated: [48]-[49]. Further, the Judge found that the  brother-in-law
    was not responsible for the loss of the appellant's business in a  Gulf
    state.

21. The Judge concluded as to the risk  of  persecution  arising  from  the
    appellant's sexuality, at [47], [55]:

         47. He is now reconciled with his wife and states that he will  not
            have any future same sex relationships. He has  stated  that  he
            does not wish to cause problems in his marriage. He is opting to
            live discreetly not because of social pressure  but  because  of
            his personal commitment to his wife.


         ...


         55.  I do not accept the appellant has been truthful in his account
            of his brother-in-law seeking  to  carry  out  an  honour  crime
            against him  or  that  his  brother-in-law  has  the  weight  or
            influence to pursue him throughout Jordan ...

22. As to the appellant's claim concerning FGM and his daughter, the  Judge
    concluded, at [54]-[55]:

         54.  I do not accept that the appellant  has  been  straightforward
            about the dangers of FGM to his daughter from his  father.  Even
            if the letters  can  be  relied  upon  it  is  unclear  why  the
            appellant's father would be advancing FGM for his  granddaughter
            given the claimed consequences for his daughter.  The  appellant
            and his wife are opposed to FGM and I do not  accept  that  they
            would allow his father to carry out FGM. They have the option of
            internal relocation to avoid  the  appellant's  father  and  the
            information provided by the respondent suggests  that  it  is  a
            criminal offence for a grandparent to remove a  child  from  the
            person who is entitled to custody. The appellant does not appear
            to be suggesting that his father would abduct his  child  and  I
            note that there would have been opportunities for  him  to  have
            done so in the past after the appellant and his wife returned to
            Jordan. I also note that  the  appellant  has  stated  that  his
            father has not mentioned the issue for a period  of  five  years
            after the birth of his child. I formed the impression  that  the
            appellant was simply adding an additional element to his  asylum
            claim in an attempt to strengthen it.


         55.  ... I do not accept that his child is at risk of  FGM  on  her
            return to Jordan ...

Grounds of Appeal

23. The grounds  of  appeal  were  drafted  by  Mr.  Holmes,  Counsel,  who
    represented the appellant before the First-tier Tribunal. The  relevant
    grounds of appeal are

         i) The FtT erred by failing to take account of material evidence


        ii) ...


       iii) There was procedural unfairness


24. I observe that the appellant does not challenge  the  adverse  judicial
    findings made in relation to the FGM claim.

25. In granting permission to appeal UTJ Grubb reasoned, inter alia:

         2.   Ground (i)  (read  with  Ground  (iii))  is  arguable.  It  is
            arguable  that  the  judge  at  [41]   wrongly   identified   an
            inconsistency in the appellant's evidence (at Q98) given that it
            was corrected by  the  appellant's  representatives  immediately
            after the interview record became  available  and  also  in  the
            light of the appellant's  answer  two  questions  later  in  the
            interview (Q100) which is more consistent with what he  says  he
            said. The independent transcription  of  the  interview  may  be
            relevant on an E & R basis.
         ...


         4.   For these reasons, permission is granted on  grounds  (i)  and
            (iii) but refused on ground (ii).

26. The respondent filed a rule 24 response detailing, inter alia:

         2.   The respondent opposes the appellant's appeal. In summary, the
            respondent will submit, inter alia, that the judge of the First-
            tier Tribunal directed himself appropriately.


         3.   Given what is alleged in the grounds the  SSHD  is  unable  to
            comment until the independent transcript is available.



Decision on Error of Law

27. By means of his detailed grounds, dated  9  October  2019,  Mr.  Holmes
    addresses ground 1 - a failure to take account of material  evidence  -
    and observes that though the Judge notes at  [41]  that  the  appellant
    sought  to  correct  the  written  interview  record  soon  after   the
    conclusion of the interview, the Judge did not take  into  account  the
    substance of the appellant's response two questions later. The relevant
    questions and answers in interview of 10 April 2019 are:

         Q 98.  Can you continue to tell me what happened with your wife?


           A. We bought the sweets for my daughter and  with  the  sweets  I
              bought a condom but I forgot completely and  put  the  receipt
              inside the bag. When I dropped  off  my  wife  she  found  the
              receipt and she just wanted to check  the  prices  because  we
              live in the [Gulf state] and she found that I bought a  condom
              as well. She got crazy. As she got the key for the hotel,  she
              came back on her mind that I have a relation with a girl.  But
              when she came and opened the door and found  us  together  she
              was completely numbed.


         ...


         Q100. Can you help me understand if  you  were  so  careful  to  be
              discreet and put the condom in your pocket, why did  you  not
              put the receipt in your pocket too?


           A. I wasn't applying enough  attention  and  the  person  at  the
              counter, he put it in the bag.


         Q101.  Knowing that you were taking a risk meeting [T], did you not
              think to hide the receipt too, to avoid being discovered?


           A. I haven't seen the receipt until she forgive me and  she  told
              me that she found it, my wife. She told me that after she give
              me. I ask her why did you come back and I  saw  that  you  are
              meeting a girl.

28. By a letter to the respondent dated  17  April  2019,  the  appellant's
    solicitors detailed corrections to the interview, including:

         Q96.   Client states I bought the sweets not we bought the  sweets.
              The receipt was placed in the bag, by the shopkeeper not  the
              client.

29. Mr. Holmes details at paras. 7-9 of the original grounds of appeal:

         7.  The appellant would respectfully contend that before concluding
            that his evidence was inconsistent, the Judge was bound not only
            to take account [of] the corrections made after  the  interview,
            but also his virtually contemporaneous correction in answer to a
            subsequent  interview  question.  The  combination  of  the  two
            suggests, rather powerfully, that the error in  the  record  was
            not  the  appellant's,  but  either  that  of  the   interpreter
            attempting  to  capture  the  appellant's   meaning,   or   more
            straightforwardly of the interviewing officer's fairly pressured
            summary of the responses.


         8.   It must be borne in mind that asylum records are not  verbatim
            transcripts. They are summaries  of  the  questions  and  answer
            prepared ad hoc by the interviewing officer on  a  laptop  under
            time pressure. They are prone, therefore, to error,  and  it  is
            reasonably likely in any given case that there will be errors on
            the face of the record.


         9.  The likelihood of this needs to be assessed  in  light  of  the
            record as a whole, and in particular, all of the elements of  it
            which are, in fact, consistent with the account advanced by  the
            appellant.

30. By means  of  amended  grounds  dated  23  December  2019,  Mr.  Holmes
    incorporated a third ground into the appellant's  challenge,  detailing
    at para. 6:

         6.  ... the appellant submits that the decision of the Judge  below
            is bad because, unbeknownst to the Judge, the evidence submitted
            by the respondent (the appellant's asylum interview record)  was
            inaccurate and misleading, and did  not  faithfully  record  the
            responses given by the appellant to the questions asked  of  him
            during interview.

31. Mr. Holmes details, at paras 7-9, 13 of the amended grounds:

         7.  ... In short, the recorded answers at questions 98-101  of  the
            appellant's  asylum  interview  are  said  to  give  rise  to  a
            discrepancy in the appellant's account. The appellant maintained
            before the Judge (and immediately following the  interview  when
            the record was corrected by  way  of  correspondence)  that  the
            recorded  answer  at  question  98  of  the  interview  did  not
            represent the answer given by the appellant.  The  Judge  below,
            however, rejects this at paragraph 41 of her decision.


         8.  This having been a live issue at the hearing before the  Judge,
            the appellant has now obtained an independent transcript of  the
            asylum interview, which was audio recorded. The content of  this
            transcript, it is respectfully submitted, is mildly astonishing.
            Suffice to say, it demonstrates that both the answers relayed by
            the interpreter at interview, and indeed the written  transcript
            prepared by the respondent itself, is seriously  inaccurate  and
            demonstrates that, in fact, the account given by  the  appellant
            at interview was wholly consistent, and that accordingly, he has
            wrongly  been  found  to  be  'inconsistent'  by  the  Judge  at
            paragraph 41 of her decision.


         9.   This  amounts  to  a  mistake  of  fact,  and   a   procedural
            irregularity, which has unfairly prejudiced  the  appellant.  No
            fault can be ascribed to the Judge for this failing. Fault  can,
            arguably, be ascribed to the respondent who,  it  is  submitted,
            must be under a duty to ensure that its records of interview are
            accurate. Furthermore, the respondent is under a duty to  ensure
            that their  interpreters  are  properly  skilled  and  interpret
            properly,  in  the  first  person.  It  is  apparent  from   the
            transcript obtained by the appellant that, amongst other things,
            the interpreter in the present case addresses the  appellant  in
            the second person, rather than  relaying,  word  for  word,  the
            questions put to him.


         ...


         13. Accordingly, it is sufficient for the appellant to  demonstrate
            that there has been a (at this  stage  an  arguable)  procedural
            unfairness resulting from a mistake of fact. The  unfairness  is
            all the more palpable when it results from evidence submitted by
            the opposing party which was inaccurate/misleading  in  content.
            In those circumstances, it presents  a  compelling  case  for  a
            grant of permission to  appeal,  as  it  demonstrates  that  the
            appellant's evidence as to an interpreting  error,  rejected  by
            the Judge below, was actually true.

32. I observe at this juncture the evidence of Mr. Hassan,  an  interpreter
    instructed by the appellant to  consider  a  recording  of  the  asylum
    interview and its attendant written record, as conveyed by means of  an
    undated letter, where he details, inter alia:

         'I was provided with the client's statement of evidence form  (SEF)
         dated 10.04.2019 pages  10,11.  I  was  instructed  to  review  the
         questions and answers from Q98-102. I was also  provided  with  the
         audio of the interview covering these questions.


         ...


         I would like to mention one crucial point about the  interpretation
         of the Home Office interpreter. As interpreters,  we  are  strictly
         expected to  use  1st  person  interpreting,  because  it  is  very
         confusing for all parties if 2nd person interpreting is  used.  For
         example if I say "he said I will write to you" you cannot  tell  if
         HE is going to write or he meant that I will write on behalf of him
         to you. Therefore, it is a MUST for interpreters to use 1st  person
         only to avoid confusing people. This problem was  evidence  in  his
         case, as interpreter in the interview said "he said he put  receipt
         in the bag" which is unclear whether  it  means  (the  male  client
         says, the other male person put the receipt in  the  bag)  or  (the
         male client says that he himself put the receipt in the bag).

33. The appellant relies upon the decision in MM (Unfairness: E & R)  Sudan
    [2014] UKUT  00105  (IAC);  [2014]  I.N.L.R.  576  where  the  Tribunal
    confirmed that an error of  law  can  be  found  to  have  occurred  in
    circumstances where some material evidence, through  no  fault  of  the
    FtT, was not considered, with resulting unfairness.

34. Upon carefully considering the arguments advanced,  and  the  documents
    relied upon, the difficulty for the  appellant  is  that  even  if  the
    submissions advanced at grounds 1 and 3 are taken at their highest  the
    identified error of fact and law is not a material error.

35. I observe that the Judge accepted that the appellant had engaged  in  a
    relationship with 'T', at [45]. The present challenge concentrates upon
    the judicial assessment as to a purported  inconsistency  in  interview
    concerning the commencement of a chain of events from his wife  finding
    a receipt recording that he had purchased a condom, suggesting an extra-
    marital relationship, to her finding the appellant in a hotel room with
    his male lover. Taking the challenge at its highest, and accepting  the
    Judge unwittingly erred in fact as to there being an  inconsistency  in
    the appellant's evidence  because  of  an  interpreting  error  in  the
    interview transcript, at Q98, the Judge proceeded to give several other
    reasons for not finding the appellant credible on other aspects of this
    chain of events at [46] of the decision:

         46. I have some concerns about the appellant's account of his  wife
            returning to the hotel to find him with  [T].  I  question,  for
            example, how he would explain that he was going to  a  hotel  to
            see friends in the evening and why he would stay there  when  he
            was only half an hour where she was staying. I question how  his
            wife would be able to walk straight into his hotel room when  he
            was with [T].

36. The appellant does not challenge these adverse findings, which are  not
    so intertwined with the finding of the receipt as to be infected by the
    erroneous finding of  fact  and  procedural  unfairness  the  appellant
    identifies at [41], if the present challenge were to be accepted at its
    highest.

37. Further, the Judge accepts that husband and wife are reconciled and, as
    observed at [48], the 'focus of the appellant's fear is now  stated  to
    be his brother-in-law'. There is no challenge to the  finding  at  [48]
    that the brother-in-law holds the rank of lieutenant, which is  'not  a
    rank which would normally be seen as a high rank or a  powerful  rank'.
    Nor is there a challenge to the finding at [49]:

         49. The appellant has stated that his brother-in-law will carry out
            an  honour  crime  against  him.  The   evidence   provided   is
            insufficient to show the extent of the  appellant's  brother-in-
            law's  influence  and  ability  to  carry  out  such   a   crime
            particularly if the appellant chose to move to another  location
            in Jordan outside the city of Amman. There  is  a  reference  to
            corruption but not to the  extent  that  a  low-ranking  officer
            would have the means or connections to trace the appellant  from
            entry into Jordan or should he internally relocate.

38. The Judge ultimately made an adverse  finding  as  to  the  appellant's
    account that his brother-in-law seeks to  carry  out  an  honour  crime
    against him, see [55], which is not challenged by means of this appeal.

39. Further, in the alternative, the Judge concludes that the appellant can
    reasonably internally relocate: [48].  The  appellant  pursued  a  very
    narrow challenge to the internal relocation finding by means of  ground
    2, based upon a purported failure by the Judge to  conduct  a  holistic
    and fact-sensitive consideration, which was appropriately found by  UTJ
    Grubb to be unarguable. Consequently, there  is  no  challenge  to  the
    internal relocation findings before this Tribunal.

40. I observe that there is no challenge to the  Judge's  finding  at  [50]
    that the loss of the appellant's business  in  a  Gulf  state  was  not
    connected to  the  brother-in-law  contacting  the  appellant's  former
    business partner.

41. The finding that the appellant does not possess a well-founded fear  of
    persecution at the hands of his brother-in-law, a non-state agent,  and
    the further finding  that  the  brother-in-law  does  not  possess  the
    required influence to secure the assistance of  the  state  authorities
    against the appellant upon his return are not challenged. Consequently,
    I conclude that even taking the  present  appeal  at  its  highest,  in
    relation to whether the appellant was consistent in his evidence as  to
    how the receipt was placed in the bag, permission should not have  been
    granted on grounds 1 and 3 where the appeal would fail  regardless:  OK
    (Ukraine)  [2020]  UKUT  00044  (IAC).  The  fear  of  persecution  was
    considered in the alternative and there is no arguable challenge to the
    findings  underpinning  the   reasonable   availability   of   internal
    relocation from a non-state agent of persecution as found by the  Judge
    in this matter. In all of the circumstances, this appeal must fail.

Notice of Decision

42. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal, dated 26  September  2019,  is
    upheld and the appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

44. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant, his wife and child.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others,  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.  Any
    failure to comply with this direction could give rise  to  contempt  of
    court proceedings.



Signed: D. O'Callaghan

Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 8 July 2020


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal is dismissed, and no fee award is payable.

Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan
Date: 8 July 2020

