

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:
PA/06548/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons promulgated    |
|on 14 June 2017                          |on 23 June 2017                   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     VJ
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: In person.
For the Respondent: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Obhi ('the Judge') promulgated on 19  January  2017  in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellants  appeals  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.
     2. The appeals of two other appellants, given reference  PA/06550/2016
        and PA/06551/2016, were declared invalid  as  no  right  of  appeal
        arose in relation to the decisions affecting the recipients of  the
        respondent's notices.



Background


     3. The appellant was represented before the First-tier Tribunal by  Mr
        Norman of counsel. The first date allocated to hear  the  Error  of
        Law hearing was Friday, 7 April 2016 at Field House  in  London.  A
        fax was received from the appellant's previous  solicitors  seeking
        an adjournment to facilitate  availability  of  counsel  which  was
        refused. A letter of 8 March  2017  from  the  appellant's  current
        solicitors sought an adjournment of the hearing due to  the  second
        appellant's expected date of delivery, 30th April. This request was
        again refused as adequate time was said to be  available  to  allow
        the appellant to instruct alternative counsel.
     4. On 22 March 2017, the current solicitors wrote  advising  they  had
        received a refusal that appeared to relate to a request made by the
        original solicitors rather than in response to their request  based
        upon the second appellant's pregnancy. The application was  refused
        by a Duty Judge on 23 March 2017. On 27th March 2017,  the  current
        solicitors, who indicated they had been instructed  since  8  March
        2017, wrote to the tribunal asking for an interpreter to attend the
        hearing on 7 April as the first appellant would attend the  hearing
        without a representative and required linguistic assistance.
     5. The hearing of 7 April 2017 had to be adjourned as  no  interpreter
        was booked, it been assumed that as this was an initial hearing and
        the appellant was represented, an interpreter was not required.
     6. The hearing was transferred to  Birmingham  for  14  June  2017  in
        respect of which a further letter was received from the appellant's
        current solicitors,  dated  12  May  2017,  requesting  a  Georgian
        interpreter and again confirming the  appellant  would  attend  the
        hearing without a representative.  The appellant attended today  in
        person and was assisted by a Tribunal  appointed  interpreter.  The
        appellant confirmed he was aware of the correspondence and the fact
        the solicitors were not attending that he was intending in  person.
        No further application to adjourn was received from  the  appellant
        solicitors.
     7. The first appellant is a national of Georgia born  on  11  December
        1987. The second appellant is the first appellant's  wife  who  was
        born in January 1988 and the third appellant their daughter born in
        July 2006 and therefore aged 10 � years at the date of the  hearing
        before the First-tier Tribunal.
     8. The first appellant's immigration history was noted in the decision
        in which it is stated he applied for a  visit  Visa  to  enter  the
        United Kingdom which he did lawfully although failed to leave  when
        the visa expired on 14 March 2014. An asylum application made on 13
        September 2014 was refused and a challenge to the refusal dismissed
        on appeal. The  appellant  became  appeal  rights  exhausted  on  4
        January 2016.  On 26 May 2016, further representations were made in
        relation to the asylum claim which was refused on 8 June  2016.  It
        is the appeal against that decision that came before the Judge.
     9. Having  considered  the  available  evidence  the  Judge  sets  out
        findings of fact at [16] to [29] which can  be  summarised  in  the
        following form:


   i. The decision of the previous Tribunal is the proper starting point  in
      which it was accepted the appellant's claim did not  engage  the  1951
      Refugee Convention and was limited to claims under Articles  2  and  3
      [16].
  ii. The previous judge accepted the appellant's account of past events and
      noted the first appellant had been arrested  and  tried  in  2009  and
      released from prison in  2012  and  that  during  the  period  of  his
      detention there had been a change in the government in Georgia.  As  a
      result,  the  regime  in  power  at  the  time  of   the   appellant's
      difficulties fell and individuals, named as Davit Akhalaia  and  Bacho
      Akhalaia were charged with abuse of power, convicted and sentenced  to
      imprisonment, leading to finding regime  change  meant  the  appellant
      would no longer be at risk [17].
 iii. The appellant's credibility was also found to be damaged by virtue  of
      Section 8 Asylum and Immigration (Treatment  of  Claimants  etc.)  Act
      2004  as  the  appellant  had  not  sought  asylum  at  the   earliest
      opportunity, for the reasons set out in [18]  of  the  decision  under
      challenge.
  iv. The current claim is on essentially the same grounds although  it  was
      submitted the claim has also been bought under the Refugee  Convention
      as the claim involved the Akhalaia brothers which placed a  "political
      spin" on the matter. The Judge concluded that it was difficult to  see
      how it can be said that the appellant is a political refugee based  on
      the same facts as  before  when  it  was  accepted  that  the  Refugee
      Convention was not engaged [20].
   v. The claim is based on a business dispute and  the  fact  his  business
      partner has connection with others who are connected to the government
      does not turn it into a political dispute [21].
  vi. The connections with those in the government are more to do  with  the
      claim there is no sufficiency of protection rather than the  appellant
      being at risk of persecution as a result of political  views  that  he
      holds [21].
 vii. The question in the appeal is whether the situation is such that there
      is a risk to the first appellant  because  of  the  influence  of  his
      former assailants, namely the Akhalaia brothers [22].
viii. An expert report written by Robert Chenier opines the  brothers  still
      retain influence because of the system of patronage  and  the  fact  a
      number of people  will  owe  their  jobs  to  Bacho  Akhalaia.  It  is
      suggested the first appellant is likely to be at risk  of  persecution
      from the organised criminal gangs who attacked him previously and  was
      not confident there will be State protection from the authorities.
  ix. The expert noted Bacho is in prison and Davit in Greece where  he  has
      successfully fought extradition to Georgia, although their  father  is
      an MP and there are large patronage group of clients in Georgia who it
      was presumed will carry out their wishes [22]. The Judge however noted
      that Mr Chenicer made a number of assumptions in his report.
   x. Although Mr Chenicer  claims  the  brothers  continue  to  have  power
      because of their influence he is not able to say how or why they would
      be interested in the appellant, or how the appellant's former business
      partner could invoke their influence whilst they are detained  or  not
      available. It is not claimed there is  a  dispute  with  the  Akhalaia
      brothers directly but that his former business  partner  was  able  to
      rely on them because of his association with them. It was found to  be
      speculative  to  suggest  that  criminal  gangs  associated  with  the
      appellant's former business partner who look to their contacts in  the
      government for legitimacy  could  continue  to  pose  a  risk  to  the
      appellant  whilst  those  contacts  are  in  prison  and  the   former
      government that they belonged to is no longer in power [24].
  xi. Factual information in Mr Chenicer's report is no  different  to  that
      which  was  considered  by  the  previous  Tribunal.  The  only  'new'
      information is his view that  the  Akhalaia  brothers  could,  through
      their  contacts,  get  the  appellant  and  that  there  would  be  an
      assumption the appellant was trying to regain his shares because  that
      is something he did before, although the Judge did not accept this was
      fresh information or that the previous Tribunal would have viewed  the
      risk to the appellant differently if the  report  had  been  available
      [25].
 xii. Reports of killings of another individual as a result of the  business
      dispute and the pursuit of a journalist were noted but  no  connection
      between those cases and that of the appellant was made out [25].
xiii. The appellant fears criminal  attack  and  the  possibility  of  being
      arrested and abused in prison as he was  when  the  Akhalaia  brothers
      were free but that cannot happen now as it is a  different  government
      and one that sought to put an end to such behaviour [25].
 xiv. Mr Chenicer noted that criminal gangs have reach all over  Europe  and
      therefore the UK would not necessarily be able to  protect  the  first
      appellant who the Judge found had been the victim of a  criminal  gang
      [25].
  xv. The Article 8 claim was comprehensively dealt  with  in  the  previous
      decision [26]  in  which  the  circumstances  of  the  appellants  are
      discussed.
 xvi. The appellant's older child is at primary school and about to move  to
      secondary school and lives in a close and  loving  family.  The  child
      wrote a letter to the Judge. She is a happy and  well-adjusted  little
      girl whose best interests are met by her remaining with her family who
      could support to any change in her circumstances [27].
xvii. The appellants cannot satisfy  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration
      Rules. There are no circumstances warranting a finding the decision is
      proportionate outside the Rules  weighing  up  the  interests  of  the
      family members against the public interest [28].


    10. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal. The operative part of the grant being  in  the  following
        terms:


         2.   Whilst neither of the two alleged errors  of  law  purportedly
             identified  is  necessarily  or  obviously   well-founded   or
             unanswerable, the first of  these,  namely  that  the  learned
             First-tier Tribunal Judge did not give  adequate  reasons  for
             the rejection of  the  expert  opinion  tended,  is  at  least
             reasonably  arguable.  The  second  is  more  contentious  and
             appears to put unfair strain on the words used  by  the  Judge
             but perhaps cannot be dismissed out of hand at this stage.


    11. The appeal is opposed by the Secretary of State who in her Rule  24
        response writes:


        3.    The grounds of appeal primarily allege that the  FtTJ  failed
             to give adequate reasons for rejecting the expert report of Mr
             Chenicer. It is submitted that  the  Judge  did  give  anxious
             scrutiny to this report from [22] - [25]. At  [25]  the  Judge
             finds that there is nothing new factually in the report  since
             it was presented to the previous Tribunal except  the  undated
             report contains his opinions and that the gang  could  get  to
             the appellant and the assumption that the appellant  will  try
             to regain his shares. The Judge  after  careful  consideration
             finds that the report holds no new information that would  now
             view the appellant at risk and also  goes  on  to  consider  a
             report of a killing related to business but found this had  no
             relation to the appellant's case.


        4.   This is a thorough and well detailed determination. The Judges
             considered all the evidence as a whole  and  it  is  submitted
             that  the  grounds  are  without  foundation.  See  VHR   (and
             meritorious ground) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367. The Judges  not
             required to particularise every piece of evidence is found  in
             VHR (and meritorious grounds) Jamaica [2014] UKUT 00367 (IAC).
             At paragraph 24 the Upper Tribunal referred to McCombe  LJ  in
             VW (Sri Lanka) [2013] EWCA Civ 522 which  said:  "regrettably,
             there is an increasing tendency in immigration cases, where  a
             First-tier Tribunal Judge has given a judgment explaining  why
             he has reached a particular decision, of seeking to burrow out
             industriously areas of evidence  that  have  been  less  fully
             dealt with then others and then to use this  as  a  basis  for
             saying the judges decision is legally flawed  because  it  did
             not deal with a particular matter more fully. In my  judgment,
             with respect, that is no basis on which to  sustain  a  proper
             challenge to the judge's findings of fact".


        5.   The grounds have no merit, merely disagree  with  the  adverse
             outcome  of  the  appeal  without  identifying  any   arguable
             material error of law. The Judge considered all  the  evidence
             that was available to him and came to a conclusion open to him
             based on that evidence and the rules, on  the  lower  standard
             and does not disclose any error.



Error of law



  12. Dr Chenicer is known to the Tribunal as he  has  prepared  reports  in
      several cases, but was found by Mr Justice Collins to have produced  a
      speculative report on Ukraine in Venediktov v SSHD  [2005]  EWHC  2460
      (Admin), which is an issue commented upon in relation  to  assumptions
      made by the expert in the report at [22] of the impugned decision.
  13. The issue of the treatment of expert evidence has been the subject  of
      a number of decisions of the  senior  courts  including  in  NA  v  UK
      Application 25904/07 [2008] ECHR 616 in which it  was  said  that  "in
      assessing such material, consideration must be given to its source, in
      particular its independence, reliability and objectivity.  In  respect
      of  reports,  the  authority  and  reputation  of  the   author,   the
      seriousness of the investigations by means of which they are compiled,
      the consistency of their conclusions and that corroboration  by  other
      sources are all relevant considerations."
  14. In Pajaziti v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 518 the Court of Appeal  said  that
      adjudicators were not to select a particular evaluation of an expert's
      report, without placing it side by side with other expert evidence (in
      this case a CIPU report), in order to make  a  qualitative  assessment
      and arrive at a balanced over view of all the material.  At very least
      adjudicators had to explain why they preferred one  source  of  expert
      evidence over another. Matters that  had  to  be  taken  into  account
      included the standing of the expert,  the  sourcing  of  the  expert's
      material and the logical cogency of the arguments
  15. In AAW (expert evidence - weight) Somalia [2015] UKUT 673 (IAC) it was
      held that a failure to comply with  the  Senior  President's  Practice
      Direction may affect the weight to be given to  expert  evidence.  Any
      opinion  offered  that  is  unsupported  by  a  demonstration  of  the
      objectivity and comprehensive review of material facts required of  an
      expert witness is likely to be afforded little weight by the Tribunal.
      In particular, a witness who does not engage with  material  facts  or
      issues that might detract from the view being  expressed  risks  being
      regarded as an informed advocate for the case of one of the parties to
      the proceedings rather than an independent expert witness.
  16. The appellant submits that greater weight should have  been  given  to
      the report of Mr Chenicer  whose  report  explains  the  situation  in
      Georgia since the appellant left that country. It  was  submitted  the
      change in government did not change the situation as  the  people  who
      threatened him and his family still hold  high-ranking  positions  and
      have friends they can turn to.  It  was  also  submitted  that  whilst
      Georgia may on the outside appear to be a  normal  place,  it  is  not
      true, and the environment there poses a real threat to  the  appellant
      and his family as per the evidence he sought to rely upon.
  17. The appellant refers to how he was treated in prison and tortured  and
      how those he fears tried to take his business from him  and  inflicted
      physical abuse upon him.
  18. When pressed to be clear on what basis he was asserting the Judge  had
      erred in law, the appellant agreed that what he was  saying  was  that
      the Judge was wrong. When asked why he thought the Judge was wrong the
      applicant stated the Judge should have placed greater weight upon  the
      expert report and that had he done  so  the  appeal  would  have  been
      allowed.
  19. In response, Mr Mills noted the judge granting  permission  to  appeal
      referred to two alleged errors of law  the  second  of  which  has  no
      arguable merit as the Judge properly applied the Devaseelan principles
      to the decision, noting carefully the earlier decision of  the  First-
      tier Tribunal, the new evidence being relied upon  by  the  appellant,
      and made findings that were reasonably open to  the  Judge  concerning
      the impact of that evidence.
  20. Mr Mills submitted that in relation to the first  ground,  namely  the
      Judge failing to give adequate  reasons  for  rejecting  the  expert's
      report, the real issue was whether  the  content  of  the  report  was
      sufficient such that the Judge was bound to find  that  the  appellant
      was at risk on return.
  21. The Judge was fully aware of the arguments that had been advanced  and
      I find  a  reading  of  the  determination  shows  the  evidence  made
      available was considered with the required degree of anxious scrutiny.
      Indeed, the challenge is not to the manner in which the  evidence  was
      considered  but  whether  the  conclusions  reached   are   adequately
      reasoned.
  22. There are concerns noted by the Judge in relation to  the  appellant's
      case including finding the appellant did not explain  how  the  people
      who harmed him in the past, who are now in prison  without  influence,
      could cause him a degree of harm sufficient  to  warrant  a  grant  of
      international protection now.
  23. There are a number of  experts  dealing  with  various  countries  and
      aspects relating thereto in this jurisdiction, some  of  whom  are  so
      well-regarded that gaps in source material which  ordinarily  will  be
      expected to support an opinion contained in a report are excused as it
      is accepted the author of a report has  particular  knowledge  of  the
      point in hand. In relation to Mr Chenicer, it was submitted there  has
      been comment and criticism in other decisions that  he  speculates  to
      fill in background evidence  and  gaps  in  his  knowledge.  Mr  Mills
      referred to the case of TD  (Albania)  and  submitted  that  on  three
      occasions now, in country guidance cases, there had  been  speculation
      in absence of evidence which the Judge  found  had  also  occurred  in
      relation to this case too. It is not a case in which the Judge can  be
      found to have said that Mr Chenicer made up the  connections,  as  any
      such criticism is wholly unwarranted, but rather that the  content  of
      the report is speculative in relation to  those  the  appellant  fears
      presenting a real risk that they could harm the  appellant,  which  is
      neither shown to be rational nor adequately reasoned as presented.
  24. The appellant's reply was that having read the report he considers  he
      will be at risk on return and that the report should be followed.
  25. It is clear  watching  and  listening  to  the  appellant  making  his
      submissions that he has a subjective fear that if returned to  Georgia
      he will be at risk of suffering the type of ill-treatment that he  has
      suffered in the past. There is comment in the reports of the appellant
      having a drug problem and being on methadone although it is not  known
      if that was a situation prevailing before the Upper Tribunal. What was
      clear is that the appellant appeared somewhat anxious.
  26. This is, however, not the hearing of the appeal on its merits as  that
      was the exercise  conducted  by  the  Judge  who  concluded  that  the
      appellant had failed to establish a real risk sufficient to engage the
      United Kingdom's obligations under the protection  provisions  or,  in
      relation to Article 8 ECHR, that the decision was not proportionate.
  27. Not only did the Judge consider the evidence with the required  degree
      of anxious scrutiny, the Judge has also  given  adequate  reasons  for
      findings made. As such the weight the  Judge  chose  to  give  to  the
      evidence was a matter for the Judge. It has not been made out that the
      Judge misunderstood, misrepresented, ignored, or failed to  understand
      the expert report or other material made available relating to country
      conditions. The Judge was aware of the difficulties the appellant  had
      experienced in the past in Georgia and  the  reality  of  life  within
      Georgian society.  The  Judge  was  aware  of  the  previous  decision
      rejecting the appellant's protection claim and  the  finding  that  he
      faced no real risk on return,  and  adequately  dealt  with  what  was
      referred to as the "new" evidence, which did not justify  a  departure
      from the previous findings  as  per  the  Devaseelan  principles.  The
      conclusion of the Judge is that even if the appellant has a subjective
      fear of return, such fear is not objectively justified.
  28. The appellant has failed to make out in  both  his  written  and  oral
      evidence and submissions received and considered, that the  Judge  has
      made an error of law material to the decision to dismiss the appeal.
  29. Accordingly, as the appellant was advised at the  hearing,  the  Upper
      Tribunal has no authority to remake the decision which shall stand.  A
      desire for a  different  outcome  or  disagreement  with  the  Judge's
      assessment of the evidence and the weight to be given to that evidence
      does not, per se, establish arguable legal error.


Decision

    30. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    31. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.





Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 22 June 2017












