

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06636/2019


|Heard at Bradford                                  |Decision promulgated            |
|On 18 December 2019                                |On 13 January 2020              |

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON

                                   Between

                            HUSSAIN AHMED SULIMAN
                       (Anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms R Frantzis instructed by Bankfield Heath Solicitors.

For the Respondent: Mr A McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS


     1. The appellant appeals with  permission  a  decision  of  First-Tier
        Tribunal Judge Hillis promulgated on 13 September 2019 in which the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's  appeal  on  protection  and  human
        rights grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 1 July 1968. He  arrived
        in the United Kingdom clandestinely on 14 October 2018 and  claimed
        international protection on the same date.
     3. The Judge had the benefit of considering documentary  evidence  but
        also seeing and hearing oral  evidence  being  given  by  both  the
        appellant and his witness.
     4. The Judge considers relevant questions from  [32]  in  relation  to
        which the core findings can be summarised in the following terms:


           i. In relation to the question "Was the appellant  a  performing
              musician and teacher 2018?" it is found at [36] 'Following my
              very careful and anxious scrutiny of the evidence as a  whole
              I conclude that the Appellant has  failed  to  show,  to  the
              lower standard required, that he was actively teaching  music
              to students performing in clubs and parties where women  were
              present and alcohol was being served".
          ii. In relation to the question "Did Islamic extremists  threaten
              the appellant?" it is  found  at  [38]  "I  conclude  on  the
              evidence taken as a whole, including the  objective  material
              and the Appellant's bundle set out below, that he has  failed
              to show, to the lower standard required,  he  or  his  family
              were threatened by Islamic extremists with death,  kidnap  or
              ill-treatment for any reason whatsoever", at [40] following a
              finding that there was no reliable evidence before the  Judge
              that the Appellant taught or performed  "Western  music"  and
              additionally that although executions took place in Iraq they
              were not said to have been within the IKR, as at least one of
              those relied upon by the Appellant occurred in Mosul, "It is,
              in my judgement, significant that the Appellant's  solicitors
              in  their  correspondence  and  Ms  Hashmi  in  her   closing
              submissions were  at  the  appeal  were  unable  to  draw  my
              attention to any objective material to show that  traditional
              musicians or even  those  playing  Western  music  have  been
              targeted by Islamic extremists by any militant group  in  the
              IKR."
         iii. The Judge finds there was a  significant  indication  in  the
              documents  relied  upon  by  the  Appellant  that   the   IKR
              authorities are able, willing and competent in  dealing  with
              extremist groups  in  the  IKR  [41].  The  Judge  noted  the
              appellant's claim is that he always lived in Erbil in the IKR
              which has never been under the control  of  ISIS,  which  was
              found to  be  relevant  to  the  location  of  incidents  the
              appellant sought to rely upon to support  his  claim  in  his
              evidence.
          iv. At [52] "I conclude on the evidence taken  as  a  whole  that
              there is a sufficiency of State protection available  to  the
              Appellant and his family on return  to  Erbil  and  that  the
              Appellant has failed to show, to the low  standard  required,
              that he faces a risk of death, persecution  or  ill-treatment
              on removal to Iraq for a reason  recognised  by  the  Refugee
              Convention and, in particular, an  imputed  religion  due  to
              being a music teacher in contravention of Islam."
           v. In relation to the question "Can the  appellant  relocate  to
              Baghdad City?" The Judge finds at [54]  "I  accept  that  the
              Appellant is a Sunni Muslim who has no family or  connections
              in Baghdad and who  does  not  speak  Arabic.  I,  therefore,
              conclude that he cannot remain safely  in  Baghdad  City  (BA
              headnote at paragraph vii) and that he and his  family  would
              face destitution there."
          vi. In relation to the question "Will the appellant to be able to
              travel safely from Baghdad airport to  the  IKR?"  The  Judge
              having considered relevant country guidance case law in force
              at the date of the promulgation of the decision writes at [58
              - 60]:


                  58.  The Appellant, on his own account, has four  brothers
                      and two sisters living in Erbil. I conclude  for  the
                      reasons set out above that he is not credible in  his
                      claim that they are too scared to send him  his  CSID
                      card which he claims he left with them. There  is  no
                      explanation from him as to how any Islamic  extremist
                      group would discover they had sent him his CSID  card
                      or its  number  and  a  number  of  his  family  page
                      enabling him to obtain a replacement  card  from  the
                      Iraqi Embassy in London prior to his leaving the UK.


                  59.  The background evidence states that  it  is  part  of
                      Kurdish culture  to  assist  relatives  and,  on  the
                      Appellant's own account, he is still  on  good  terms
                      with his family in Erbil. I, therefore, conclude that
                      he  and  his  family  can  turn  to  the  Appellant's
                      brothers and  sisters  for  support  on  return.  The
                      Appellant and his family have always lived  in  Erbil
                      and he has not  shown  that  he  does  not  have  any
                      contacts who will assist him to  gain  employment  on
                      return and, in particular, as a  traditional  Kurdish
                      musician as he has in the past.


                  60.  I, therefore, conclude in the absence of evidence  to
                      the contrary, for the reasons set out above, that the
                      Appellant can safely travel to and  relocate  in  the
                      IKR and Erbil in particular without undue hardship.


         vii.  The  Judge  therefore  dismissed  the  claim  on  protection
              grounds,  found  the  appellant   could   not   satisfy   the
              requirements of the Immigration Rules on the basis of private
              or family life, and that the appellant accepted his claim did
              not engage article 8 ECHR and that the appellant's daughters'
               best interests are served by returning to the IKR with their
              parents, for the reasons given by the Judge, resulting in the
              dismissal of the claim on all grounds.


     5. The appellant sought permission to appeal  asserting  a  procedural
        unfairness and misconstruction of country evidence and  mistake  of
        fact. Permission was granted by a Designated  Judge  of  the  First
        Tier Tribunal, the operative part of  which  is  in  the  following
        terms:


             "The grounds assert  correctly  that  the  respondent  in  his
             reasons for refusal letter accepted the appellant was a  music
             teacher in Iraq. There is no indication in the  Tribunal  file
             that at the hearing the respondent  sought  to  withdraw  this
             concession. It is therefore arguable the Judge erred in law at
             paragraphs 32 - 34 and 36 of his decision in making a  finding
             of fact that the appellant was not a music teacher,  rejecting
             without notice or reason the respondent's concession  on  this
             point.


             The other grounds relating to the  Judge's  treatment  of  the
             UNHCR guidelines on return as to Iraq not extending to returns
             to the Independent Kurdish Region (IKR) may also be argued.


     6. The Secretary of State filed a Rule  24  reply  dated  12  November
        2019, the relevant parts of which are in the following terms:


             2.   In his first ground  the  appellant  complains  that  the
                  Judge has erred through  procedural  unfairness  in  going
                  behind,  without  warning,  a  concession  made   by   the
                  respondent in the decision letter. The respondent does not
                  accept that the concession went as far as contended by the
                  appellant, nor  that  the  Judge  has  departed  from  the
                  concession.


             3.   At paragraph 30 of the decision  letter,  dated  27  June
                  2019, the respondent  stated  the  following:  "take  into
                  account all of the above  information  it  is,  therefore,
                  accepted that you were a music teacher".


             4.   The concession appears to go no further  than  this,  and
                  the claim to  have,  garnered  the  adverse  attention  of
                  Islamic  extremists  in  2017/2018  because  he  had  been
                  playing Western music in clubs, is  specifically  rejected
                  at paragraph 36.


             5.   In the Judge's  decision,  at  his  [36]  he  states  the
             following:


                  36.   Following my very careful and  anxious  scrutiny  of
                      the evidence as a whole I conclude that the Appellant
                      has failed to show, to the low standard required,  he
                      was  actively  teaching   music   to   students   and
                      performing in clubs  and  parties  where  women  were
                      present and alcohol was being served.


             6.   The respondent contends that this finding was one open to
                  the Judge, for the reasons given and does  not  contradict
                  the position taken in the respondent's decision letter.


             7.   The appellant's second ground amounts  to  no  more  than
                  disagreement with the Judge's  thorough  consideration  of
                  the background evidence where, between [40] and  [52],  he
                  concludes that there is an absence of real  risk  for  the
                  appellant in the IKR, and the  sufficiency  of  protection
                  from Islamic Extremists in any case.



Error of law


     7. The grounds assert the Judge,  in  going  behind  the  respondent's
        concession, committed a procedural  unfairness  as  the  respondent
        accepted the appellant's claim to be musician. The  grounds  assert
        the Judge did not place the parties on notice of his  intention  to
        go behind the concession which is procedurally unfair. The  grounds
        assert that the appellant has been  denied  a  fair  hearing  as  a
        result. It was also submitted that there was no acknowledgement  in
        the decision of the concession or how the positive  aspect  of  the
        concession informed the Judge's conclusions. The grounds argue that
        it is unclear as to whether the appellant's claim to  have  been  a
        music teacher was accepted.
     8. It was accepted before the Upper Tribunal that Ground 2 is material
        if Ground 1 is made out.
     9. The Secretary of State in the Reasons for Refusal letter considered
        the appellant's claim with the required degree of anxious  scrutiny
        recording, when considering  whether  the  appellant  was  a  music
        teacher in Iraq, the following:


             26.  You claim  that  you  are  a  music  teacher  (AIR  Q55).
                  Consideration has been given to this aspect of your claim.


             27.  You claim that you began to work as a  music  teacher  in
                  1991, and "played the Org, the Saz  and  Oud"  (AIR  Q15).
                  This is internally consistent with your claim later in the
                  interview when you state that you taught your students how
                  to play these 3 instruments (AIR Q99).  You also provide a
                  plausible account of how you  came  to  be  interested  in
                  music  and  learning  to  play  instruments  by  attending
                  courses as a hobby while you were in school (AIR Q20).


             28.  In addition to this, you state that you have played music
                  in clubs and hotels, such as Sheridan and Best  Inn  Erbil
                  (AIR Q99). This is externally consistent with  information
                  showing that they are all hotels in Erbil.


             29.  It is noted that you have provided your  Iraqi  Kurdistan
                  Artists Syndicate membership card  and  letters  regarding
                  your work as a musician in Iraq.  Consideration  has  been
                  given to these documents using the principles  of  Tanveer
                  Ahmed. Looking at them in the  round,  little  weight  has
                  been applied to the documents as it has not been  possible
                  to verify them using external information, in additionally
                  it is not clear how you came to be in possession  of  them
                  or where you obtained them from.


             30.      Taking into account all the above information it  is,
                  therefore, accepted that you were a music teacher.


    10.  At  [36]  of  the  Reasons  for  Refusal  letter  the   respondent
        specifically states:


              "Given the above, it is considered that  you  have  failed  to
             provide a credible and/or consistent account  with  regard  to
             this aspect of your claim. It is not accepted that  you,  were
             threatened by Islamic  extremists  because  you  are  a  music
             teacher and attended parties.  This  part  of  your  claim  is
             rejected".


    11. It is not made out the Judge  did  not  consider  the  respondent's
        position and that of the appellant  with  the  required  degree  of
        anxious scrutiny. There is specific reference to  the  Reasons  for
        Refusal letter at [8 - 9] of the decision under challenge.
    12. It is not made out the concession in the refusal letter goes as far
        as the appellant asserts  in  the  grounds  seeking  permission  to
        appeal sufficient to give rise to any procedural unfairness.
    13. The Judge accepted that the appellant was a music teacher which  is
        in line with the concession. It was not accepted the appellant  had
        taught music to students and performed in clubs and  parties  where
        women and alcohol were present which was a claim  rejected  in  the
        reasons for refusal letter too.
    14. At [33] the Judge noted there was no supporting documents from  any
        source after 7 January 2007 to  show  the  appellant  was  actively
        working in the IKR as a teacher or  performing  as  a  musician  at
        parties and clubs after that year. At [34]  the  Judge  noted  that
        despite the appellant claiming to be a famous  musician  throughout
        the whole of the IKR in the last few years he had not submitted any
        documents from the Iraqi Kurdistan Artists Syndicate or  any  clubs
        or other venues in the IKR to show that  he  was  still  performing
        and/or teaching after 2007. The Judge noted  the  only  people  the
        appellant claimed to  be  in  fear  of  in  the  IKR  were  Islamic
        Extremists and that he could provide no valid  reason  for  why  he
        could not have contacted people there  to  obtain  more  up-to-date
        confirmation of his claim, if it was true.
    15. It is not made out the Judge has erred in law on this ground.
    16. There is no arguable legal error  in  relation  to  Ground  2.  The
        appellant is from an area that has never been  controlled  by  ISIS
        and examined the country information and country guidance case  law
        relating to the area from which the appellant originated. The claim
        in the grounds that the UNHCR guidelines apply to the whole of Iraq
        still required the Judge to specifically consider the issue of risk
        relating to the appellant's home area which he did.
    17. Whilst the appellant disagrees with  the  Judge's  conclusions  and
        wishes to secure a more favourable outcome to enable him to  remain
        in the United Kingdom, the grounds fail to establish arguable legal
        error material to the decision to dismiss the appeal sufficient  to
        warrant a grant of permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.
    18. The recently published up-to-date country guidance decision of SMO,
        KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq  CG  [2019]  UKUT
        00400 (IAC), which was handed down after the Error of law  Hearing,
        does not establish any real risk for the  appellant  on  return  or
        indicate arguable legal error in the Judge's findings.


Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    20. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 6 January 2019



