
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06871/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26th October 2017                       |On 08th November 2017            |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                 MR I S M S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Martin (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq  born  on  1st  October  1984.   The
    Appellant claims to have left Iraq on 26th December 2015 and  travelled
    illegally to Turkey and thereafter onwards by lorry to the UK which  he
    entered on 18th January 2016 claiming asylum the  following  day.   The
    Appellant's claim for asylum was based on a fear that  if  returned  to
    Iraq he would face mistreatment due to his homosexual relationship with
    a man named R.  That application was refused by Notice of Refusal dated
    23rd June 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Birk sitting at Birmingham on 25th January 2017.  In  a  decision
    and reasons promulgated on 2nd February 2017 that appeal was  dismissed
    on all grounds.

 3. Handwritten Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the Upper Tribunal.  Typed
    grounds were lodged on 27th February 2017.  On 9th June 2017 First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Ransley granted permission to  appeal.   Permission  was
    only granted on one ground namely that the Appellant had  submitted  in
    the grounds that he did not understand the court  interpreter  who  was
    not from Iraq.  At the outset of the hearing the judge apparently asked
    the interpreter if he and the Appellant understood each other  but  the
    judge did not ask the Appellant whether he understood the  interpreter.
    Judge Ransley notes that having perused the Record of  Proceedings  the
    judge recorded at the commencement of  the  hearing  that  he  "checked
    interpreter".  She notes that  there  is  no  reference  to  the  judge
    checking with the Appellant whether he understood the court interpreter
    and it was therefore arguable that the Appellant did not  have  a  fair
    hearing due to language barrier issues.  Further she considered that it
    was arguable that the procedural unfairness amounted to an error of law
    that might have made a  material  difference  to  the  outcome  of  the
    appeal.

 4. On 27th June 2017 the Secretary of State responded to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal.  It is on the above basis that the appeal comes  before  me  to
    determine whether or not there is  a  material  error  of  law  in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal.   The  Appellant  appears  by  his
    instructed Counsel Mr Martin.  The Secretary of State  appears  by  her
    Home Office Presenting Officer Mr Harrison.

Submission/Discussion

 5. Mr Martin takes me to the Secretary of State's Rule 24.  He  notes  the
    Appellant raises issues in relation to both the Home Office interpreter
    used at his asylum interview and the court appointed interpreter before
    the First-tier Tribunal and that the Appellant signed the  Home  Office
    asylum interview to acknowledge he understood the interpreter and  that
    the language was checked by the First-tier Tribunal Judge at the outset
    of the appeal.  He accepts that that is the position maintained by  the
    Secretary of State.  However he refers me to the Appellant's additional
    witness statement dated 23rd October 2017 which has been translated and
    read back to him in Kurdish Bahdini.  Mr Harrison does not object to my
    giving due consideration  to  this  statement.   The  Appellant  states
    therein

         "I did not understand the interpreter and this was clear  from  the
         outset of my  appeal  where  I  informed  the  interpreter  on  two
         separate occasions I could  not  understand  him.   Nonetheless  he
         stated that when proceedings commenced he would explain my  answers
         in more detail to the judge, which  was  not  the  case.   This  is
         because he wrongly interpreted my answers and  I  believe  this  is
         because he was not a native Iraqi Bahdini speaking interpreter.   I
         understand the interpreter was educated in Turkey or Syria and  for
         this reason we could not understand each other fully.

         Furthermore, the interpreter was  asked  to  confirm  if  he  could
         understand me to which he agreed.  However it is my case that  this
         question was not put to me and if it had I would  have  stated  the
         problems I had in understanding the interpreter."

 6. Mr Harrison in brief response states that he feels that  the  Appellant
    cannot argue that he did not understand the interpreter at  his  asylum
    interview bearing in mind that he signed that interview off  as  having
    understood it.  However he does acknowledge that he cannot be sure that
    the court interpreter was able or proficient  to  do  his  job  and  he
    acknowledges it may be, albeit he leaves it to me, that there has  been
    a procedural unfairness that needs to be rectified.

The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

 9. This matter  turns  entirely  on  whether  or  not  there  has  been  a
    procedural unfairness to the Appellant through the possibility that  he
    did  not  understand  the  interpreter.   It  may  well  be  that   the
    interpreter understood him but that does not mean  that  the  Appellant
    necessarily understood the questions that were being put to him through
    the interpreter.  To a certain extent  the  Appellant's  case  has  not
    helped by arguing that he did not understand  the  interpreter  at  his
    asylum interview.  If that is the case it does beg the question  as  to
    why he agreed to sign off that interview as being something that he had
    understood and that his statement was a true and complete record.

10. However I cannot be certain that what is  being  said  in  the  witness
    statement of the Appellant is in fact not the truth and if that clearly
    is the truth the Appellant would have suffered a procedural  unfairness
    and it is possible (although I emphasise by no means certain) that  the
    Tribunal Judge may have come to a different decision.

11. In such circumstances the correct approach is to find that there  is  a
    material error of law, to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and to remit the matter back for a complete rehearing before a
    freshly  constituted  First-tier  Tribunal.   Hopefully   the   correct
    interpreter namely an Iraqi Bahdini can be ensured to be in  attendance
    at that hearing.  It would be prudent of the judge rehearing the matter
    to get an absolute assurance in  this  case  that  the  Appellant  does
    understand his interpreter.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing  of
this matter.

 1) On the finding that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal discloses a
    material error of law in that there have been a  procedural  unfairness
    to the Appellant in his  failure  to  understand  the  interpreter  the
    decision is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Birmingham
    on the first available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 3) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a bundle of  such
    additional objective and/or subjective evidence upon which they  intend
    to rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.

 4) That the restored hearing be before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other
    than Immigration Judge Birk.

 5) That an Iraqi Bahdini interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made an anonymity direction  in  this  matter.
No application is made to  vary  that  order  and  the  anonymity  direction
remains in place.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed                              Date 07 November 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris








