
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06116/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 13th June 2019 On 23 July 2019


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY JUDGE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                MRS M P I A G
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr J Khan, Counsel, instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant has permission to appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Holt.In a decision  promulgated
       on 21st March  2009  the  judge  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the
       respondent's refusal to grant her protection and to find no breach of
       a protected human rights.

    2. She is a national of Sri Lanka, born  in  February  1982.  She  is  a
       Buddist.She trained as a nurse. She came to the United Kingdom on  30
       March 2014 as a dependent her husband. He was granted  permission  on
       foot of a post study Visa. That Visa was issued on 13 March 2014  and
       expired on 25 April 2015. Shortly before it expired  application  was
       made for further leave and this  was  refused  in  August  2015.  The
       appellant contacted the respondent in September 2015 about  making  a
       protection claim and then attended for interview the following month.

    3. In summary, her claim is that following an  attack  on  a  Mosque  in
       April 2012 the injured were admitted to the hospital in  Kandi  where
       she was working. She says that the attack was blamed on an  extremist
       Buddhist organisation.  She  said  that  body  warned  medical  staff
       against treating the injured.  By  coincidence  one  of  the  injured
       included her former boyfriend. She said she treated him  at  her  own
       home. Subsequently, she  started  to  receive  threatening  telephone
       calls. In March 2014 the authorities came to her  parents'  home  and
       detained the appellant. During this time she was sexually  abused  by
       CID officers. She was released after a week.

    4. She claimed to fear the Sri Lankan authorities as well as non-  State
       individuals on the basis she is perceived to be a Muslim sympathiser.
       The respondent did not accept the truth of her claim.

The First tier Tribunal

    5. The judge did not find the appellant credible and rejected her  claim
       of past difficulties. The judge gave various reasons.  This  included
       her ability to leave without difficulty through the main airport.  As
       part of her appeal  the  appellant  had  produced  a  report  from  a
       consultant psychiatrist, Dr O who concluded she  was  suffering  from
       post-traumatic stress disorder. The judge did  not  accept  this  was
       attributable to her claim. The judge concluded  the  doctor  had  not
       approached the question  of  causation  with  sufficient  rigour  and
       refers to the appellant self-reporting symptoms. The  judge  observed
       the  appellant  had  gone  through  several  stressful   experiences,
       including entering into an arranged marriage and  then  moving  to  a
       culturally different environment and now facing  the  possibility  of
       being returned. The judge also  concluded  there  would  be  adequate
       treatment facilities available for her in Sri Lanka.

The Upper Tribunal.

    6. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  it  was  arguable  the
       judge erred in concluding  that  the  appellant's  ability  to  leave
       through the airport affected the credibility of her claim.  Reference
       was made to GJ and others (post-Civil War: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG
       [2013] UK 80 00139 about the ability to leave through  airports.  The
       second ground was a Mibanga point and related to how the judge  dealt
       with  the  psychiatric  report.  Two  other  grounds  advanced   were
       considered to have less merit, namely,  that  the  judge  was  unduly
       reliant upon the question of plausibility in considering the  account
       and failing to have regard to the appellant's mental health on return
       and her article 3 claim.

    7. At hearing Mr Khan emphasised the first two grounds.  The  two  other
       challenges were not pursued with the same vigour.

    8. Regarding passing through  the  airport,  I  was  referred  paragraph
       25(vi) of the decision were the judge said:

           "... In the asylum interview she said that she feared the people
           who attacked her, i.e. the CID... Nonetheless, she was  able  to
           pass through security at the airport and leave Sri Lanka for the
           UK only a few days later. If  she  was  a  person  to  whom  the
           authorities  attached  political  sensitivity,  then  I  am  not
           satisfied that she would be able to leave the country so  easily
           ..."

    9. I was referred to paragraph 275 of MM  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home  Department  [2014]  EWCA  Civ  36.  Lord  Justice
       Richards decision states:

           "9.    ... Various arguments are advanced as to  why  it  was  a
           material error of law to find that the appellant would have been
           stopped at the airport  if  he  had  been  of  interest  to  the
           authorities and reliance  is  placed  in  addition  on  the  new
           country guidance in GJ in support of those arguments.

           10.    The Secretary of State accepts that  the  Upper  Tribunal
           judge made a material  error  of  law  in  concluding  that  the
           appellant would not have been able to depart  from  the  airport
           unnoticed if the Sri Lankan authorities had an interest in  him.
           It is also accepted that exit procedures at the airport are  the
           subject of detailed consideration in GJ, by reference to  which
           it is said that the matter  would  have  to  be  assessed  on  a
           remittal to the Upper Tribunal."

   10.  In relation to the psychiatric evidence I was referred to  paragraph
       24 and 25 of the decision. Mr. Khan  contended  that  the  judge  had
       assessed credibility without having regard to the psychiatric report.

   11. Regarding the remaining two grounds I was referred  to  paragraph  25
       again  where  it  was  submitted  the  judge  engaged  in   assessing
       probabilities. Regarding the final ground and the  suicide  risk,  he
       submitted the judge failed to apply the test  in  J  v  Secretary  of
       State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 629.

   12. Mr Bates relied upon the rule 24 response. He argued that  the  judge
       properly factored into the assessment the appellant's mental  health.
       The  judge  had  made  numerous   references   to   the   appellant's
       vulnerability. At paragraph 21 for instance, the  judge  referred  to
       the appellant's ability to cope  at  the  hearing.  Before  this,  in
       paragraph 18 the judge had  recorded  the  representatives  had  been
       reminded of the  need  for  sensitivity  in  questioning.  This  also
       features at paragraph 19  and  20  where  the  judge  refers  to  the
       psychiatric report and her ability to give evidence  and  whether  an
       interpreter was necessary. In summary, the appellant's  vulnerability
       was always at the forefront of the judge's mind.

   13. Regarding the comments about her departure through the  airport  this
       was a single point taken against a credibility assessment whereas the
       judge in fact had considered many factors.

   14. Regarding the third point raised Mr Bates said  that  the  judge  had
       focused on what was happening in Sri Lanka  and  had  not  sought  to
       apply a westernised view. He submitted that when the decision is read
       fairly there  was  ample  consideration  given  to  the  claim  made.
       Generally in relation to the psychiatric report and the claim risk of
       self-harm, he pointed out that  the  report  was  based  the  largest
       extent upon the appellant's account.

Consideration

   15. The primary issue in the appeal related to the truth of the claim and
       the appellant's credibility. The judge accurately set out  the  claim
       made. At paragraph 13 the judge emphasised that  he  was  considering
       every piece of evidence and had reviewed the evidence as a totality.

   16. The appellant's Counsel in the First tier emphasised the  appellant's
       vulnerability. At paragraph 16 the judge acknowledged this issue  and
       said regard was being had to the  Presidential  Guidance.  The  judge
       noted it had been suggested the appellant  could  provide  a  witness
       statement covering her claim about sexual assault and thus avoid  the
       stress of giving  evidence  on  this  aspect.  However  despite  that
       suggestion no such statement had been produced. Paragraph 18  records
       the consideration of how cross-examination should proceed bearing  in
       mind the appellant's vulnerability. The judge indicated he bore  this
       in mind throughout.  Paragraph  19  is  a  referral  to  the  medical
       evidence.

   17.  The judge was at pains to ensure the appellant was  able  to  follow
       the proceedings. The judge  had  commented  that  the  appellant  has
       studied nursing in the United Kingdom through the medium  of  English
       and had worked in a care home. Furthermore, her  husband  had  spoken
       clearly in English. The judge raised the question of the need for  an
       interpreter and offered the appellant the choice if she preferred  to
       speak in English and to avail of the  interpreter  if  she  ran  into
       difficulties. This suggestion was declined.

   18. Having dealt with these preliminary matters the judge turned  to  the
       substantive issues. The judge found the claim lacked credibility.  At
       paragraph 25 a series of reasons are given. The judge queried why  or
       how she needed to nurse a patient in her  room  rather  than  in  the
       hospital. The appellant initially said that it was the Buddhist group
       who posed a threat to him rather than the authorities. The judge made
       the point that she had not explained why he could not  have  remained
       in the hospital. The judge also noted the appellant had not  reported
       threats to the Sri Lankan authorities. The judge commented about  the
       vagueness of the evidence.

   19. The judge did not find  it  credible  that  the  appellant  would  be
       arrested in March 2014, two years later. By that stage she was not in
       a relationship with the injured person.

   20. Furthermore, the appellant remained in Sri Lanka for two years  after
       this without any issues. The judge took this as  an  indication  that
       she was not at risk. There was no suggestion she was in hiding but in
       fact went about her day-to-day  work  in  the  hospital.  Whilst  she
       claimed threatening  phone  calls  were  made  nothing  untoward  had
       happened.

   21. The judge found the appellant's account about who she  feared  to  be
       incredibly vague. Whilst she  said  she  feared  the  CID  the  judge
       commented that she was nevertheless able to pass through security  at
       the airport. The judge makes the  observation  that  her  ability  to
       leave without difficulty was seen as a contra indicator of someone at
       risk from the State.  The  country  guidance  decision  emphasises  a
       sophisticated database is maintained but  still  suggest  people  can
       pass  without  difficulty.  The  judge  has  not  referred  to   this
       specifically. However, the guidance is not that there is never a risk
       for an individual at the airport. Security personnel are likely to be
       concentrated there. Each case is  fact  specific.  GJ  does  not  say
       individuals are not stopped. For example, it  found  a  person  whose
       name appears on a computerised "stop" list accessible at the airport,
       comprising a list of those against whom  there  is  an  extant  court
       order or arrest warrant. Individuals whose name appears on  a  "stop"
       list  will  be  stopped  at  the  airport  and  handed  over  to  the
       appropriate Sri Lankan authorities, in pursuance  of  such  order  or
       warrant. His comments about her ability to leave for only part of the
       wider assessment.

   22. The judge considered if any mental issues which could account for the
       gaps in her account. Having made  this  allowance,  the  judge  still
       concluded her account was inconsistent and incoherent and this  could
       not be explained by her health.

   23. At paragraph 27 the judge commented on the fact the  appellant  added
       further details to the claimed assault,  saying  she  was  beaten  so
       badly that she had scarring to her  breasts.  The  judge  observed  a
       change in her evidence  on  this  when  cross-examined.  Furthermore,
       medical evidence of scarring could have  been  used  to  support  the
       claim and this was not forthcoming. The judge also  referred  to  the
       cross-examination of her husband and concluded  he  sought  to  avoid
       answering questions before saying he had not noticed any marks.

   24. The judge then considered the appellant's mental health and  made  an
       assessment. The judge considered the medical management. At paragraph
       29  the  judge  considered  why  she  had  declined  counselling  and
       treatment. The judge did not accept her  explanation.  She  suggested
       she would have required an interpreter which she would be expected to
       provide. However the judge referred to her ability  in  English.  The
       judge noted that she subsequently attended counselling.

   25. The judge deals with the psychiatrist's report.  The  judge  observed
       that the consultant  did  not  have  the  appellant's  GP  notes  and
       records. The judge referred to relevant case law and the approach  to
       experts. In the absence of medical records the appellant's account to
       the psychiatrist was  described  as  `self-reporting'  symptoms.  The
       judge questioned whether the psychiatrist  had  adequately  evaluated
       causation. The judge is not challenging the doctors expertise but  is
       making legitimate comments in assessing the weight to be attached  to
       the report in relation to the claim. Most significantly, the judge is
       not dismissing the diagnoses but is simply suggesting there could  be
       other causes and goes on to name them.

   26. The judge made the observation that the appellant  had  worked  as  a
       nurse in Sri  Lanka  and  the  evidence  indicated  there  existed  a
       sophisticated medical service there. It  was  for  the  appellant  to
       demonstrate she could not receive adequate treatment and according to
       the judge failed to do this.

   27. The judge then had regard to section 8 factors pointing out this  was
       not determinative and the case had to be looked at in  its  entirety.
       The judge then refers to her delay in  claiming  protection  and  the
       circumstances of her claim.

Conclusions

   28. The judge has been most careful in the conduct of the hearing and  in
       the assessment of the evidence. The points made were ones open to the
       judge. The decision when read as a whole clearly shows that the judge
       had not reached a conclusion absent the psychiatric report. There  is
       constant reference throughout to  consideration  of  the  appellant's
       mental  state  and  possible  vulnerability.  The  judge   considered
       measures which would assist. In summary, I find this is not a Mibanga
       situation.

   29. I do not see any material error in the  comment  made  by  the  judge
       about the appellant being able to leave through the airport. This was
       clearly not the central point but an observation in relation  to  the
       appellant's claimed fear. There were many  other  credibility  points
       taken which justify the outcome.

   30. The other two points have not been laboured at hearing.  Reading  the
       decision I do not see anything which suggests the judge was  applying
       Western values. The judge was most careful in the approach  taken  to
       the  appeal  and  this  is  set  out  in  numerous   occasions.   The
       observations made in relation to the claim  and  the  chronology  are
       logical and legitimate observations.

   31. The final grounds advanced related to the absence of consideration of
       the risk of suicide if returned. The appellant's  representative  has
       been unable to say if this was argued in the First-tier Tribunal. Had
       it been raised I would have thought it most likely would have been  a
       reference to it by the judge. Reference was made to the other  points
       raised. There is a high threshold for a  claim  to  succeed  on  this
       basis. The point had been mentioned  in  the  psychiatric  report  at
       paragraph 65. The doctor  saw  a  moderate  risk,  referring  to  the
       appellant's family as a protective factors  albeit  the  prospect  of
       removal could lead to a change.

   32. Whilst I note the risk  of  self-harm  was  raised  in  the  skeleton
       argument submitted, it could well be  that  the  appellant's  Counsel
       decided not to pursue this  at  hearing.  I  have  gone  through  the
       judge's notes. These are detailed  and  typed.  The  details  of  the
       presenting  officer's  submission  are  recorded  and  there  is   no
       reference to any risk of self-harm. The record  in  relation  to  the
       submissions of the appellant's representative is much shorter. Again,
       there is no reference to self-harm. As Mr Bates points  out,  it  was
       open to the appellant's representatives to obtain  a  statement  from
       Counsel.

   33. In conclusion, having regard to the points made  and  having  studied
       the decision in its entirety and the background material  I  find  no
       material error of law established.

Decision.

No material error of law has been established in the decision of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Holt.  Consequently,  that  decision  dismissing  the  appeal
shall stand.


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly

17 July 2019
