
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06390/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 30th April 2019                   |On the 22nd July 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                              MS HELEN MICHAEL
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C Timson, Counsel instructed by Maya Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Nigeria.  She appeals the decision of
      First-tier Tribunal ("FtT") Judge Davies promulgated on 26th June 2018
      by which the FtT Judge dismissed her appeal against the respondent's
      decision of 15th May 2018 refusing her claim for international
      protection.


   2. The appellant has a lengthy immigration history that is briefly
      referred to at paragraphs [3] to [13] of the decision of the FtT
      Judge.  For present purposes, it is sufficient to note that the
      appellant claims to have arrived in the UK in January 1995, but, as
      FtT Judge Davies notes at paragraph [4] of his decision, she has given
      differing evidence as to when she arrived in the UK. In a previous
      application for leave to remain made by the appellant, she appears to
      have claimed that she entered the UK in 1985. On any view, whether the
      appellant arrived in the UK in 1985, 1995 or some later date, her
      presence in the UK has been unlawful throughout.   She first came to
      the attention of the respondent when she made an application for leave
      to remain in the UK on grounds of long residence, on 21st March 2007.
      That application was refused on 20th October 2009.  Having then made a
      number of unsuccessful applications to the respondent, in June 2016,
      the appellant made a claim for asylum. In August 2016, a referral was
      made to the Competent Authority in accordance with the National
      Referral Mechanism, and in September 2016, the appellant received a
      positive 'reasonable grounds' decision from the Competent Authority.
      However following further investigation, the Competent Authority
      concluded, on 17th July 2017, that the appellant is not a victim of
      human trafficking, slavery, servitude or forced/ compulsory labour.


   3. The appellant gave evidence before the FtT Judge at the hearing of her
      appeal. The evidence before the Tribunal is referred to at paragraphs
      [34] to [46] of the decision.  The findings and conclusions of the FtT
      Judge are set out in paragraphs [56] to [68] of the decision. The
      Judge found the appellant to be a wholly unreliable and untruthful
      witness, noting that the appellant's immigration history shows that
      she has taken every opportunity possible, to try to remain in the
      United Kingdom, even to the extent of venturing into a sham marriage.
      The Judge found that the appellant has not discharged the burden upon
      her, to satisfy the Tribunal that there is a serious possibility or
      reasonable chance that if returned to Nigeria, she will, or may be,
      persecuted for a Convention reason.  The FtT Judge went on to consider
      the appellant's Article 8 claim, and found that the removal of the
      appellant from the UK will not amount to an interference of the
      exercise of either her private or family life. The Judge found that
      even if Article 8 is engaged, the removal of the appellant is not
      disproportionate to the legitimate aim sought to be achieved.


The appeal before me


   4. In the written grounds of appeal, the appellant submits that the
      assessment by the FtT Judge of the core of the appellant's claim is
      inadequate, and the decision is heavily focused on the circumstances
      since the appellant's arrival in UK.  As to the length of time that
      the appellant has been in the UK, the appellant submits that she has
      lived in the UK for more than 20 years, and in reaching his decision,
      the FtT Judge failed to properly consider the appellant's relationship
      with her son and grandchildren.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam on
      7th November 2018 on one ground only.  Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
      refused permission in respect of the challenge to the decision to
      dismiss the appeal on asylum and international protection grounds. She
      noted that the findings of the FtT Judge in that respect, are grounded
      in the evidence, and are adequately reasoned. She noted that the
      appellant's account was fully rejected, and that there were serious
      credibility issues.  In granting permission, the Judge observed that:


           "It is arguable that the appellant has been here since 1995. It
           is arguable that the Judge did not properly consider the
           appellant's appeal under Article 8, with specific reference to
           paragraph 276ADE. Permission is granted in respect of Article 8
           only."


   6. Before me, Mr Timson submits that it was central to the appellant's
      Article 8 claim that she has resided in United Kingdom since 1995.  He
      submits that the Judge did not address the question of whether the
      appellant has been in the UK for a period of 20 years, and that the
      failure is material, because if the Judge had found the appellant has
      been in the UK since 1995, the appellant would be able to satisfy the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.  Mr
      Timson submits that although the appellant was disbelieved in respect
      of all other matters, that is not to say that the appellant could not
      establish that she has lived in the UK for a period in excess of 20
      years. In reaching his decision, the FtT Judge was plainly concerned
      about the delay in making a claim for asylum, and the FtT Judge
      therefore appears to accept that the appellant has been in the UK for
      a lengthy period.


   7. Mr Bates, properly in my judgement, acknowledges that the FtT Judge
      does not address whether the appellant has lived in the UK since 1995.
       However, he submits that there was no evidence before the FtT Judge
      supporting the claim by the appellant that she has lived in the UK
      since 1995, and the respondent has never accepted that she has been in
      the UK since 1995.  He submits that any failure to address that issue,
      it is therefore immaterial.


Error of law


   8. Although I recognise the force of the submission made by Mr. Bates, in
      my judgement, the failure of the FtT Judge to address the  appellant's
      claim that she has been in the UK since  1995,  discloses  a  material
      error of law in the decision of the FtT Judge.  The failure is  in  my
      judgement material, because paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  immigration
      rules makes provision for leave to remain in the UK on the grounds  of
      private life, where an individual does not fall  for  refusal  on  the
      grounds of suitability, and they have continuously lived in the UK for
      at least 20 years.


   9. Even  if  the  FtT  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the  appellant  has
      established a family life in the UK with her son and grandchildren, it
      is plain that the appellant has been in the UK for a lengthy period of
      time, and is likely to have established some form of private  life  in
      the UK.    The issue in the appeal, as is often the case, was  whether
      the interference is proportionate to the legitimate public end  sought
      to be achieved.   Although the  appellant's  ability  to  satisfy  the
      immigration rules is not the question to be determined by the Tribunal
      in a human rights appeal, the ability to satisfy the rules is  capable
      of being  a  significant  factor  when  deciding  whether  refusal  is
      proportionate to the legitimate aim of enforcing immigration  control.
      It was therefore in my judgement, incumbent upon the Judge to consider
      whether the requirements of paragraph  276ADE(1)  of  the  immigration
      rules can be met by the appellant, before  there  could  be  a  proper
      assessment  of  whether  the  refusal   of   leave   to   remain.   is
      proportionate.


  10. It follows that in my judgement, the decision  of  the  FtT  Judge  to
      dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds must be set aside.  As to  the
      re-making of the decision, Mr. Timson submits that the  appellant  has
      letters from people that know of her presence in the UK prior to 2007.
       He submits that the appropriate course is for me to remit the  matter
      to the FtT, so that the appeal on Article 8 grounds can be reheard  in
      the FtT. The witnesses were not as court, and in the alternative,  Mr.
      Timson made an application for me to adjourn the  hearing  to  another
      date, so that I can hear from the appellant's witnesses. I refused the
      application to remit the matter to the FtT  for  re-hearing,  and  the
      application for an adjournment.


  11. Directions were issued to the parties in advance of the hearing before
      me requiring the parties to prepare for the hearing on the basis that,
      if the Upper Tribunal decides to set aside the  determination  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal, any  further  evidence,  including  supplementary
      oral evidence, that the Upper Tribunal may  need  to  consider  if  it
      decides to re-make the decision, can be so considered at that hearing.
      No further evidence was relied upon by the appellant and there was  no
      application made pursuant to rule 15(2A)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
      (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


  12. There is in my judgement, no explanation why  the  evidence  that  the
      appellant  now  seeks  to  rely  upon,  could  not,  with   reasonable
      diligence, have been made available to the FtT at the hearing  of  the
      appeal  before  the  FtT.   Furthermore,  there  is  no   satisfactory
      explanation for the failure to  make  any  application,  supported  by
      evidence, pursuant to rule 15(2A) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
      Tribunal) Rules 2008.  The grant of  permission  to  appeal  by  Upper
      Tribunal Judge McWilliam provided the parties with a very clear  steer
      as to the issues that I would  be  considering.   It  must  have  been
      obvious to the appellant  and/or  her  representatives,  that  if  the
      decision of the FtT Judge was set aside, the Upper Tribunal would have
      to determine whether the appellant has been in the UK for a period  of
      more than 20 years, and that in resolving that question, the appellant
      would have to refer the Tribunal to the evidence  in  support  of  her
      claim.  In any event, in the absence of any further witness statements
      or evidence, I could not be satisfied that the new material  that  the
      appellant seeks to rely upon, would  inevitably  resolve  the  factual
      issue in the appellant's favour.


  13. I proceeded to hear submissions from  the  parties  so  that  I  could
      remake the decision in the Upper Tribunal.  Mr. Timson  had  not  been
      provided with a copy of the manuscript witness statement made  by  the
      appellant, that was before the FtT Judge.  I provided Mr. Timson  with
      a copy of that witness statement, and stood the matter down,  so  that
      Mr. Timson could consider the content of that witness  statement,  and
      seek instructions before making submissions to me.


  14. When the parties returned, on behalf  of  the  respondent,  Mr.  Bates
      submits that the appellant has been found to be  a  wholly  incredible
      witness.  She has provided inconsistent information  as  to  when  she
      arrived in the United Kingdom, and there is no evidence at all, of her
      presence in the UK prior to March 2007. He submits that the  appellant
      has failed to establish  on  a  balance  of  probabilities,  that  the
      appellant has lived in the United Kingdom for a period of at least  20
      years. He  submits  that  the  appellant  is  unable  to  satisfy  the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.  In
      considering the public interest, s117B  Nationality,  Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 confirms that the maintenance of effective immigration
      control is in the public interest and little weight is to be given  to
      a private life that is established by a person at time when the person
      is in the UK unlawfully, or when the person's  immigration  status  is
      precarious.


  15. In reply, Mr. Timson invites the Tribunal to find that  the  appellant
      has been in the UK for at least 20 years.  He accepts that other  than
      the assertions made by the appellant in her witness statement that she
      travelled out of Nigeria in January 1995, there is no evidence  before
      the Tribunal as to when the appellant arrived in  United  Kingdom.  He
      accepts  that  there  is  no  documentary  evidence   at   all,   that
      demonstrates the appellant's presence in the UK,  prior  to  2007.  He
      submits that although the appellant has not been found to be  credible
      in relation to a claim for international protection, that  is  not  to
      say that the Tribunal should reject her account that  she  arrived  in
      the UK in 1995.


Re-making the decision


  16. The only ground of appeal available  to  the  appellant  is  that  the
      respondent's decision is unlawful under s6 of  the  Human  Rights  Act
      1998.  As to the Article 8 claim, the burden  of  proof  is  upon  the
      appellant to show, on the  balance  of  probabilities,  that  she  has
      established a family and private life in the UK, and that her  removal
      from the UK as a result of the respondent's decision, would  interfere
      with that right.  It  is  then  for  the  respondent  to  justify  any
      interference caused. The respondent's decision must be  in  accordance
      with the  law  and  must  be  a  proportionate  response  in  all  the
      circumstances. I can take into account circumstances at  the  date  of
      the appeal hearing before me.


  17. Paragraph 276ADE(1) of the rules recognises  the  significant  private
      life that an individual who has continuously lived in the  UK  for  at
      least 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment), is likely  to
      have established. I accept, as Mr Timson submits,  that  although  the
      appellant has not been found to be credible in relation to a claim for
      international protection, that is not to say that the Tribunal  should
      reject her account that she arrived in the UK in 1995.  However, there
      is in my judgement no doubt here that on any view, the requirement  at
      paragraph  276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules cannot  be  met  by
      the appellant.


  18. Although the appellant claims to have arrived  in  United  Kingdom  in
      1995, there is  quite  simply  nothing  to  support  that  claim.  The
      appellant was found by FtT Judge Davies to be a wholly unreliable  and
      untruthful witness. She has already been found to be someone  who  has
      taken every opportunity possible, to try to remain  in  the  UK.   She
      arrived in the UK unlawfully and there is no record  of  her  arrival.
      Although in an asylum interview, she claims to have arrived in the  UK
      on 10th January 1995, in a previous application for  leave  to  remain
      made in March 2007, she claimed to have arrived in the United  Kingdom
      in 1985.  The appellant has given inconsistent information as  to  the
      date of her arrival in the UK, and there is no  evidence  to  indicate
      arrival in the United Kingdom, on either date.  There is  no  evidence
      at all before me, to demonstrate any presence in the UK, prior to  the
      appellant's application to the respondent in March 2007, for leave  to
      remain.  One might reasonably have  expected  to  see  at  least  some
      evidence showing that the appellant was in the UK prior to March 2007.
      There is, for example, nothing to establish where  the  appellant  had
      been living, and how she was supporting herself, since her arrival  in
      the UK and in the period until March 2007.  There is  no  evidence  of
      her having attended a GP or hospital, and no other  evidence  from  an
      independent source, attesting to her presence in the UK.  I cannot  be
      satisfied, on the balance of probabilities, that the appellant arrived
      in the United Kingdom in 1995 as she claims.  It follows  that  in  my
      judgement, the appellant cannot satisfy the requirements of  paragraph
      276ADE(1)(iii) of the immigration rules.


  19. The focus under 276ADE(1)(vi) of the rules, is whether there would  be
      very significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into Nigeria
      if she is required to leave  the  UK.   Mr  Timson  did  not  seek  to
      persuade  me  that  if  the  appellant  is  unable  to   satisfy   the
      requirements of paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii), there is  evidence  of  very
      significant obstacles to the appellant's integration into  Nigeria  so
      that  the  appellant  can  satisfy  the  requirements   of   paragraph
      276ADE(1)(vi).   Her  claim  for  international  protection  has  been
      comprehensively rejected by FtT Judge Davies, and the evidence  before
      me  does  not  begin  to  establish  any  obstacles,  let  alone  very
      significant obstacles, to the appellant's integration into Nigeria.


  20. As to family life, it is uncontroversial  that  the  appellant  cannot
      satisfy the requirements of Appendix FM of the immigration rules.


  21. The judgment of the Supreme Court in Agyarko -v- SSHD [2017]  UKSC  11
      establishes that the fact that the  rules  cannot  be  met,  does  not
      absolve  decision  makers  from  carrying  out  a  full   merits-based
      assessment outside the rules under Article 8, where the ultimate issue
      is whether a fair balance has been struck between the  individual  and
      public interest, giving due weight to the provisions of the Rules.  It
      is now well established that Appendix FM and  paragraph  276ADE(1)  of
      the immigration rules are said to reflect  how  the  balance  will  be
      struck under Article 8 between the right to respect  for  private  and
      family life, and the legitimate aims listed in article 8(2),  so  that
      if an applicant fails to meet the requirements of the Rules, it should
      only be in genuinely  exceptional  circumstances  that  refusing  them
      leave and removing them from the UK, would breach Article 8.


  22. In considering whether the respondent's decision is unlawful under  s6
      of the Human Rights Act 1998 on Article 8 grounds, I have adopted  the
      step by step approach referred to by Lord Bingham in Razgar  -v-  SSHD
      [2004] UKHL 27.


  23. Although the appellant's son is now living in the UK,  in  Kugathas  v
      SSHD  [2003] EWCA Civ  31, the Court of Appeal approved the  following
      passage in S v United  Kingdom [1984] 40 DR 196 as still relevant:


           "... generally, the protection of family life  under  Article  8
           involves  cohabiting  dependents,  such  as  parents  and  their
           dependent  minor  children.  Whether   it   extends   to   other
           relationships depends on the circumstances  of  the   particular
           case. Relationships between adults  ...  would  not  necessarily
           acquire the protection of Article 8 of  the  Convention  without
           evidence of further elements of dependency, involving more  than
           the normal emotional ties."


  24. The Court of Appeal considered that the further element of  dependency
      did not  have to be economic. Accordingly, it  will  be  necessary  to
      show that ties of  support,  either  emotional  or  economic,  are  in
      existence and go beyond the ordinary and natural  ties  of  affection,
      that would accompany a relationship of that kind.


  25. It is clear from the authorities that relationships between adults  do
      not necessarily acquire the protection of Article 8 of the Convention,
      without evidence of further elements  of  dependency,  involving  more
      than the normal emotional ties.  Here, there is very  little  evidence
      of any such dependency, but in light of the nature of the relationship
      between the appellant, her son, and her grandchildren, and the  modest
      threshold applicable, I am prepared to accept that the  appellant  has
      established a family life in the UK.    I accept  that  the  appellant
      appears to have been living in the UK since at least March 2007,  when
      she first made an application to the  respondent.   She  will  plainly
      have established a private life in the UK during  the  lengthy  period
      that she has been in the United Kingdom.  The issue in this appeal, as
      is often the case, is whether the  interference  to  the  private  and
      family life established by the  appellant,  is  proportionate  to  the
      legitimate public end sought to be achieved.


  26. I remind myself that section 117A of the Nationality, Immigration  and
      Asylum Act 2002 requires  that  in  considering  the  public  interest
      question, I must (in particular) have  regard  to  the  considerations
      listed in  section  117B.   I  acknowledge  that  the  maintenance  of
      effective immigration controls is in the public interest.


  27. There is very little  evidence  regarding  the  appellant's  son,  his
      partner and their two children, the  appellant's  grandchildren.   The
      appellant's grandchildren live with their parents, and it is in  their
      best interests to continue to do so. In reaching my  decision  I  have
      had regard to  the  best  interests  of  the  children  as  a  primary
      consideration.  The appellant claims that  her  son  and  his  partner
      heavily rely upon the appellant, and that  the  uncertainty  regarding
      the appellant's immigration status is having an adverse impact on  the
      mental health of her son.   The removal of the appellant from  the  UK
      will inevitably impact upon the relationship  that  the  appellant  is
      able to have with her son and grandchildren, but there is no  evidence
      before me to suggest that the appellant would be  unable  to  maintain
      regular  communication  with   her   son,   his   partner,   and   her
      grandchildren, or that they cannot continue the  relationship  through
      visits to and from Nigeria.


  28. Looked at in the round, an element of the appellant's wish  to  remain
      with her son and grandchildren, is the desire to stay in the  UK  with
      them, for the simple reason that they love one  another,  and  do  not
      want to be apart. That  is  an  entirely  understandable  and  natural
      desire. I do not doubt that the appellant would miss  them,  and  they
      her, but that is something which many, if not most, families  have  to
      deal with at some stage in their lives when they relocate  because  of
      their relationships, work or any of the multitude of reasons for which
      people do relocate.  Article 8 does not confer  upon  individuals  the
      right to insist that they should be allowed to enjoy their family life
      in one country rather than another. Again in the alternative, they can
      continue to enjoy their relationship  through  visits  with  telephone
      calls in between.


  29. I have noted the practical issue of the  support  that  the  appellant
      claim to give in caring for the children. She is, I accept,  a  caring
      grandmother but that is not sufficient to lead to the conclusion  that
      she should  be  allowed  to  remain.  Other  sources  of  support  are
      available to the appellant's son and  his  partner,  and  whilst  such
      support may well not be the same as that is provided by the appellant,
      there is no evidence that the appellant's son and  his  partner  would
      not be able to manage nevertheless.


  30. Only little weight can be  attached  to  the  private  life  that  the
      appellant has established whilst she has been in the UK unlawfully.


  31. Having carefully considered the evidence before me and taking all  the
      relevant factors into account including those in  S117B  of  the  2002
      Act, I am satisfied, on the facts here, that the  decision  to  remove
      the appellant is proportionate to the legitimate  aim  of  immigration
      control. Accordingly, I am satisfied that the decision to  remove  the
      appellant would not be in breach of Article 8.


  32. It follows that I dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


Notice of Decision


  33. The decision of FtT Judge Davies to dismiss the appellant's appeal on
      Article 8 grounds is set aside.


  34. I remake the decision, and dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.






      Signed                                 Date     21st June 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


  35. I have dismissed the appeal and I make no fee award.






      Signed                                 Date     21st June 2019

