
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06343/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Court of Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 23 October 2017                     |On 6 November 2017                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                   L K J-C
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Jones, Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
                    Solicitors (Morden)
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of St Lucia  who  was  born  in  1991.   He
    appealed against the respondent's decision dated 22 June 2017 in  which
    the respondent had refused  his  claim  for  asylum.   His  immigration
    history is very poor and he also has a number of convictions, following
    which a decision was made to deport him.  It was only at this very late
    stage that he first made a claim for asylum on the basis  that  he  was
    bisexual.  For a number of reasons, including the delay, this claim was
    a difficult one to run and the respondent refused it.

 2. The appellant appealed against this decision and his appeal  was  heard
    at Harmondsworth by First-tier Tribunal Judge M A  Khan,  on  7  August
    2017.  Judge Khan dismissed the appeal.

 3. Regrettably (and also unacceptably) and as referred to in  the  grounds
    of appeal, Judge Khan's decision is littered with typographical errors.
     Further, his credibility findings are  contained  in  six  very  short
    paragraphs (from paragraphs 30 to 35 of the decision) in which there is
    only the briefest reference to the evidence which was given during  the
    hearing.

 4. On behalf of the respondent before the Tribunal at today's hearing,  Mr
    Duffy very fairly set out the respondent's position as follows:

         "The respondent's position is that we accept essentially that there
         is a  lack  of  adequate  reasoning  for  the  adverse  credibility
         findings, and that this is a material error of law."

 5. Regrettably again, this is by no means the first time that decisions of
    this particular judge have had to  be  remade  because  of  a  lack  of
    adequate reasoning.  In ML (Nigeria) v SSHD [2013]  EWCA  Civ  844  the
    Court of Appeal dealt with an appeal against a decision  made  by  this
    judge which was subject to appeal for similar reasons.  In  that  case,
    the case of that applicant was also very weak, but the errors  made  by
    Judge  Khan  were  so  egregious  that  the   court   considered   that
    notwithstanding that the applicant's case was  an  extremely  difficult
    one to run nonetheless he had been entitled to a fair trial,  which  it
    did not appear he had had.  In that case also, the court was  concerned
    with the number of errors, "carelessness", which had been  demonstrated
    within the decision.  At paragraph 13, Moses LJ stated as follows:

         "...  It seems to me that the only conclusion  the  Upper  Tribunal
         should have reached was to set aside the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal and try the matter again or, if there was not time  to  do
         so, ... send it back for a further hearing.  For my  part,  because
         the FtT decision was so bad and because of  the  inability  that  I
         have to have any confidence  that  the  judge  conscientiously  and
         fairly took into account the arguments deployed on  behalf  of  the
         appellant, I am led to the conclusion  that  the  Upper  Tribunal's
         decision [upholding Judge Khan's decision from  that  time  on  the
         basis that despite the errors that applicant  was  still  bound  to
         lose] ought to be quashed."

 6. At paragraph 14, Moses LJ added as follows:

         "As a second limb, as I have hinted,  Mr  Rawat  [Counsel  for  the
         Secretary of State] said that, even if  there  were  these  errors,
         there is no point in sending this case back for a further  hearing.
         But so bad was the decision that, in my view, it would be wrong  to
         consider the chances of success that  the  claimant  might  have  a
         second time round.   I  am  perfectly  prepared,  as  a  matter  of
         hypothesis, to assume that he will have a very difficult run  on  a
         further occasion.  But that cannot displace the obligation for  the
         procedure to provide him with a fair opportunity of  deploying  his
         case.  It is, after all, the reputation  of  the  courts,  and  the
         courts in relation to immigration, which  is  at  stake  here.   It
         seems to  me  that  they  cannot  be  preserved  and  protected  as
         deserving respect if a decision which is so flawed  is  allowed  to
         stand."

 7. Although the decision in this case cannot be said to be quite as bad as
    the decision in ML (Nigeria), as Mr Duffy on behalf of  the  respondent
    has  very  fairly  and  properly  conceded,  the  decision   is   still
    sufficiently bad that it cannot be allowed to stand.  However weak  the
    appellant's case may be (and at first blush his case does not appear to
    be by any means a strong one) he is still entitled to a  fair  hearing,
    and it is incumbent upon a decision maker to ensure that  the  decision
    which is made demonstrates that the appellant has had a  fair  hearing.
    Mr Duffy concedes that in this case it does not, and it is  accordingly
    unnecessary to say more than that in my judgment  that  concession  was
    properly made.  It follows that the decision must be remade.

 8. I would only add that having been criticised so harshly by the Court of
    Appeal in ML (Nigeria), one might have expected this judge at least  to
    ensure that all his future decisions were properly proof  read.  Sadly,
    that has not happened.

 9. Both parties agree that  the  appropriate  course  would  be  for  this
    decision to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal, by  any  judge  other
    than Judge Khan, and I also agree that that is the  appropriate  course
    and will so order.

Decision

I set aside the decision of Judge M A Khan, as containing a  material  error
of law and remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  sitting  at  Hatton
Cross, for re-hearing before any judge other than Judge M. A. Khan.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:

                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 24 October 2017
