

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06025/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reason s Promulgated     |
|On 27th October 2017                   |On 31st October 2017                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     AS
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Caseley, instructed by Migrant Legal Project

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as AS. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. This is an appeal  by  the  SSHD  against  a  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Devittie who, for reasons given in a decision  dated  5
      May 2017, dismissed AS' appeal against the SSHD's refusal of his claim
      for international protection. Although an appeal by the SSHD  I  refer
      to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


   2. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  following
      grounds:

   a) Failure to consider credibility in the round.
            In particular the SSHD asserted "...the FTTJ notes the Appellant
            has probably lied about his age, attempting to claim  he  was  a
            minor. The FTTJ notes this "undermines the  credibility  of  his
            claim".
            It is notable that the FTTJ then fails to consider the issue  of
            the clear deception by the Appellant regarding his  age  at  any
            point in his credibility assessment, indeed it is clear the FTTJ
            has appeared to accept everything the Appellant  has  said  with
            little hesitation, and no further  mention  of  this  clear  and
            material  deception  is   made   in   the   remainder   of   the
            determination. It is submitted that the deception regarding  his
            age, cannot simply be artificially  separated,  as  the  IJ  has
            done,  and  that  the  credibility  of  he  Appellant  must   be
            considered in  the  round,  taking  into  account  all  relevant
            factors.
   b) Material misdirection
            ....at paragraph 13(iv) of the determination the FTTJ has failed
            to adequately address the submissions  made  by  the  Presenting
            Officer and the  credibility  findings  made  fail  to  actually
            address the issue rasied. It is evident  submissions  were  made
            that it was unlikely that a father would place his son  at  such
            great risk by requesting him to hand out leaflets. The FTTJ  has
            relied on a passage form the Danish report....
            .....the passage quoted in no way addresses the issue raised, in
            that a father would be highly unlikely to risk his  son's  life,
            particularly as the FTTJ has  already  found  it  plausible  the
            Appellant did not know what his father did for the KDP.....
            [13(iv)] ...If the authorities  catch  the  person...the  person
            carrying  the  information  will  be  treated  as  a   political
            opponent, even though the person  in  question  had  never  been
            involved in the movement"
            It  is  submitted  that  this  therefore  clearly  supports  the
            submissions made by the Secretary of State and the  findings  of
            the FTTJ in this respect are clearly unsafe.


   3. The appellant is an Iranian citizen. He claimed to have been  born  on
      25 December 2000 but the respondent accepted what is described as (and
      doesn't appear  to  have  been  challenged)  a  Merton  compliant  age
      assessment undertaken by Kent Social Services that he was  born  on  1
      January 1996. It seems the appellant continued to claim  his  date  of
      birth to be 1 December 2000 at the hearing because that is the date of
      birth referred to by the judge.


   4. The grounds upon which permission was granted incorrectly assert  that
      the judge found the appellant had probably  lied  about  his  age.  In
      paragraph 13, the judge states

        In closing submissions  respondent's  counsel  contended  that  the
        appellant's    account should [sic] be believed because:
   i) He had told a lie about his age. This undermines  the  credibility  of
      his claim. I am prepared to accept that the  appellant  may  not  have
      been truthful about his exact age and this is a factor in my view that
      is relevant to my overall assessment of his credibility.
        ......


  ii) .....I do not  consider  that  even  if  the  appellant's  age  is  as
      contended by the respondent, that  the  appellant  can  reasonably  be
      expected to know details of his father's role in the KDP  beyond  what
      is stated n the evidence. I find that there is merit in the submission
      by appellant's counsel, that it is
 iii) The appellant had failed to explain how it  is  that  the  authorities
      would  have  come  to  know  of  father's   involvement   in   leaflet
      distribution.


              In my view the appellant is not in a position to know  either
              how  his  uncle  obtained  this  information   or   how   the
              authorities  knew  that  he  was  involved  in  his  father's
              activities and he cannot be expected to explain  this.  There
              is merit in counsel's submission that


              The Danish report makes clear that the authorities engage  in
             monitoring and surveillance of KDI activities, inter  alia  by
             tapping phones and using networks of unpaid informants: so  it
             is  plausible  that  the  Etalat  could  have  discovered  his
             involvement by these means.
  iv) It is not likely that the appellant's father would have willingly  put
      him at risk by requesting him to hand out leaflets.


              I do not consider much turns on this  point  because  a  2009
              Danish immigration service report
              "as an example, a person may have been told by his  uncle  to
              carry a parcel from one place to another. The person may  not
              know what he or she is caring [sic] and may not even be in  a
              position to question or refuse the demand from his uncle.  If
              the authorities catch the person, and it turns out  that  the
              parcel contains for instance pamphlets or CD  with  political
              views  opposing  the  government,  the  person  carrying  the
              information will be treated as  a  political  opponent,  even
              though the person in question had never been involved in  the
              movement and hardly knows anything about it."


   5. There is no specific finding by the judge as to  the  appellant's  age
      but rather an acknowledgment that he  may  "not  have  been  truthful"
      about his age.


   6. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that the  appellant's  father  had
      been involved in  the  distribution  of  leaflets  and  the  appellant
      assisted him; that the appellant's father has been arrested  and,  "on
      the reasons given [by the appellant]", the authorities have an adverse
      interest in him.

   7. Judge Devittie's judgment and its reasons are  not  particularly  well
      expressed. Nevertheless, he did, contrary to what is  pleaded  by  the
      respondent, take the appellant's possible deception as to his age into
      account and did find that  relevant  to  the  appellant's  credibility
      overall. In so far as the second  ground  pleaded  is  concerned,  the
      judge was entitled to reach  the  conclusion  he  reached  as  to  the
      likelihood of the father involving  the  appellant  in  his  political
      activities. The Danish report, whilst it could provide support for the
      respondent's  submission,  is  not  unqualified  and  the  judge   was
      entitled, on the basis of the evidence before him, which has not  been
      the subject of challenge by the  respondent  in  her  grounds  seeking
      permission to appeal, to reach the conclusion he reached.

   8. The judge took account of matters that he described as adverse to  the
      appellant's credibility and, although  not  the  most  clearly  worded
      decision, gave adequate reasons for reaching the conclusion he did.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

     I do not set  aside  the  decision.  The  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal judge stands.


    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).




[pic]

                                    Date 30th October 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
