
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06375/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reason Promulgated |
|On 14 March 2018                              |On 16 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                  NIMAL [V]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S. Muquit, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Z. Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


 ORDER PURSUANT TO RULE 39 OF THE TRIBUNAL PROCEDURE (UPPER TRIBUNAL) RULES
                                    2008

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal ("FtT) against a decision dated  20  June  2017  to  refuse  a
    protection and human rights claim. First-tier Tribunal Judge G.  Clarke
    ("the FtJ") dismissed his appeal on all grounds after a  hearing  on  2
    August 2017.

 2. Permission to appeal against  the  decision  of  the  FtJ  having  been
    granted, his appeal came before me.

 3. By consent, the parties agreed the following:

    (i)  the FtJ erred in law in his decision in terms of his assessment of
         credibility,

         a)   by reason of his having found at [75] that the  appellant  was
             tortured as he had claimed, yet making no findings as to  what
             led to his being (detained and) tortured if otherwise than  on
             the basis of the appellant's account,

         b)    by  making  no  findings  as  to  the  circumstances  of  the
             appellant's release from detention, for example on payment  of
             a bribe as claimed,

         c)   on the basis of inconsistency between  the  finding  that  the
             appellant was tortured (in detention) and  yet  rejecting  the
             credibility of his account of  events  that  led  up  to  that
             detention and torture, and

    (ii)     the FtJ erred in law in terms of his assessment of risk to the
         appellant on return to Sri Lanka in  relation  to  the  appellant's
         involvement with the TGTE and his sur place activities; and

    (iii)    that the FtJ's decision should be set aside; and

    (iv)     that the appeal should be remitted to the FtT for a hearing de
         novo before a  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge G. Clarke.

4.   Having heard the parties, and  considering  rule  39  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I make a consent  order  in  the
    terms expressed in [3] above, considering it appropriate to do so,  and
    thus remitting the appeal to the FtT for a hearing  de  novo  before  a
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  G.
    Clarke, with no findings of fact preserved.

5.   The consent order is as contained herein, no  separate  document  being
    required.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                            14/03/18


