
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
pa/06813/2017
                                                         Extempore judgement

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 16 October 2017                        |On 24 October 2017                |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM

                                   Between

                                     rm
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Jones, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and his  date  of  birth  is  29
    July 1984.  He made an application  for  asylum.  The  application  was
    refused by the Respondent on 12 July 2017.  The Appellant appealed  and
    his appeal was dismissed by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Housego in
    a decision promulgated on 10 August  2017  following  a  hearing  on  8
    August 2017.  The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  by  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Scott-Baker on 22 August 2017.

2.   The Appellant came to the UK on a visit visa  in  2011.  He  overstayed
    and claimed asylum on 22 May 2017.  The Appellant's account, very  much
    summarised, is that he joined the Pakistan Muslim League (PML) in 2004.
    The Appellant refused to allow a former member of the National Assembly
    of Pakistan (MNA), to whom I will  refer  as  MJA,  to  join  the  PML.
    Following this in September 2009 and  January  2010  MJA  assisted  the
    authorities in arresting the Appellant after which he was detained  and
    tortured. The Appellant's father secured his release by way of payment.
     In 2010 the Appellant was riding his bike with a friend and MJA's  men
    attempted to shoot him.  The bullet hit the Appellant's friend and  the
    Appellant fell off his bike and suffered injuries.

3.   Judge Housego found the Appellant to  be  lacking  in  credibility  and
    rejected his claim.

4.     The Appellant  relied  on  a  report  from  Consultant  Psychiatrist,
    Satinder Sahota.  Dr Sahota documented in his  report  the  Appellant's
    brief background history (paragraph 3.3), his medical, psychiatric  and
    forensic history (paragraph 3.4), assessment of the Appellant's medical
    state as at 31 July 2017 (paragraph 3.5) and he  undertook  a  physical
    examination of the Appellant (paragraph 3.6).  The doctor noted various
    scars on the Appellant's thumb and fingers and  he  recorded  that  the
    Appellant reported to him that they were caused by an incident when  he
    was attacked with a knife and the assailant attempted to stab  him  and
    the Appellant managed to grip the blade with his left hand.

5.   The  doctor  concluded  that  the  Appellant  meets  the  criteria  for
    adjustment disorder complicated by post traumatic  symptoms  (paragraph
    4.1(c)). The doctor concluded that post  traumatic  symptoms  are  most
    likely caused by the history of torture and abuse suffered in  Pakistan
    (paragraph 4.2(a)).   the  doctor  concluded  that  the  scars  on  the
    Appellant's left hand are consistent with his account of being attacked
    in 2010 and that the size, location and  shape  of  the  scars  do  not
    indicate self-injury, operation or accidental incisions  and  that  the
    pattern of scars is consistent with cutting injuries that  could  occur
    by gripping a knife as described by the Appellant during the attack  in
    2010 (paragraph 4.2(b)).  The doctor  concluded  that  the  Appellant's
    account of symptoms of psychological trauma is consistent with a victim
    of torture (paragraph 4.2(c)). The doctor acknowledged that credibility
    is a matter for the court.  He  opined  that  there  is  a  history  of
    symptoms which in the doctor's view are likely to have been experienced
    by a victim  of  torture  given  the  characteristics  and  quality  of
    symptoms described and that the psychiatric evidence is consistent with
    a victim of abuse or  torture  (paragraph  4.2(d)).   In  the  doctor's
    opinion, the Appellant's medical health is  likely  to  deteriorate  if
    returned to Pakistan.

6.   Before the judge there was a report from Dr Giustozzi.    Dr  Giustozzi
    gave his opinion  in  relation  to  mental  health  care  provision  in
    Pakistan and general background evidence.

7.       There was  a  Rule  35  report  from  Dr  Sayed  who  examined  the
    Appellant on 25 July 2007 stated, "on examination he  has  scars  which
    may be due to the attack described.  He claims he was mentally tortured
    and keeps washing himself".

8.    I will engage with the grounds insofar  as  they  concern  the  expert
    evidence. The challenge, as I understand it,  is  that  the  judge  has
    failed to properly engage with this evidence and has failed to consider
    the evidence in the round.

9.   The judge set out his findings in relation to the  expert  evidence  as
    follows:

         "65. The Appellant claims  to  suffer  from  depression  and  other
             mental health problems.  There is  no  reason  why  he  cannot
             receive  treatment  in  Pakistan.   He  has  received   little
             treatment here in the UK, and there is no reason  for  the  UK
             taxpayer to pay for treatment he can, if he needs it,  get  in
             Pakistan.  He has  family  there  from  whom  he  can  receive
             support.


         66.   I  have  carefully  considered  the  medical  reports  of  Dr
             Giustozzi and Dr Serota.  The Appellant has scars on his  left
             hand.  They may have been caused  any  number  of  ways.   The
             assessment that the Appellant  has  mental  health  issues  is
             derived entirely from the account of the  Appellant  to  them.
             Their conclusions are doubtless entirely correct  for  someone
             who has been truthful throughout.  They rightly  observe  that
             the assessment of credibility is a matter  for  the  Tribunal.
             For the reasons given in this decision  I  did  not  find  the
             Appellant credible (and  keeping  firmly  in  mind  the  lower
             standard of proof required).  The absence of any medical  care
             or serious mental health  difficulty  for  the  last  7  years
             undermines the veracity of  the  account.   There  is  no  one
             giving evidence of his long term mental ill health although he
             says he has a friendship group in the  UK.   It  is  just  not
             true.


         68.  In so  far  as  there  is  an  Article  3  claim  based  on  a
             combination of mental health and  the  other  factors,  it  is
             untenable.  There is no medical evidence  that  the  Appellant
             can meet the tests set out in N v SSHD [2005] UKHL 31  and  GS
             (India), EO (Ghana), GM (India), PL (Jamaica), BA (Ghana) & KK
             (DRC) v SSHD [2015]   EWCA Civ 40.  I take full  note  of  the
             professionalism of the preparers of the reports before me: but
             they are predicated  on  acceptance  of  the  account  of  the
             Appellant to them: I find that account not credible,  so  that
             the foundations of the opinions are on sand (which is  not  to
             criticise the DRs in any way).


         69.  The account of being attacked by being shot at  by  associates
             of MJA is not credible and I reject it.  If they  were  really
             trying to kill him they would have stopped and done so when he
             fell off.  There is no evidence of injury to the  friend,  who
             remains unnamed.  There is evidence of hospital treatment  for
             multiple lesions.  Either  this  is  an  unreliable  document,
             applying Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD (Pakistan) [2002]  UKIAT  00439,
             or it is accounted for by a routine (if painful) road  traffic
             accident.  I find the former, as how this piece of  paper  has
             survived in good order over 5 years, why it was kept  at  all,
             and how it was sent to the Appellant all remain unexplained."




10.  A proper reading of paragraphs 66 and 68 of the judge's decision  makes
    it clear that he did not consider the medical evidence  in  the  round.
    He did not find the Appellant to be  credible  and  therefore  did  not
    attach weight to the medical evidence. This is a Mibanga error (Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367). There was no holistic assessment of the evidence.
    For this reason alone the judge materially erred.

11.  There were further significant  problems  with  the  decision.  I  will
    briefly engage with these. The first obvious matter of concern is  that
    Dr Giustozzi did not prepare a medical report.  He  is  not  a  medical
    doctor.  There is no discrete finding  made  by  the  judge  about  his
    evidence.

12.  The judge did not make adequate findings  in  respect  of  the  medical
    evidence, considering the  extensive  opinion  of  Dr  Sahota  (not  Dr
    Serota, as recorded by the judge).   In  the  view  of  the  judge  the
    (medical) evidence came entirely from the account the Appellant gave to
    "them".  It is not entirely clear to whom  the  judge  referred  to  as
    "them" because there was only one medical report.  There was of  course
    a Rule 35 report, but it is not apparent from  the  decision  what  the
    judge made of  this  piece  of  evidence.   Considering  the  error  in
    identifying Dr Giustozzi as having prepared a medical report, I am  not
    satisfied that the reference to them is a typographical error. I am not
    satisfied that the reference to them is  to  Dr  Sahota  and  Dr  Sayed
    because there is no specific reference by Dr  Sayed  to  mental  health
    and, in any event,  the  Rules  35  report  is  not  mentioned  in  the
    findings.  I conclude that the judge has not carefully  considered  the
    evidence.

12.   The  evidence  of  Dr  Sahota  (and  the  background  evidence  of  Dr
    Giustozzi) was unarguably  capable  of  corroborating  the  Appellant's
    account and it was inadequately engaged with by the judge.   Whilst the
    more a diagnosis is dependent on assuming that an account given  by  an
    Appellant is to be believed, the less likely  it  is  that  significant
    weight is to be attributed to it, this does not mean that the report is
    not independent evidence and the judge in my  view  did  not  recognise
    this. Whilst it was open to the judge to decide not to attach weight to
    the medical evidence, it was not  considered  in  accordance  with  the
    guidance in JL [2013] UKUT 145.

11.  Both parties agreed that the matter should be remitted  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a re-hearing.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the judge to dismiss the appeal is set aside. The matter  is
remitted to FtT for a fresh hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 19 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
