
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06497/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25th January 2018                          |On 28th  February 2018        |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     MK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Hooper of Counsel instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Twydell
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 14th December 2016.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of India.  She fears returning  there  owing
    to domestic violence from her husband and his family.   The  respondent
    accepted her account of domestic violence during her marriage, broadly,
    but did not accept that she would be at risk on return from either  her
    husband or his family or her own family.  The  judge  agreed  with  the
    respondent and dismissed the appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal against her determination  on
    a number of grounds but was refused both in the First-tier and  in  the
    Upper-tier.  She then sought a judicial review of the Upper  Tribunal's
    decision to refuse permission to appeal  and,  on  21st  June  2017  Mr
    Justice Collins granted permission.

 4. On 25th October 2017 the Vice President of the Upper  Tribunal  granted
    permission to appeal against the decision of the Immigration Judge.

 5. At the hearing the principal ground upon which it was argued  that  the
    Immigration Judge had erred in law  was  that  the  judge  had  made  a
    material mistake of fact as to  whether  the  screening  interview  was
    conducted in the appellant's mother tongue or not.  The judge  rejected
    the appellant's claim, made at the  hearing,  that  she  had  sought  a
    change  of  interpreter  during  the  interview  and  that  on  several
    occasions during the interview her answers were  incorrectly  recorded.
    She said that she proceeded with  the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  that
    finding.

 6. With the grounds seeking  judicial  review  is  a  statement  from  the
    appellant's support worker who was present at the  interview.   In  her
    statement she said that the caseworker had told  them  that  a  Punjabi
    interpreter  was  not  available  and  the  interpreter  spoke  to  the
    appellant in Urdu.  She herself understood Urdu and observed  that  the
    interpreter was not translating word for word the answers  given.   She
    could tell that the  appellant  was  distressed.   After  a  while  the
    interview was continued in English and when she tried to intervene, the
    caseworker told her that she would not be allowed to.

 7. I heard oral evidence from the support worker, Ms V, who confirmed that
    the contents of her witness statement were true.   She  said  that  she
    reported  the  difficulties  with  the  interview  to  the  immigration
    caseworker at the women's refuge where the appellant  was  staying  and
    she believed that the support worker had forwarded that information  to
    the solicitors.  However  she  learned  relatively  recently,  although
    probably before the hearing  before  the  First-tier  Judge,  that  the
    support worker had not in fact done so.

Submissions

 8. Ms Pal defended the Immigration Judge's determination and  pointed  out
    that the difficulties with the interpretation had only been  raised  at
    the hearing, well after the screening  interview  had  taken  place  in
    December 2014.  The appellant had had plenty of  opportunity  to  raise
    the issue of unfairness.  She observed that it would have been  helpful
    if the solicitors had been able to confirm the  account  given  by  the
    caseworker.

 9. Ms Hooper relied on her original grounds but  in  particular  submitted
    that the decision ought to be set aside on the grounds that  the  judge
    had made a mistake of fact resulting in unfairness,  by  rejecting  the
    appellant's account of the  difficulties  which  she  had  had  at  the
    interview, which had tainted her  findings  on  the  substance  of  the
    claim.

Findings and Conclusions

10. I am satisfied that the evidence given by Ms V is  credible  and  that,
    whilst there have clearly  been  administrative   difficulties  at  the
    women's  refuge  centre  and  possibly   at   the   solicitors,   those
    difficulties do not undermine the strength of the evidence given today.



11. I accept that there were serious  issues  with  interpretation  at  the
    screening interview.  The judge rejected  the  appellant's  account  of
    those difficulties and said in terms that he proceeded with the  appeal
    on the basis of that finding.

12. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT 00105 it was  held  that  a
    successful appeal is not dependent on the demonstration of some failing
    on the part of the original judge.   Material  evidence  has  now  been
    produced which was not before her and which demonstrates that she  made
    a material error of fact in concluding that the appellant's account  of
    interpretation  difficulties  at  interview   was   not   true.    This
    credibility finding was relied upon by the judge in part  to  undermine
    the appellant's credibility generally.

13. Ms Pal did not argue that there was any other proper course open to  me
    than remitting the appeal to be  reheard  by  a  different  Immigration
    Judge other than Judge Twydell at Taylor House.  This appellant has had
    difficulties with male interpreters in the past and requests  a  female
    interpreter.

14. An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed[pic]                             Date 24 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

