
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06515/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House London           |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 22 August 2017                     |On 6 September 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McCARTHY


                                   Between

                                     MD
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR the HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Halim, instructed by Haq Hamilton Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision and  reasons
    statement of FtT Judge Aujla that was issued on  30  May  2017.   Judge
    Aujla decided the appellant is not a refugee from Turkey  or  otherwise
    in need of international protection.

 2. Judge Aujla made an anonymity direction.   Given  the  nature  of  this
    appeal, it  is  appropriate  to  continue  anonymity  and  I  make  the
    appropriate order at the end of this decision.

 3. Although the appellant originally relied on  eight  grounds,  Mr  Halim
    abandoned the last two and regrouped the others  into  a  more  logical
    framework.  At the hearing,  he  relied  on  the  following  three  key
    aspects.  First, Judge Aujla failed to have proper  regard  to  whether
    the appellant would appear on the  Turkish  computerised  records  (GBT
    system) as a draft evader / conscientious objector.  Mr Halim  reminded
    me that Judge Aujla  accepted  the  appellant  was  a  draft  evader  /
    conscientious objector at [48] because of the findings made earlier  by
    Judge Shaerf, which became his starting point (Devaseelan applied).  As
    a result, given the conclusions in  IK  (Returnees  -  Records  -  IFA)
    Turkey [2004] UKIAT 312, which Judge Aujla  cited  at  [39],  Mr  Halim
    argued Judge Aujla erred by failing to recognise that draft evasion was
    a reasonable basis for inferring the appellant  would  be  on  the  GBT
    system.  The fact current Home Office country information continues  to
    support this  view,  because  of  the  situation  surrounding  military
    service in Turkey, means this oversight was material.

 4. Second, Judge Aujla failed to give weight to the  clinical  conclusions
    contained within the Consultant Psychiatrist's report as to the  effect
    separation from family would have on the appellant on return to Turkey.
     This was a factor that went to the question of  proportionality  under
    article 8 ECHR  in  terms  of  factors  affecting  moral  and  physical
    integrity.  By implication it also  went  to  paragraph  276ADE  as  to
    whether the appellant's mental health condition was a very  significant
    obstacle to integration.  This failure means the balancing exercise  is
    incomplete.

 5. The assessment carried out by Judge Aujla was also  flawed  because  he
    found the appellant's ethnicity as a Kurd would  help  his  integration
    into Turkey.  This position is contrary to  all  country  guidance  and
    background country information, Kurds facing discrimination  in  Turkey
    because of their ethnicity.  This factor was improperly relied upon  by
    Judge Aujla and further undermines the proportionality assessment.

 6. Third, Judge Aujla stated he  could  give  no  weight  to  the  witness
    evidence because there was no explanation why the witness had not  been
    called to give evidence.  This overlooked paragraph 4 of the  witness's
    written statement, in which he explained he was living  in  France  and
    could not afford to visit the UK.

 7. In addition, Mr Halim reminded me that one of the reasons  Judge  Aujla
    found the appellant not  credible  was  the  delay  in  making  further
    submissions.  This failed to  take  into  consideration  the  fact  the
    appellant applied in 2013 and his application fell within the  "legacy"
    policy.  The delays were not of the appellant's making.

 8. Although Mr Singh did not agree with all the grounds, he conceded  that
    Judge Aujla took the wrong approach to  the  psychiatric  evidence  and
    thereby fell into legal error.  The appellant's  mental  health  was  a
    relevant factor to be considered when assessing  proportionality  under
    article 8 ECHR.  Mr Singh further conceded that Judge Aujla's  findings
    that the appellant's Kurdish ethnicity would help his  integration  was
    confused and was a further problem with the decision.   Mr  Singh  also
    conceded that Judge Aujla failed to have regard to the explanation  for
    the absence of the appellant's witness and therefore the  reason  given
    for rejecting that evidence was wrong in law.

 9. Mr Singh was realistic in identifying that the errors he accepted meant
    nothing of Judge Aujla's findings could be preserved.  He  agreed  with
    Mr Halim that the appeal needed to be reheard by a different  judge  in
    the First-tier Tribunal.

10. Given such agreement, there is little for me  to  say.   I  agree  that
    there are obvious legal errors, as conceded by Mr Singh, and  they  are
    sufficient  reason  for  setting  Judge  Aujla's  decision  aside   and
    remitting the appeal.

11. For completeness, I have considered the other grounds, which centre  on
    whether the appellant was recorded as a  draft  evader.   Judge  Shaerf
    made a clear finding that it is reasonably  likely  the  appellant  was
    recorded as a draft evader, and this finding must be the starting point
    in any future  assessment  (as  per  Devaseelan).   It  was  necessary,
    therefore, for Judge Aujla to consider why the appellant would not come
    to the adverse attention  of  the  Turkish  authorities  because  draft
    evasion was a factor that was likely to be recorded on the GBT  system.
    The failure to examine this issue is a legal error.

12. It follows that the appeal must be reheard in full  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by a judge other than Judge Aujla.

Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The decision of Judge Aujla is set aside because it contains legal errors.

The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge.

Order regarding anonymity

I make the following order.  I prohibit the  parties  or  any  other  person
from disclosing or publishing any matter  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.  The  appellant  can  be  referred  to  as
"MD".



Signed                              Date         6 September 2017

Judge McCarthy
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
