
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                               Appeal
Number: PA/06048/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12th January 2018                  |On 21st February 2018                |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN


                                   Between

                                  miss H A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Masood (instructed by Aden & Co Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  with  permission,  by  the
    Appellant who had sought asylum in the United Kingdom on the basis that
    she would be at risk on return to Pakistan.

 2.  The grounds make several challenges  to  the  judge's  Decision.   The
    judge, Judge Sullivan heard the case at Hatton Cross on 24th July  2017
    and in a Decision and Reasons promulgated on 21st August of  that  year
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.  The first and most forcefully put
    challenge is that the judge failed  to  adjourn  the  hearing  for  the
    Appellant's representatives to obtain a medico-legal report.   That  is
    dealt with by the judge in paragraphs 14 and 15 of the  Decision  where
    she deals with preliminary matters.  She notes that there had  been  an
    application in writing on 5th July for an adjournment for  that  reason
    which had been refused by a duty judge and the application was  renewed
    orally before her.  She  was  told  that  the  Medical  Foundation  had
    declined to provide a medical report.  Helen Bamber had been approached
    but was unable to provide a report and  two  other  organisations  were
    suggested as possible points of contact but  there  was  no  indication
    from anybody that they would be able to provide a medical report by any
    particular date.  The situation therefore, as asserted by Mr Kotas,  is
    that an application was being made for a report, the author of whom had
    not been identified and a timescale for which had not  been  identified
    notwithstanding  the  solicitors   had   been   instructed   for   some
    considerable time.  The judge was entitled to find that  there  was  no
    indication that a report would ever be  forthcoming  and  certainly  no
    timescale given and under those circumstances the judge was entitled to
    refuse the adjournment.  There was no unfairness  taking  into  account
    matters the judge should have taken into account as set out in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC).

 3. The second point that is put forward on the Appellant's behalf is  that
    the Appellant was a vulnerable witness and the judge indeed found  that
    she should be treated as a vulnerable witness and said so at  paragraph
    16.  That was because there was medical  evidence  that  the  Appellant
    suffered  from  anxiety  and  depression  which  had  required  medical
    treatment.  However, treating someone as  a  vulnerable  witness  which
    involves following the President's Guidance in that respect  is  a  far
    cry from saying 'I am a vulnerable witness  and  therefore  you  cannot
    make adverse credibility findings and you should give me the benefit of
    the doubt and believe what I am saying'.  There was  no  evidence  that
    the Appellant had memory problems or was unable to recount  her  story.
    There is no such evidence in the Decision and Reasons nor in the Record
    of Proceedings, which I have seen. I note the Appellant was represented
    by Counsel before the First-tier Tribunal.  There is no suggestion that
    there was any challenge to the way in which the hearing  progressed  or
    of any difficulties the Appellant experienced in giving  her  evidence.
    There is no evidence and no suggestion that I  can  see  that  she  was
    treated anything  other  than  in  accordance  with  the  guidance  for
    vulnerable witnesses.

 4. The simple point here is that  the  judge  gave  numerous  reasons  for
    disbelieving  this  Appellant's  account.   There  are  clear   adverse
    credibility points in relation to her supposed marriage.  The judge  at
    paragraph 24(a) finds it unlikely that a young  woman  of  26  from  an
    intolerant family would have struck up a  friendship  in  the  way  she
    claimed.  The judge is entitled to  that  view  and  it  is  a  finding
    properly open  to  the  judge  given  what  she  was  told  about  this
    Appellant's  background.   The  judge  also  made  adverse  credibility
    findings based on the conduct of  the  relationship.   Apparently  they
    married but did not live together and there  was  very  little  contact
    between them.  The adverse  credibility  findings  are  contained  over
    seven subparagraphs in paragraph 24, all of which are properly based on
    the evidence and open to the judge and the fact that the Appellant is a
    vulnerable witness has no impact on those findings.  It is  also  clear
    that the Appellant had changed her evidence through the course  of  the
    hearing.

 5. I agree with Mr Kotas that having dealt with the refusal to adjourn and
    the fact that she was a vulnerable witness the remaining grounds are in
    reality no more than a disagreement with the judge's reasoning  all  of
    which are properly reasoned, based on the evidence and sustainable  and
    I therefore find no material error of law in the First-tier  Tribunal's
    Decision. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 2nd February 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin

