
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06386/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2017                           |On 23rd October 2017          |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON

                                   Between

                                     NAS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bundock of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Pears promulgated on 8 August 2017, in  which  the  Appellant's  appeal
    against the Respondent's decision to refuse his  protection  and  human
    rights claim dated 20 June 2017 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Pakistan, born on  21  April  1981,  who
    entered the United Kingdom in 2011 as a Tier 4 Student  with  leave  to
    remain granted to 30 August 2012.  A further application for  leave  to
    remain was refused.  The Appellant sought asylum on 11 January 2015 and
    underwent a screening interview on 27 February 2015, but the claim  was
    treated as implicitly withdrawn after the Appellant failed to attend  a
    substantive asylum interview.  On 21 April  2017,  the  Appellant  made
    further representations which were considered as  a  fresh  application
    asylum which he underwent a screening interview on 10 May 2017 and  the
    substantive interview on 6 June 2017.  The Appellant's protection claim
    is based on fear of return to  Pakistan  following  his  conversion  to
    Christianity from being brought up as a Shia Muslim  and  following  an
    incident in 2010 where he was involved in  an  argument  in  a  snooker
    hall.

 3. The Respondent refused the application on 20 June  2017  on  the  basis
    that  it  was  not  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  converted   to
    Christianity, nor that anyone in Pakistan knew about  his  interest  in
    another religion, nor that  he  was  attacked  by  police  officers  in
    Pakistan in 2010, nor that any in any event such an attack was anything
    other than by a rogue  individual.   The  Appellant's  credibility  was
    deemed to have been damaged pursuant to section 8  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004 on the basis of  his
    immigration history and late claim for asylum.  For these  reasons  the
    Respondent did not accept the Appellant would be at risk on  return  to
    Pakistan.  The Respondent further considered  the  Appellant's  private
    and family life in the United Kingdom but did not grant leave to remain
    on this basis, or on health grounds either.

 4. Judge Pears dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 8  August
    2017 on all grounds.  Judge Pears  made  adverse  credibility  findings
    against  the  Appellant  and  found  that  he  had  not  converted   to
    Christianity in 2012 or at all; nor was there any risk from an isolated
    incident in 2010.  Although the Appellant raised issues as  to  private
    and family life under Article 8 of the  European  Convention  on  Human
    Rights within his appeal documentation, the appeal was not advanced  on
    that basis, although limited findings were made as the ground  was  not
    formally expressly abandoned.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on two grounds.  First, that the refusal to grant
    an adjournment of the oral hearing on 26  July  2017  was  procedurally
    unfair and secondly, that inadequate reasons were given for the adverse
    findings made as to the credibility of the  Appellant's  conversion  to
    Christianity.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by  Judge  Baker  on  25  August  2017
    without restriction as to the grounds of  appeal,  albeit  the  reasons
    given focused on the first ground of appeal only.

 7. At the oral hearing, Mr Jarvis indicated at the outset that in light of
    the very tight timetable for this  appeal,  the  refusal  to  grant  an
    adjournment in all  of  the  circumstances  amounted  to  an  error  of
    procedural fairness.  For the avoidance of doubt, however, he submitted
    that the Respondent had significant concerns as to the underlying merit
    of the claim.

Findings and reasons

 8. On 24 July 2017, an application was made on behalf of the Appellant for
    adjournment of the oral hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal,  which
    was supported  by  a  statement  from  the  Appellant's  solicitor  and
    material showing communication with  possible  expert  witnesses.   The
    application for an adjournment was made on the basis that further  time
    was required to file a medicolegal expert report and a  country  expert
    report in support of the Appellant's claim and on the basis that  there
    were witnesses that would be  willing  and  able  to  attend  the  oral
    hearing to give evidence on the Appellant's behalf, but who were out of
    the country on the date on which the appeal has been listed.

 9. Judge Pears considered that a country expert report was  not  necessary
    in this case given that the Respondent accepted that if  the  Appellant
    was a genuine Christian convert then he would be at risk  in  Pakistan.
    As to the medicolegal expert report, this was relevant to the  question
    of whether the Appellant was a vulnerable adult and as  for  witnesses,
    problems with their availability  was  something  that  would  probably
    apply to a great number of cases and should  be  dealt  with  when  the
    hearing date was fixed.  The application for an adjournment was refused
    following consideration of factors set out in the overriding  objective
    to deal with the case fairly and justly.

10. The chronology leading up to the listing of  the  oral  hearing  is  an
    important consideration in the context of whether the refusal to  grant
    adjournment  was  procedurally  fair  this  case.   The  Appellant  was
    unrepresented when he made his asylum claim and has been identified  as
    an adult at risk on  10/11  April  2017  following  a  Rule  35  report
    indicating that he  may  be  a  victim  of  torture.   Solicitors  were
    instructed on the Appellant's behalf on 31 May 2017 and they took steps
    to identify relevant experts to provide  reports  in  relation  to  the
    claim.   While  this  was  underway,  the   Appellant   underwent   his
    substantive asylum interview on 6 June 2017 and his claim  was  refused
    on 20 June 2017.  His appeal against that refusal was made  on  4  July
    2017 and the notice of hearing was sent on 18 July 2017 with a  listing
    six working days later on 26 July 2017.  I  accept  that  in  the  time
    available  and  despite  the  efforts  detailed  by   the   Appellant's
    solicitors, it was not realistically possible  to  obtain  the  desired
    expert  reports.   In  addition,  one  of  the   Appellant's   proposed
    witnesses, his pastor, was on annual leave at the date of  hearing  and
    it would also be unrealistic for this to be rearranged with such  short
    notice of a listing date for the hearing.

11. As confirmed by the Upper Tribunal in Nwaigwe  (adjournment:  fairness)
    [2014] UKUT 00418 (IAC), in practice the question will be  whether  the
    refusal of an adjournment deprived the affected party of his right to a
    fair hearing, rather than whether the refusal was reasonable.   In  the
    context of an asylum appeal where credibility and  the  genuineness  of
    conversion to Christianity was the  central  issue,  fairness  required
    that the Appellant was given the opportunity to obtain relevant reports
    and for witnesses to attend to  give  evidence  on  his  behalf.   That
    opportunity was not practically  available  to  the  Appellant  in  the
    absence of an adjournment, given the very short period of notice  of  a
    hearing date.  The fact that in many cases the hearing date may not  be
    convenient for witnesses is no answer to the specific grounds on  which
    adjournment was sought and failed to  take  into  account  whether  the
    refusal would result in any unfairness to the Appellant in all  of  the
    circumstances.  The  refusal  to  grant  an  adjournment  deprived  the
    Appellant of the right to a fair hearing and  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    therefore  erred  in  proceeding.   No  view  is  required  as  to  the
    underlying merit of the claim given this is a  question  of  procedural
    fairness.

12. The refusal of the application for an adjournment of the  oral  hearing
    before the First-tier Tribunal was an error of procedural fairness  the
    reasons set out above and it is therefore necessary to set  aside  that
    decision and remit the appeal for a de novo hearing before a  different
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  In these circumstances, it is not necessary
    to consider the second ground of appeal as to whether adequate  reasons
    were given as the decision has to be set aside in any event.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   [pic]             Date     20th October 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

