
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/06046/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 June 2017                           | On 19 June 2017                    |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON

                                   Between

                                     b a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Palmer, Counsel instructed by Quality
Solicitors (AZ Law)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant in this case is an Iraqi national born on 10 April  1961.
    The background in this case is not in dispute and is  set  out  in  the
    papers.  The appellant appealed to the first-tier Tribunal against  the
    decision of the respondent dated 27 May 2016, refusing the  appellant's
    application for asylum and humanitarian protection and his appeal under
    the ECHR.

 2. In a decision promulgated on 23 February 2017, Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Miller dismissed the  appellant's  appeals  under  asylum  and
    humanitarian  protection  and  Articles  2  and  3  but   allowed   the
    appellant's appeal under Article 8.

 3. The appellant appealed with permission from the Upper Tribunal  on  the
    basis that there was merit in the grounds that the judge had failed  to
    consider all relevant risk  factors  in  accordance  with  the  country
    guidance in considering that the appellant would  not  be  at  risk  in
    Iraq.

Error of Law

 4. It was conceded at the outset by Mr Bramble that the decision contained
    an error of law.  In particular Mr Bramble noted that the appellant  is
    a Christian and would be perceived as  a  Catholic.   Mr  Bramble  also
    indicated that he was not relying on the  respondent's  Rule  24  which
    sought to indicate that  the  decision  was  sustainable.   Mr  Bramble
    submitted that although the judge noted that  the  appellant  had  been
    westernised he did not deal with the issue of religion.

 5. I am satisfied that the judge's decision in relation to the appellant's
    protection  claim  is  unsustainable.   Although  the  judge  carefully
    analysed the appellant's Article 8 appeal there was no consideration of
    the risk to the appellant as a Christian or in relation  to  Article  3
    generally.  The respondent had accepted that the appellant is an  Iraqi
    Catholic.  Although the judge did not 'envisage him being targeted even
    though he might be 'westernised' the  decision  is  silent  as  to  the
    claimed risks to the appellant as a Christian.  Judge Miller  had  also
    accepted at [36] that the  appellant  has  no  family  and  other  ties
    whatsoever in Iraq and that he left Iraq when he was 9 years old and is
    now 55 years old but failed to give reasons why the appellant  did  not
    qualify for protection under Article 15(c), if that was the case  given
    his individual characteristics.

Remaking the Decision

 6. As already indicated there was no challenge  to  the  judge's  findings
    allowing the appellant's appeal under Article 8.

 7. In relation to the appellant's appeal, other than under Article  8,  it
    was  not  disputed  that  the  respondent  accepted   the   appellant's
    nationality, identity and religion.  However, the respondent stated  at
    paragraph 23 of the refusal letter that  the  appellant  would  not  be
    targeted "above and beyond any other non-Sunni".  The respondent stated
    that the appellant could relocate to Baghdad or another  safe  area  in
    Iraq.

 8. The appellant was born on 10 April 1961.  His father  was  an  official
    photographer for the former Iraqi royal family.   King  Faisal  II  was
    assassinated in 1958.  In 1968 when the Ba'ath Party assumed control of
    Iraq the appellant's father was arrested and detained,  being  released
    from prison on payment of a bribe in 1969.  The  family  including  the
    appellant, his sister and his parents fled to Kuwait in  1970  and  the
    appellant has not returned to  Iraq  since.   The  family  subsequently
    moved from Kuwait to Abu Dhabi and then entered the UK in 1982 on visit
    visas when the appellant was 21 years old.  The appellant has not  left
    the United Kingdom since that time.

 9. In assessing the risk on return I have had regard to the expert  report
    of Sheri Laizer in the appellant's bundle  together  with  the  country
    guidance case law and the background country information in relation to
    the risk of persecution for Christians. Mr Bramble submitted that  this
    was relevant to his concession that there was an error of  law  in  the
    respondent's approach (and although Mr Bramble did not formally concede
    the appeal on remaking he made no submissions other than to  direct  me
    to the relevant material in support of the appellant's case).

10. At pages 392 to 393 of the appellant's bundle the respondent's  country
    information  dated  August  2016  in  relation   to   Iraq:   religious
    minorities, sets out the abuses against Christians.  In  particular  it
    was noted that groups targeting Christians:

         "reportedly  combined  kidnappings  or   killings   with   criminal
         activities for profit ...  Christian groups reported that  militias
         and armed groups confiscated phones abandoned by community  members
         who fled the country following the sectarian violence  of  2006  to
         2008".

    The country information went on to state that a number of  murders  and
    kidnappings of Christians in Baghdad had been reported  and  that  "the
    trend of Christian kidnappings in Baghdad had risen since the formation
    of the Popular Mobilisation Unit (MPU) Shia militia".  Many  Christians
    have left their homes and their properties  were  subsequently  seized.
    Christians in other parts of Iraq also live in fear although they  were
    never exposed firsthand to the effects of ISIS.

11. The expert report of Sheri Laizer at page 120 to 144 of the appellant's
    bundle before the First-tier  Tribunal  detailed  that  as  a  Chaldean
    Catholic Christian the appellant  would  present  as  a  non-practising
    Muslim, from a known Christian family in an environment  where  radical
    groups are increasingly in control outside the KRI  area.   The  expert
    indicated that  family  records  can  show  the  family  to  have  been
    Christian and born as such and that there were  no  family  in  Baghdad
    that could assist the appellant. The expert also  indicated  that  this
    had to be considered in the context where Christians increasingly  live
    in fear in their traditional  areas  of  residence,  many  fleeing  the
    Islamic militant groups both Sunni and Shia.

12. At page 266 of  the  appellant's  bundle,  the  "no  way  home:  Iraq's
    minorities on  the  on  the  verge  of  disappearance"  highlights  the
    difficulties experienced by Christians in Iraq:

         "Many minority  communities  in  Iraq  are  now  on  the  verge  of
         disappearance.   The  Christian  population,  which   before   2003
         numbered as many as 1.4 million, had dwindled by 350,000  by  early
         2014, and  since  the  ISIS  advance  is  now  estimated  as  under
         250,000".

13. I have  considered  the  country  guidance  including  BA  (Returns  to
    Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 which provides:

         "(i)  The  level  of  general  violence  in  Baghdad  City  remains
             significant,  but  the  current  evidence  does  not   justify
             departing from conclusion  of  the  Tribunal  in  AA  (Article
             15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC).

         (ii)  The evidence shows that  those  who  worked  in  non-security
             related  Western  international  companies,   or   any   other
             categories  of  people  who  would  be  perceived  as   having
             collaborated with foreign coalition forces, are  still  likely
             to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL  control  or  have
             higher levels of insurgent activity.  At the current time  the
             risk is likely to emanate  from  Sunni  insurgent  groups  who
             continue to target Western or international companies as  well
             as those who are perceived to collaborate with the  government
             of Iraq.

         (iii)    The current evidence indicates that the risk in Baghdad to
             those  who  worked  for  non-security   related   Western   or
             international companies is low although there is  evidence  to
             show that insurgent groups such as ISIL are active and capable
             of carrying out attacks in the city.  Insofar as there may  be
             a low level of risk of  such  groups  in  Baghdad  it  is  not
             sufficient  to  show  real  risk   solely   as   a   perceived
             collababrator.

         (iv) Kidnapping has been  and  remains,  a  significant  persistent
             problem contributing to the breakdown  of  law  and  order  in
             Iraq.  Instance of kidnapping are likely to be  underreported.
             Kidnappings might be linked to political or sectarian  motive;
             other kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity  for  purely
             financial motive.  Whether a returnee from the West is  likely
             to be perceived as a potential target  of  a  kidnapping  made
             Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has  been  away  from
             Iraq.  Each case will be fact sensitive on the  principle  the
             longer a  person  has  spent  abroad  the  greater  the  risk.
             However the evidence does not show a real risk to  a  returnee
             in Baghdad on this ground alone.

         (v)  Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal  of  the
             US-led coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the level  seen
             in 2006-2007.  Shia dominated government is supported by  Shia
             militias in Baghdad.  The evidence indicates  that  Sunni  men
             are more likely to be  targeted  as  suspected  supporters  of
             Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL.  However  Sunni  identity
             alone is not sufficient to give rise to a real risk of serious
             harm.

         (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves  create
             a real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount
             to a real risk for the purpose of Article 3 ECHR  if  assessed
             on accumulative basis.  The assessment  would  depend  on  the
             facts of each case.

         (vii)    In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and  in
             the case of Sunni complainants, are unlikely to  be  unwilling
             to provide sufficient protection".

14. I have taken into consideration  all  of  the  evidence  including  the
    expert report and the background country information.  In light of  the
    appellant's 47 year absence from the country,  his  Westernisation  and
    the fact in particular that he  is  from  a  religious  minority  I  am
    satisfied that these cumulative factors indicate that the appellant  is
    at risk of persecution on the basis of his membership  of  a  religious
    minority.  In particularly the appellant is likely to be perceived as a
    potential target for kidnaping in Baghdad given how long  he  has  been
    away from Iraq and that he is from a Christian minority.  Although   BA
    (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq is authority that there was not a  real  risk
    to returnees on the basis alone of the fact that they had  been  abroad
    for a significant level of time, taken together with the fact that  the
    appellant has never lived in Iraq as an  adult  and  left  as  a  child
    together  with  the  evidence  of  growing  difficulties   for   ethnic
    minorities including  Christians  in  Iraq  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    cumulative  factors  mean  that  the  appellant  is  at  real  risk  of
    persecution on return to his home area of Baghdad.

15. It was not submitted by Mr Bramble  that  the  appellant  could  safely
    relocate elsewhere in Iraq.  Even if the respondent's contention in the
    refusal letter that the appellant could relocate was  maintained  I  am
    not satisfied that the  appellant  could  safely  relocate  outside  of
    Baghdad.  The appellant is not from the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR)  and
    as a non-Kurd at risk in his home area in Iraq he  is  unlikely  to  be
    able to relocate to the IKR (AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT
    00544 (IAC) applied).  I find that he  cannot.   Although  it  was  not
    specifically argued that the appellant could relocate to (certain parts
    of) the Baghdad belts, even if this were safe I am  satisfied  that  it
    would be  unduly harsh/unreasonable given all  the  factors,  including
    that the  appellant  has  no  family  members  of  friends  that  might
    accommodate him/assist him; that I accept that he has largely lost  his
    Arabic skills, that he is from a minority community and I  accept  that
    he lacks proof of identity documents; has no sponsor or  other  support
    available.

16. Further in the alternative if I am wrong in relation to the  convention
    reason I am satisfied that the appellant would be entitled to  a  grant
    of humanitarian protection both on the same factual matrix.

17. I have  also  considered  whether  in  the  alternative  the  appellant
    qualifies for humanitarian protection under Article 15(c).  In reaching
    this finding I have applied the relevant country:  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq  CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  and  have  considered  R(on   the
    application of H) v The Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
    (application of AA(Iraq CG) IJR [2017] UKUT.

18. The country guidance sets out the position on  indiscriminate  violence
    in Iraq and confirms that decision makers in Iraqi cases should  assess
    the individual characteristics  of  the  person  claiming  humanitarian
    protection in order to ascertain whether those characteristics are such
    as to put that person at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.  In  relation
    to feasibility of return:

    B DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (excluding IKR)

         "5.  Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  region  (IKR)
             will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.
             The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in  the
             United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession  of  a
             current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a  laissez
             passer.

          6.  No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
             possession of one of these documents.

          7.  In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made  by  P
             cannot succeed by  reference  to  any  alleged  risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of Iraqi identification documentation,
             if there Tribunal finds  that  P's  return  is  not  currently
             feasible,  given  what  is  known  about  the  state  of   P's
             documentation.

     C POSITION ON DOCUMENTATION WHERE RETURN IS FEASIBLE

          8.  It will only be where  the  Tribunal  is  satisfied  that  the
             return of P to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk
             of harm  arising  from  an  absence  of  Iraqi  identification
             documentation will require judicial determination.

          9.  Having a Civil Status Identity Document (CSID) is one  of  the
             ways in which it is possible for  an  Iraqi  national  in  the
             United Kingdom to obtain  a  passport  or  a  laissez  passer.
             Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means  of
             a  passport  or  laissez  passer,  she  will  be  expected  to
             demonstrate to  the  Tribunal  what,  if  any,  identification
             documentation led the Iraqi authorities to issue  P  with  the
             passport or laissez passer (or to signal their intention to do
             so).

          10. Where P is returned to Iraq on a  laissez  passer  or  expired
             passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
             return by reason of not having a  current  passport  or  other
             form of Iraqi identification document.

          11. Where P's return to Iraq  is  found  by  the  Tribunal  to  be
             feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide  whether  P
             has a CSID, or will be able to  obtain  one,  reasonably  soon
             after arrival in Iraq.  A CSID is generally required in  order
             for  an  Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance   from   the
             authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and   medical
             treatment.  If P shows there are no family  or  other  members
             likely to be able to provide means of support, P is in general
             likely to face  a  real  risk  of  destitution,  amounting  to
             serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to P  by  the
             Secretary of State or her agents to  assist  P's  return  have
             been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have
             no CSID.

         ..."

19. The respondent in the refusal letter concluded that the appellant could
    return home and that the situation of internal security conflict within
    Baghdad was not such as to give rise to indiscriminate  violence.   The
    respondent noted that the appellant did not have  a  national  identity
    card but the respondent concluded that the  appellant  would  be  in  a
    position to obtain replacement documents via  the  embassy  in  London.
    However, the appellant has not provided a passport or expired  passport
    and there  was  no  evidence  that  he  has  access  to  the  necessary
    documentation to obtain  a  passport  or  laissez  passer  (a  CSID  or
    Nationality Certificate).  I  am  not  satisfied  that  return  is  not
    currently feasible.

20. AA at paragraph  7  of  the  headnote  states  that  'an  international
    protection claim made by an appellant cannot succeed  by  reference  to
    any  alleged  risk  of  harm  arising  from   an   absence   of   Iraqi
    identification documentation, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
    not currently feasible'.  A finding, as is the case in my findings with
    this appellant, that he cannot currently be returned, owing to  a  lack
    of particular travel documentation, will not be  determinative  of  the
    claim for international protection if the appellant  faces  a  risk  of
    serious harm other than solely by reason of  the  appellant's  lack  of
    such documentation (R(on the application of H) v The Secretary of State
    for the Home Department (application of AA(Iraq  CG)  IJR  [2017]  UKUT
    applied).

21.  I have considered whether I can go on to consider the risk to this
      appellant on return and whether he could internally relocate, given
      that his return to Iraq is not currently feasible.  I am satisfied
      that I can and I am supported in this conclusion by AA.  In that case
      the appellant was a Kurd from a disputed area and the Tribunal
      accepted the appellant would face an Article 15(c) risk there.  As
      with this case there was no evidence that the appellant had access to
      Iraqi documentation and the Tribunal found that he would not be
      returnable until he was able to supply sufficient documentation to the
      Iraqi Embassy but nevertheless the Tribunal remitted the case to the
      First-tier Tribunal for findings of fact on relocation, finding:

      207 'Given that the appellant's return is not currently feasible it
      could be said that it is unnecessary to hypothesise any risk to him
      upon his return to Iraq.  However, as identified in paragraphs 169 and
      170 above, there may be cases where it will be evident that the person
      concerned would be at real risk of persecution or serious harm
      irrespective of the lack of documentation and that an applicant should
      not be precluded from pursuing a claim to international protection in
      circumstances where the asserted risk of harm is not (or not solely)
      based on factors (such as lack of documentation) that currently render
      a person's actual return unfeasible.'


22.  The appellant in this case faces a risk, otherwise than due to the
      lack of documentation, as he is from a Christian minority and has been
      outside of Iraq most of his life (and I rely on my findings above in
      relation to his circumstances on return).  All Iraqis not from the IKR
      will be returned to Baghdad.  If I am wrong in my above conclusions in
      relation to internal relocation, I have considered that the appellant
      does not have a CSID and I am not satisfied, given his particular
      circumstances that he would be able to obtain one reasonably soon
      after arrival, given that it is accepted that he has no family or
      friends who would likely be able to provide means of support.  I am
      satisfied therefore (in line with C11 of the headnote of AA) that the
      appellant, given his individual characteristics, is likely to face a
      real risk of destitution mounting to serious harm, as it is reasonably
      likely that he will still have no CSID by the time any funds provided
      to him by the Secretary of State, to assist return, have been
      exhausted.



Conclusion

23.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.   I  remake  the
    decision allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.  As I  have
    allowed the appeal on asylum grounds I make no finding in  relation  to
    the Qualification Directive.

24.  If I am wrong  in  relation  to  the  Refugee  Convention  grounds  the
    appellant   qualifies   for   Humanitarian   Protection,   under    the
    Qualification Directive, including Article 15(c).

25.  I similarly allow the appeal under  human  rights  Articles  2,  3  and
    preserve the First-tier Tribunal's findings in relation to Article 8.

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family. This direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  15 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application was made for a fee award or is applicable.

Signed                                  Date: 15 June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
