
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06721/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|By video link to Field House                     |On 27 April 2020               |
|On 20 March 2020                                 |                               |
|                                                 |                               |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                S M K (iraq)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms Marion Cleghorn, Counsel instructed by Halliday
Reeves,
                  solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr Myroslav Diwnycz, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer



                          DECISION AND REASONS [V]

Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of S M K who is the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to refuse him international protection  under  the  Refugee
   Convention, humanitarian protection or leave  to  remain  in  the  United
   Kingdom on human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq,  a
   Sunni Muslim and an ethnic Kurd.  He comes from Makhmour in western Iraq.

2. This has been a remote hearing  which  was  not  objected  to  by  either
   party.  The form of remote hearing was video [V] with the Judge at  Field
   House and the parties in the North Shields hearing  centre.   A  face  to
   face hearing was not held because it was not practicable and both parties
   consented to a remote hearing by video link. The  documents  that  I  was
   referred to are set out in the decision and the order made  is  described
   at the end of these reasons.

Background

3. The appellant was born in 1983 and is nearly 37 years old. Mahkmour,  his
   home area, is now part of the Ninewah Governorate, although in  the  late
   1980s and early 1990s,  it  was  considered  to  be  part  of  the  Erbil
   Governorate.  Before leaving Iraq, the appellant  lived  there  with  his
   family and worked as a kebab chef in a restaurant.

4. In August 2014, Makhmour was attacked and taken over by ISIS/Daesh.   The
   appellant's father stayed behind, but the rest  of  the  family  fled  to
   Erbil, about 40 miles away (just over an hour's car journey).

5. The Peshmerga quickly retook Makhmour.  On the  appellant's  account,  20
   days after leaving Makhmour for Erbil, he and his  family  were  able  to
   return, but his father appeared to have  decided  to  support  ISIS/Daesh
   while they were away.

6. Three or four  months  later  (so  in  late  2014  or  early  2015),  the
   appellant's father left to join ISIS/Daesh, with three other men, one  of
   whom the appellant knew.  The appellant was working in the restaurant and
   did not see his father leave.  His  father  and  the  man  he  knew  left
   letters for their families,  saying  that  they  were  going  on  a  long
   journey.

7. A few hours after his father's departure to join ISIS/Daesh,  members  of
   the family of the other man known to the appellant  came  to  the  family
   home when the appellant was at work.  One was the  man's  brother  and  a
   member of the  Peshmerga.   He  had  an  AK47  rifle.   They  blamed  the
   appellant's father for encouraging their relative to join ISIS/Daesh, and
   they humiliated the appellant's mother and uncle, threatening to take the
   appellant for questioning, or  to  harm  him,  because  of  his  father's
   actions.

8. The appellant's uncle contacted him to tell him what had  happened.   His
   uncle collected him, took him to a garage, and arranged for the appellant
   to leave Iraq.  The appellant  travelled  through  Turkey,  Bulgaria  and
   France (at least) on the way to the United Kingdom, arriving here over  a
   year later, in January 2016.     In  his  oral  evidence,  the  appellant
   claimed to have left Iraq at the end of 2016 and spent just  22  days  on
   the way, travelling via Turkey in a lorry.  He omitted to  mention  being
   fingerprinted in Bulgaria in September and  October  2015,  when  he  was
   briefly detained there.  In cross-examination, he admitted  that  he  had
   spent some time in France.

9. The appellant claimed asylum on 13 January 2016, stating that  there  was
   now a blood feud between the two families putting him at risk in his home
   area of Makhmour.  He said it was unreasonable to expect  him  to  return
   via Baghdad, because he is a Sunni Kurd.  He could  not  be  expected  to
   travel from there to Erbil, or to find work in the KRG.

10. On 3 July 2017, the respondent refused his  claim  on  all  grounds  and
   notified him of liability to removal.

First-tier Tribunal decision

11.  The  First-tier  Judge  found  the  appellant  to  be  an   unreliable,
   unsatisfactory and dishonest witness.   He  sought  explanations  of  the
   difficulties in the appellant's time line, eliciting for the  first  time
   that he had spent time in France, for example, but found the  appellant's
   explanations to lack  credibility.   The  appellant  told  the  Judge  in
   evidence that he had a CSID card 'at home', clarifying when asked that he
   meant his United Kingdom home address.

12. The First-tier  Judge  noted  that  the  country  evidence  showed  that
   although Makhmour was taken by ISIS/Daesh on 8 August 2014, the Peshmerga
   liberated it on 10 August 2014, just two days later.  The Judge found the
   appellant's  suggestion  that  his  father  had  been  brainwashed   into
   supporting ISIS/Daesh in just two days to be 'inherently implausible':

         "25. ... I do not regard it as credible that the appellant's father
         could be 'brainwashed' into supporting ISIS/Daesh in the  space  of
         two days, or that an Iraqi Kurd would support ISIS/Daesh.   All  of
         the objective  evidence  clearly  demonstrates  that  the  rise  of
         ISIS/Daesh has been opposed by the Kurds, who have  fought  against
         them, and the struggle against them  has  drawn  different  Kurdish
         groups together.  There is no realistic basis for  the  appellant's
         father to abandon his home and family and throw  in  his  lot  with
         ISIS/Daesh who had attacked and taken his home town."

13. The Judge found that the appellant,  who  was  in  possessionof  a  CSID
   card, could obtain the necessary documentation to return to Erbil and  go
   from there, either to his home town of Makhmour, or any other part of the
   KRG that he wished.  The appellant was a fit young man, who  on  his  own
   account had travelled from Iraq to the United Kingdom, sustaining himself
   for over a year en route.

14. The First-tier Judge dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  appealed  to
   the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

15. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the First-tier  Judge
   erred in finding the appellant's  home  are  to  be  within  the  Kurdish
   Regional Governorate (KRG) and that it was safe for him to return  there,
   without reference to documentary evidence before him.

16.  The Judge also found that the First-tier Judge at  the  hearing  on  14
   August 2017 had erred in law  in  failing  to  have  regard  to  relevant
   country guidance and to the decision of the Court of Appeal in AA  (Iraq)
   v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

Error of law decision

17. On 4 April 2018, the appeal came before Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson  and
   Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker, who noted that there was no challenge
   to the First-tier Judge's findings of fact and credibility, but expressed
   concern that Mr Diwnycz, who represented the respondent before that panel
   (as he does today) was unable to specify whether the appellant  would  be
   returned to Baghdad or to Erbil.  The  panel  found  that  the  appellant
   would not be at risk in his home area of Makhmour,  but  that,  absent  a
   clear indication whether the appellant would be returned to Baghdad or to
   Erbil, they could not assess whether he could reach  Makhmour  safely  on
   return.

18. The decision was set aside,  the  sole  issue  for  the  remaking  being
   identified as 'whether  the  appellant  can  safely  make  his  way  from
   wherever it is proposed that the Secretary of State would return him' and
   directions were given for a statement of case from the respondent  and  a
   skeleton argument from the appellant, together with such further evidence
   as each party wished to adduce, to a timetable of 4 weeks.

19. On November 1 2018, the remaking of the  decision  in  this  appeal  was
   stayed to await a decision in the Upper  Tribunal's  forthcoming  country
   guidance case, which  was published on 20 December 2019 as SMO, KSP &  IM
   (Article 15(c); identity documents) CG Iraq [2019] UKUT 400 (IAC).

20. The appeal was then relisted for remaking by the Upper Tribunal.

SMO and others submissions

21. Although SMO and others was promulgated  on  20  December  2019,  by  13
   March 2020, a week before the hearing, neither party had made submissions
   or prepared a statement of case thereon.  I therefore directed that  they
   do so by 17 March 2020, so that the parties' case was  clear  before  the
   hearing.

22. The respondent served a statement of case on  18  March  2020,  and  the
   appellant's submission was received on 19 March, bearing  a  date  of  18
   March 2020.  Although both parties had complied late with my direction, I
   have had regard to these documents.

23. For the respondent,  Mr  Diwnycz's  position  statement  was  brief  but
   cogent:

         "1)  The appellant remains in possession of his CSID  card  at  his
         domestic address in  the  United  Kingdom.  It  is  submitted  this
         document is  sufficient  to  vouchsafe  his  internal  travel  from
         Baghdad International Airport ( where he would be removed to, if so
         done by the Secretary of State, as previously detailed in responses
         to the Tribunal), according to  the  ratio  in  SMO  and  ors.  The
         Presenting  Officer  will  elaborate  on  that  decision  and   its
         ramifications if required to at the hearing.

         2)   Possession of a CSID will permit the appellant  to  be  issued
         with an Iraqi passport, either on his own application,  or  by  the
         hand of the Secretary of State.  Armed with  both  these  necessary
         documents, it is submitted he may return or be returned to Iraq via
         Baghdad, and may then either proceed overland to Makhmour, or  seek
         to enter the IKR, as an ethnic Kurd. It is submitted the return can
         be effected voluntarily, or by the hand of the Secretary of State.

         3)   It is submitted that the security situation in Makhmour is not
         at a  level  which  would  place  its  inhabitants  at  a  risk  of
         indiscriminate violence which  would  get  over  the  threshold  of
         article 15 ( c ) . The situation in Makhmour does not  warrant  the
         appellant to succeed under the threshold of article 3  of  the  HRA
         1998."

24. Ms Cleghorn's skeleton argument sets out at some length the evidence  of
   Dr Fatah in SMO and others.  She contends  that  Makhmour  remains  in  a
   disputed area, as  identified  in  SMO  and  others,  and  the  appellant
   therefore cannot be expected to return to his home area. The core of  her
   argument is that this appeal should be approached on the basis of whether
   the appellant has an internal relocation option to the IKR or to Baghdad,
   both of which would require  him  to  produce  a  CSID,  which   (on  the
   evidence in his witness statement) the appellant no longer had.

25. At [259] the Upper  Tribunal  in  SMO  and  others  adopted  Dr  Fatah's
   evidence about Makhmour:

         "259. The threat from ISIL in Ninewa is higher than in Kirkuk.   We
         note and take seriously the view expressed by the US Consulate  and
         USAID that ISIL is viewed as a threat to the civilian population in
         Ninewa (and elsewhere).  As in Kirkuk, it  holds  no  territory  as
         such but it has an established presence of attack  cells,  some  of
         which are heavily armed and well organised.   Dr  Fatah  and  other
         commentators  agree  that  there  are  relatively   few   incidents
         involving civilians and that ISIL is more selective in its targets.
          The focus remains on targeting figures in  military  or  authority
         positions.  There are nevertheless indicators of a higher threat to
         civilians in this governorate, including the detonation of a  truck
         bomb in a market, the emptying of villages  and  ISIL  attempts  to
         impose taxes on villagers in rural areas.  Parts of the  population
         are subjected to physical and  psychological  pressure  from  ISIL,
         particularly at night.  We are grateful to Dr Fatah for his  update
         on the recent developments in Makhmour, in which ISIL are  said  to
         have become increasingly brazen and have been  burning  fields  and
         undertaking other activities in this remote region in an attempt to
         secure territory."

26. Ms Cleghorn notes that Makhmour appears to  be  in  a  mountainous  area
   above Baiji in Iraq, in which case, it falls within the exception at  [2]
   in the country guidance in SMO and others:
         "1.  There continues to be an internal armed  conflict  in  certain
         parts of Iraq, involving government forces, various militia and the
         remnants of ISIL.  Following the military defeat of ISIL at the end
         of 2017 and  the  resulting  reduction  in  levels  of  direct  and
         indirect violence, however, the intensity of that conflict  is  not
         such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds  for
         believing that any civilian returned to Iraq, solely on account  of
         his presence there,  faces  a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to
         indiscriminate violence amounting to serious harm within the  scope
         of Article 15(c) QD.
         2.        The only exception to the general conclusion above is  in
         respect of the small mountainous area north of Baiji in  Salah  al-
         Din, which is marked on the map at  Annex  D.   ISIL  continues  to
         exercise  doctrinal  control  over  that  area  and  the  risk   of
         indiscriminate violence there is such as to engage Article 15(c) as
         a general matter."

27. Ms Cleghorn accepted that it was not clear whether Makhmour fell  within
   the area marked on the map at Annex D but submitted that  it  was  likely
   that it was indeed in that area and was still an area  of  Article  15(c)
   internal armed conflict risk.

28. The appellant  could  not  relocate  to  the  Formerly  Contested  Areas
   because of his lack of an original CSID and of family support there.   Ms
   Cleghorn asked that the appeal be allowed.

29. That is the basis on which this appeal came before  the  Upper  Tribunal
   in the video link hearing on 20 March 2020.

Upper Tribunal hearing

30. The appellant gave evidence to the  Upper  Tribunal  through  a  Kurdish
   interpreter.  He confirmed his name and address and his signature on  his
   latest witness statement, dated 26 February 2020, which he said was true.



31. In that statement, the appellant asserted that  his  original  CSID  was
   not 'at home' in the United Kingdom but back in Iraq.   He  continued  to
   fear returning to Iraq, particularly  via  Baghdad,  which  was  a  Shi'a
   Muslim majority area, and therefore hostile for him as  a  Sunni  Muslim.
   In the absence of original documents, he would not be able to travel from
   Baghdad to Makhmour, his home town.   He continued to state that he would
   not be safe in Makhmour, even if he could get there.

32. The appellant had not been able to contact his family in Iraq since  the
   end of 2015, because he  did  not  know  any  family  members'  telephone
   numbers by heart and the agent had taken  his  mobile  phone  during  the
   journey, as he said it was not safe for the appellant to have it.

33. In oral evidence, the appellant changed his account about  the  original
   CSID card again.  He admitted that it was in his pocket when  he  arrived
   in the United Kingdom in January 2017.   He gave it to  the  police,  who
   asked him what it was, and he told them it was an  Iraqi  identity  card.
   The police then returned the card to the appellant and, on  his  account,
   told him to post it in a red post box.  It had not been returned.

34. In response to further questions, the appellant then said  that  it  was
   his solicitor who had told him to put the original CSID card in  the  red
   post box because the Home Office were asking for  it.   He  was  given  a
   stamped addressed envelope, and he put the card in that  and  posted  it.
   This had happened when he was living in  Middlesbrough,  2�  to  3  years
   earlier (so between March and September 2017).

35. The appellant was asked to explain why he had told the First-tier  Judge
   in August 2017 that he still had the card at home.  He said that  he  did
   still have it then but was asked to send it to the Home Office later.  He
   only had a copy of his CSID now, which was  not  at  home  but  with  his
   solicitor.

36. The appellant was asked whether he had taken that copy of  his  CSID  to
   the Iraqi Embassy to get a replacement.  He said that he had not:  he was
   certain, without going, that the Iraqi authorities  would  not  accept  a
   copy.  If returned, he could not  travel  on  a  photocopy  of  his  CSID
   because checkpoints would not accept it. It was impossible to get  a  new
   one with a copy: he had no need to go to the Embassy to  establish  that,
   and why should he go there, the appellant asked.

37.  In  cross-examination,  Mr  Diwnycz,  who  had  remote  access  to  the
   respondent's GCID, told the appellant that he had checked for letters  to
   him or his solicitor in 2017 asking for the original CSID to be posted to
   the Home Office, but there were none.  He put it to  the  appellant  that
   the Home Office had never made such a  request:  the  appellant  insisted
   that he had sent the card.

38. There was no re-examination.

39. In submissions, Ms Cleghorn relied on her written case and said she  had
   nothing to add.  Mr Diwnycz relied on the respondent's statement of  case
   and his recent submissions.

40. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

41.  The  appellant's  position  on  whether  he  has  a  CSID  card   lacks
   credibility.  He admits he had it on entry and that the  police  gave  it
   back to him, yet in his witness statement signed  in  February  2020,  he
   said it was in Iraq.  In oral evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, he
   said he had it at home in the United Kingdom.

42. In his oral evidence to the Upper Tribunal, the  appellant  changed  his
   account and said he had posted the CSID to the Home Office, in a  stamped
   addressed envelope which  they provided, either at  the  request  of  the
   police on entry, or his solicitor later, but in any event, between  March
   and September 2017 (the First-tier Tribunal hearing was in August  2017).
   The GCID has no record of any such request.

43. The appellant has had several years to take his copy CSID  (if  that  is
   what he has now) to the Iraqi Embassy and seek  a  replacement  document.
   He has not done so and cannot be certain that  he  would  not  receive  a
   replacement document if he did.

44. I consider that the appellant has  fabricated  his  evidence  about  the
   CSID and that the truth is the simplest one:  he had it with him when  he
   came, gave it to the police on entry and  they  gave  it  back,  and  the
   original CSID is now at his home in Middlesbrough.

45. Even having regard to the lower  standard  applicable  in  international
   protection claims, I do  not  accept  the  evidence  in  the  appellant's
   statement that he has no contact with his family in Iraq,  nor  that  the
   agent took his mobile phone and he cannot remember any telephone  numbers
   for his family members.  I find as a fact that he  still  has  family  in
   Iraq, in either Makhmour or Erbil, who could help him resettle if he were
   returned with his CSID, via either Erbil or Baghdad.

46. I have had regard to  the  country  guidance  in  SMO  and  others.   Ms
   Cleghorn's case is put exclusively on the basis that the appellant has no
   CSID, but I have found that he does have the original CSID.  Accordingly,
   even if there remains an Article 15(c) risk in his home area of Makhmour,
   this appellant  can  reasonably  be  expected  to  exercise  an  internal
   relocation to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah, to both of which  cities  there  are
   now direct flights.  Erbil is only 40 miles from Makhmour and whether his
   family are in Erbil or Makhmour, they will  be  able  to  assist  him  in
   resettling.

47. This appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

48. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.
   I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  dismissing
   the appellant's appeal.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     5 March 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



