
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06786/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 December 2019                   |On 10 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                      KK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Kanaga
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  His date of birth is 26 March
1987.  I was not addressed in respect of anonymity. However, considering
the nature of the Appellant's claim and applying Upper Tribunal Immigration
and Asylum Chamber Guidance Note 2013 No 1, I make a direction to anonymise
him.

The Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 16
May 2018 to refuse to grant him asylum was dismissed by Judge of the First-
tier Tribunal Bart-Stewart in a decision that was promulgated on 28 June
2019, following a hearing at Taylor House on 17 May 2019.  The Appellant
was granted permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford on 6 August 2019
on all grounds.

There are six grounds of appeal.  At the hearing before me, Mr Clarke
conceded on behalf of the Secretary of State that the judge erred in
respect of the medical evidence of scarring and the psychiatric evidence
(ground 1).  In his view, the decision of Judge Bart-Stewart cannot stand.
It should be set aside. The matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for rehearing afresh.

I agree with the Secretary of State's concession.  There was evidence that
the scarring was typical of torture and that the Appellant had been
diagnosed with a psychiatric disorder.  The analysis of the medical
evidence was inadequate.  There was no suggestion that the evidence was not
Istanbul Protocol compliant and the medical expert had considered self-
infliction as a remote possibility.  There was no challenge to the evidence
of the experts. It was not suggested by the Respondent that the scars were
self-inflicted. The judge directed herself relying on KV (scarring -
medical evidence) Sri Lanka [2014] UKUT 00230. The judge seemed not to be
aware of the Supreme Court in that case KV (Sri Lanka) [2019] UKSC 10.  The
judge, whilst accepting that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness, did
not indicate how this affected the assessment of the Appellant's evidence.


In the light of the Respondent's concession in respect of ground 1, there
is no need to consider the remaining grounds of appeal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of Judge Bart-Stewart to dismiss the Appellant's appeal is set
aside and the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard de
novo.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 6 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam
