
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06032/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1st July 2019                     |On 19th July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 Vimbai [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Hashmi of Counsel, instructed by Tann Law
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Monaghan
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 3rd April 2019.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe born on [~] 1978.   She  arrived
    in the UK in September 2017 on a valid visit visa  in order to see  her
    mother who was dying and returned to Zimbabwe in October  2017.   Later
    that month she returned to the UK and claimed asylum.

 3. The appellant's case is that she had been involved with the MDC-T  from
    2000 when she and her husband began attending meetings.   In  2004  she
    began a family business together with  her  husband  and  in  2012  her
    husband began working on a specific contract for  the  2013  elections.
    They began printing t-shirts for the MDC every two months or so and she
    sometimes went to rallies and to women's leagues.  She  said  that  she
    began to notice people hanging around her house which she  reported  to
    the police, following which she  was  detained  and  beaten.   Eighteen
    months after the 2013  elections  people  continued  to  check  if  her
    husband was still formally employed by the  MDC  and  whether  she  was
    still printing t-shirts.  Since her arrival in the UK her  husband  has
    been subject to a violent assault at the hands of ZANU-PF.

 4. In a careful and lengthy determination, the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant had given a consistent, detailed and plausible account of how
    she first became interested in the party in her student days,  how  she
    then became a member of the MDC and  attended  some  rallies  with  her
    husband.  She accepted that her business had printed t-shirts  for  the
    MDC and found that her account of events before she left  Zimbabwe  was
    generally credible.  There was no real reason to  disbelieve  that  she
    was taken in for questioning by the police in 2013 although  the  judge
    recorded that the appellant herself now accepts that  she  was  treated
    heavy handedly rather than being beaten as she first claimed.

 5. The judge then turned to the issue of risk on  return.   The  appellant
    claimed that her husband was employed as  director  of  organising  and
    party building within the party and produced a contract  of  employment
    and a letter dated 23rd July 2012 offering him the position.  The judge
    concluded that she could  not  rely  on  these  documents  because  the
    employment contract was  not  signed  by  the  employer,  only  by  the
    employee and it was not plausible that the appellant's  husband's  full
    address was not stated on the offer letter, but rather only the area of
    Harare where he was said to reside.

 6. So far as the claim that her husband had been  assaulted  is  concerned
    the judge said that she could place little weight upon the medical  and
    other evidence which had been produced.  The letter from  the  MDC  had
    talked about four people travelling with the  appellant's  husband  who
    were part of a polling agent's coordination team whereas the  appellant
    simply mentioned her husband being attacked.  Furthermore,  the  letter
    referred to his being firstly attended by a local clinic and then being
    sent on to a specialist after noting the severity of  his  wounds,  but
    the medical report from Dr Muskwe makes no mention of being referred on
    to a specialist.  There was also a typographical error in that  letter.



 7. She concluded that the appellant had failed to substantiate  her  claim
    that her husband had been attacked by supporters of ZANU-PF  in  August
    2018.  She did not accept that he was employed by the MDC at  any  time
    or that he had any profile or significant profile associated with them.
     She noted that the  appellant  returned  voluntarily  to  Zimbabwe  in
    October 2017 without any difficulty and was therefore of no  particular
    interest to the authorities at that stage.

 8. The judge  looked  at  the  situation  which  the  appellant  would  be
    returning to.  Her father lives in Harare and pays for her  three  sons
    who are at boarding school there and who live with her brother  in  the
    school holidays.  She therefore has two close family members who  would
    be able to assist her.

 9. On that basis she concluded that the appellant would not be at risk  on
    return and she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had materially erred in her assessment of  credibility  and  failed  to
    apply the lower standard of proof  to  her  decision.   She  failed  to
    acknowledge that the appellant's husband was a high-profile  member  of
    the MDC and  had  not  given  adequate  reasons  for  disbelieving  the
    documentary evidence which the appellant had adduced.

11. Permission to appeal was granted by Designated Judge Shaerf on 14th May
    2018.  Judge Shaerf  noted  that  an  essential  part  of  the  judge's
    reasoning for rejecting the part of  the  appellant's  claim  that  her
    husband had a high profile was the fact that  the  employment  contract
    was not signed but attached to the  contract  was  a  letter  from  the
    Director of Finance and Administration of the MDC which had been signed
    by both parties.  He said that the judge's reasoning for giving  little
    weight to the medical evidence were in part  speculative  and  in  part
    applied UK standards  to  the  production  of  medical  documents  from
    Zimbabwe.

Submissions

12. Ms Hashmi relied on her grounds and submitted that  the  judge  had  in
    large part accepted the appellant's case.  She  relied  on  the  letter
    which accompanied the contract which had been signed  by  both  parties
    and which she said had not  been  considered  by  the  judge.   In  her
    submission  the  judge's  treatment  of  the   medical   evidence   was
    inadequate.  The fact that the appellant had  not  mentioned  that  her
    husband was travelling with other people was  immaterial,  but  in  any
    event, since she was in the UK at the time it was not  surprising  that
    she  could  not  give  a  full  account  of  what  had  happened.   The
    typographical error was irrelevant.  The appellant would be at risk  on
    return not only on her own account but by association with her husband.
     She pointed out that the appellant's return to Zimbabwe  predated  the
    attack on him.   Finally,  she  said  that  the  judge  ought  to  have
    considered the circumstances to which the appellant would be  returning
    in Zimbabwe and whether she would have access to accommodation in  line
    with the country guidance case of CM (EM country guidance;  disclosure)
    Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT 00059.

13. Mr Diwnycz defended the determination and submitted that the judge  was
    correct to raise an issue in  relation  to  the  job  offer  since  the
    address was manifestly incomplete.  Moreover, the letter from  the  MDC
    was inconsistent with the medical evidence produced.  It was  perfectly
    possible for the judge to accept that part of  the  evidence  case  was
    true and part was not, and this is what she had done.

Finding and Conclusions

14. I conclude that there is no error in this determination.

15. First, in relation to the contract of employment, it was entirely  open
    to the judge to question whether this was a genuine document given that
    it was not signed by the appellant's  husband's  employer.   Ms  Hashmi
    submitted that the evidence was that there was another copy  which  was
    kept by the employer which had been signed by both of them but, as  the
    judge observed, normal practice would be that the employee would retain
    the contract signed by the employer.

16. It is wrong to suggest that the judge did not consider the offer letter
    dated 23 July 2012.  Moreover, it is difficult to see how  this  letter
    could ever have reached the appellant since the address  given  at  the
    top is simply an area of Harare and does not  contain  either  a  house
    number or  a  street.   This  contrasts  with  the  duplicate  marriage
    register which gives a full address for  both  the  appellant  and  her
    husband.

17. The judge was entitled to place little weight on  these  documents  for
    the reasons which she gave.

18. So far as the medical evidence is concerned  it  is  indeed  discrepant
    with the letter from the MDC.  The MDC letter is dated  9  August  2018
    and states that the appellant's husband was part of a  team  which  had
    been attacked and that he had  firstly  been  att4ended  by  the  local
    clinic and then further referred  to  a  specialist  after  noting  the
    severity of the wounds.  The letter from a Dr Muskwe, dated  12  August
    2018, three days later, by contrast, makes no mention of a referral  to
    a specialist but says that the  appellant  was  managed  conservatively
    with antibiotics, anti-inflammatory drugs  and  ointments.   Dr  Muskwe
    said that he continues to be doing well on this conservative management
    and is  required  to  have  weekly  reviews  until  advised  otherwise.
    Plainly it was open to the judge to conclude that she could not rely on
    these documents as evidence of significant assault.

19. The judge, correctly, pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  returned
    voluntarily to Zimbabwe with her mother's body in  October  2017.   She
    noted the explanation that she went through the airport  with  a  large
    number of extended family members but nevertheless  the  appellant  was
    clearly of no interest to the authorities on that occasion.  So far  as
    her own association with the MDC is concerned it is apparent that  they
    have no interest in her.  The assault on her husband is  said  to  have
    taken place after October 2017 of course, but as already  demonstrated,
    there is no error in the judge's rejection of that aspect of the claim.



20. Neither is there any error in her assessment of the situation which the
    appellant and her daughter would be returning to in Zimbabwe.  She  has
    three teenage sons there who are at boarding school and who  are  being
    financed by her father.  Her brother gives them  accommodation  in  the
    school holidays.  No other family members have had any difficulties  at
    the hands of the authorities and there is no basis to conclude that the
    appellant would not be assisted by them upon her return.   In  summary,
    this is a thoughtful and comprehensive  determination  of  all  of  the
    relevant issues.

Notice of Decision

21. The original judge did not err  in  law.   Her  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 13 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


