
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/06697/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Liverpool                         |Decision & Reasons  Promulgated |
|On 9 February 2018                         |On 15 February 2018             |
|                                           |                                |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                                     RS
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:     Mr G Brown, instructed by Broudie Jackson Canter
For the respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thorne promulgated 11.4.17, dismissing  on  all  grounds
    his appeal against the  decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  dated
    8.6.16, to refuse his protection claim.

 2. Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal Judge Kelly  on
    22.8.17. However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith granted permission on 26.9.17.

 3. Thus the matter came before me on 9.2.18 as  an  appeal  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons summarised below, I found no material error of  law  in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require the decision to be set aside.

 5. In essence, the protection claim was based on the Convention reason  of
    imputed political opinion. The appellant's claim to fear the Sri Lankan
    authorities follows his forcible recruitment and training by the  LTTE.
    He subsequently surrendered to the Sri Lankan Army and was detained for
    some 6  years,  during  which  he  was  beaten  and  tortured.  He  was
    eventually released through the payment of a bribe by  his  uncle,  who
    also arranged for his exit from the UK and journey to the  UK.  All  of
    this was accepted by the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. However, for the reasons set out in  the  decision,  and  applying  the
    relevant case law, Judge Thorne did not accept that the  appellant  was
    or would be on return  of  any  adverse  interest  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Smith rejected the main grounds
    of appeal, and restricted permission to the first ground only,  namely,
    "having regard to the positive findings on credibility and the  content
    of the medical evidence, that  the  judge  has  failed  to  assess  the
    article 3 risk of suicide in line with the guidance in  J  and  Y  (Sri
    Lanka). The impact of returning an appellant to a  country  of  origin,
    where he has suffered catastrophic trauma is  highly  relevant  to  the
    assessment of article 3. Further the medical opinion was  that  despite
    the appellant's denial of suicide ideation, the expert evidence  of  Dr
    Nadim was that there was a significant level of risk..."

 8. It was not clear to Judge Smith  when  granting  permission  to  appeal
    whether any reliance was placed on the medical report in support  of  a
    submission that there is a real risk that article 3 would  be  breached
    on return by reason of the appellant's mental health condition and  the
    risk of suicide. It was observed that there was no reference to such  a
    submission in the decision and no skeleton  argument.  The  appellant's
    witness statement refers to this report  only  in  the  context  of  it
    supporting his  account  of  previous  ill-treatment.  However,  having
    considered the content of the medical report, Judge Smith considered it
    "just arguable" that the judge  may  have  erred  in  failing  to  take
    account of what is said in particular about the risk of suicide. It was
    on that limited basis that permission was granted.

 9. Mr Brown's oral submission to the Upper Tribunal  was  that  given  the
    appellant went through the traumatic experience of 6  years'  detention
    during which he was tortured and beaten, all of which was  accepted  by
    the judge, the Tribunal should have  considered  the  risk  of  suicide
    and/or  self-harm  on  return  to  the  place  where  those   traumatic
    experiences took place.

10. Mr Brown took me to the relevant parts of the medical report, including
    those at [118]-[124], [126], and in particular at [153],  where  it  is
    noted that notwithstanding  that  the  appellant  denies  any  suicidal
    intent, the experts opinion is that there is  a  significant  level  of
    risk on return: "Although Mr S denies current suicidal intent,  due  to
    the presence of multiple  and  enduring  recognized  risk  factors  for
    suicide and self-harm, it is my opinion that  there  is  a  significant
    level of risk. He has some protective factors currently  which  include
    his access to Specialist Psychological Therapy."

11. Mr Brown agreed that there was no skeleton argument. However,  he  told
    me that he did raise the risk on return issue on medical  grounds,  and
    further complained that if the judge had  indicated  his  thinking,  he
    could have addressed this issue further in his  submissions.  Mr  Brown
    agreed that he was not purporting to be a witness  in  the  proceedings
    before me  and  acknowledged  that  I  cannot  take  his  assertion  as
    evidence.

12. I took the opportunity  to  read  the  judge's  handwritten  record  of
    proceedings and  in  particular  the  oral  submissions.  There  is  no
    reference in that record to any submission on a risk  on  return  under
    article 3 or other medical grounds. The whole thrust of the submissions
    appears to be as to the adverse interest of the Sri Lankan authorities.
    The judge noted in the record Mr Brown's reference to [118]  to  [124],
    and [126] of the report, but it is clear from the notes that the  focus
    was on  how  the  medical  evidence  supported  the  factual  claim  of
    mistreatment during the period of detention in Sri Lanka and  the  risk
    on return arising from adverse interest of the Sri Lankan  authorities.
    In particular, it is significant  that  there  is  no  mention  in  the
    judge's record  of  any  reliance  on  [153]  of  the  report.  In  the
    circumstances, it is understandable that there is no reference to  this
    issue in the body of the decision.

13. In granting permission Judge Smith considered it "just  arguable"  that
    Judge Thorne may have erred in failing to take account of the  risk  of
    suicide, dealt with this issue. However, with all  due  respect  to  Mr
    Brown, I cannot be satisfied on the admissible evidence before me  that
    this issue was raised by the appellant in the appeal.

14. In any event, at [153] the expert noted the appellant's denial  of  any
    current suicidal intent. Taking that into account,  the  opinion  that,
    notwithstanding the appellant's own denial,  there  is  a  "significant
    level of risk," is insufficient and far too vague and  unspecific,  and
    otherwise unsupported, to justify a finding of a real risk on return on
    this ground. Further, the following  sentence  in  [153]  suggests  the
    existence of  protective  factors  including  access  to  psychological
    therapy. I can find no record of any submission or evidence advanced to
    suggest that if he needed it, the appellant would not be able to access
    appropriate medical or psychiatric treatment in Sri  Lanka.  As  stated
    above, it is clear that the whole thrust of the appellant's case was to
    rely on the medical evidence as a means of support of  the  account  of
    ill-treatment.

15. The attempt to raise this particular claim at this stage  in  order  to
    allow the appeal is, frankly, too little too late,  with  insufficient,
    if not inadequate, evidence in support. I am satisfied that even  if  I
    had found an error of law requiring the decision to be  set  aside  and
    remade, I would have had no hesitation  in  remaking  the  decision  by
    dismissing the appeal, including on this ground under article  3  ECHR,
    applying the N high  threshold.  However,  it  would  be  open  to  the
    appellant to make further submissions to the Secretary of State on this
    issue, submitting appropriate evidence in support.



Decision

16. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did make an order pursuant to rule 13(1) of the Tribunal  Procedure
Rules 2014. Given the circumstances, I continue the anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.  Breach  of  this
direction may lead to proceedings for contempt of court.

Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable.
     [pic]
     Signed
         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup
