
                                    [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/06745/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2017                   |On 23 November 2017                  |
|Prepared on 22 November 2017          |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    D. G
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iraq who entered the  UK  illegally.  He
      made an application for protection on 8 January 2016 after arrest, and
      the Respondent refused that protection application on  23  June  2016.
      The Appellant's appeal to the First tier Tribunal ["FtT"] against that
      decision was heard on 14 February 2017, and it was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds, in a decision promulgated on 16 February 2017 by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Fox.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  30
      August 2017 by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds.
   3. The Respondent filed a Rule 24  Notice  dated  14  September  2017  in
      relation to the grant of permission, opposing it.  Neither  party  has
      made formal application to adduce further evidence.  Thus  the  matter
      comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   4.  Ground  one  complains  that  the  Judge  made  findings  that   were
      inconsistent. Having found that the interview was conducted at the end
      of the day, and by telephone, it is asserted that it was not  open  to
      the Judge to reject the Appellant's evidence that he had misunderstood
      the question about past arrest, which had  led  to  the  answer  being
      recorded that  the  respondent  had  asserted  was  inconsistent  with
      subsequent evidence. There  is  no  merit  in  this  complaint  in  my
      judgement, it is a simple disagreement with the  Judge's  analysis  of
      the weight that could be given to the evidence. The finding  made  was
      open to him, and it was adequately reasoned.
   5. The Judge appears in any event to have accepted that the Appellant was
      at risk from ISIS in his home area. Grounds two, three, four and  five
      are complaints that the Judge failed to properly apply the  applicable
      country guidance to the evidence before him, in relation to  both  the
      asylum, Article 3  and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  of  appeal.
      Before me it was acknowledged that those three grounds of  appeal  had
      been conflated in the decision.
   6. After some discussion, it became common  ground  between  the  parties
      that the Judge had either failed to identify whether he  accepted  the
      claim as to the  location  of  the  Appellant's  "home  area",  and/or
      whether this was  a  "contested  area",  or,  his  findings  in  these
      respects were unsustainable  in  the  light  of  the  current  country
      guidance.  The  Appellant  had  in  fact  identified  consistently  at
      interview a village in the province of Kirkuk as his  home;  which  if
      true led to certain conclusions being drawn pursuant  to  the  country
      guidance issued by the Upper Tribunal in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG
      [2015] UKUT 544, (as amended and confirmed by the Court of  Appeal  in
      AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944).  The  decision  did  not  distinguish
      between Kirkuk city and the province, but concluded simply that return
      to Kirkuk was feasible, without any adequate analysis of  whether  the
      Appellant would be returning to the same position of a  risk  of  harm
      from which the Judge appears to have accepted he had fled.  There  was
      also no adequate analysis of how the Appellant was to be  expected  to
      travel from Baghdad airport as the point of return to Iraq to his home
      in safety. The province of Kirkuk was acknowledged to be a  "contested
      area" for the purposes of humanitarian protection in AA, and the Judge
      could not go behind that without  clear  evidence  of  a  durable  and
      significant change in circumstances.
   7. Before me it was common ground that the Appellant's case had been that
      he had in the past  been  issued  lawfully  with  a  legitimate  Iraqi
      passport, but had since lost [Q8]. One might  have  thought  therefore
      that this was therefore an individual who should be able  to  approach
      the Iraqi Embassy in London for a replacement passport, since he ought
      to be able to supply the fingerprints and other  biographical  details
      that would allow that to occur by reference to the centralised records
      of the passport office, without the need for recourse to  the  "family
      book" in Iraq of which he had denied knowledge. In turn,  that  begged
      the question of whether he could gain the issue of a CSID.
   8. The analysis of the evidence needed to be undertaken in the  light  of
      the guidance to be found in AA and BA (returns  to  Baghdad)  Iraq  CG
      [2017] UKUT 18, and since the Appellant had been found to be  a  Sunni
      Kurd, that analysis needed to focus upon his ability  to  relocate  to
      either Baghdad, or, to the KRG to avoid his  risk  of  persecution  or
      breach of his Article 3 rights. In the event the Judge was required to
      consider  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal  argument   that   the
      Appellant could avoid the internal armed conflict by relocation to the
      KRG, then that also required a focus upon the issue identified  in  AA
      as confirmed by the Court of Appeal;
          Whether K, if returned to Baghdad, can reasonably be  expected  to
              avoid  any  potential  undue  harshness  in  that   city   by
              travelling to the IKR, will be fact sensitive; and is  likely
              to involve an assessment of (a) the  practicality  of  travel
              from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Erbil by  air):  (b)  the
              likelihood of K's securing employment in the  IKR;  and,  (c)
              the availability of assistance from family and friends in the
              IKR.
   9. It is conceded on behalf of the Respondent before me that the decision
      fails to demonstrate that the evidence was adequately analysed in  the
      light of the guidance to be found in AA and BA. As such it is conceded
      that the only fair course is to remit the appeal for rehearing with no
      findings of fact preserved, beyond the acceptance that  the  Appellant
      is a Sunni Kurd from the province of Kirkuk who fled that  area  as  a
      result of a well founded fear of persecution at the hands of ISIS.
  10. In the circumstances the decision discloses a material  error  of  law
      that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision must
      in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  I  have  in  these
      circumstances considered with the parties whether or not to remit  the
      appeal to the First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or whether  to
      proceed to remake it in the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where  it
      would  appear  that  the  relevant  evidence  has  not  properly  been
      considered by the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law
      has been to deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his  case  to
      be properly considered by the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of
      the Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover  the  extent  of
      the judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard  to  the
      over-riding objective, it is appropriate that  the  appeal  should  be
      remitted to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the  Practice
      Statement of 25 September 2012.
  11. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of  the  parties  I
      make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
        for rehearing.
    ii) The findings of fact that the Appellant is a Sunni  Kurd  from  the
        province of Kirkuk who fled that area as a result of a well founded
        fear of persecution at the hands of ISIS are preserved.
   iii) The remitted appeal is not to be listed before Judge Fox.
    iv) A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required for  the  hearing  of  the
        appeal.
     v) There is presently anticipated to be the  Appellant  and  no  other
        witness, and the time  estimate  is  as  a  result,  3  hours.  The
        Appellant proposes to rely upon  expert  evidence  to  address  the
        current position in the province of Kirkuk, and the current ability
        of ethnic Kurds who did not originate from the  KRG  to  enter  and
        settle in the KRG. Dr George is instructed to prepare such a report
        which will be available for service by the end of January 2018.
    vi) The appeal is to be listed at the North Shields hearing  centre  on
        the first available date after 7 February 2018.
   vii) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform e  Tribunal  immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
  viii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

  12. The decision promulgated on 16 February 2017 discloses an error of law
      that requires it to be set aside, and the appeal is  remitted  to  the
      First Tier Tribunal for rehearing with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 22 November 2017


