
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/06749/2017
     PA/06750/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 21 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Appellants
                                      v

                                     c m
                                     t M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Mr Misra, Crown solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Respondents, to whom I shall refer as the Claimants, are  nationals
    of Zimbabwe born respectively on 24 August  1997  and  17  March  2001.
    They applied for entry clearance as visitors on 27 March 2012 and their
    applications were refused but allowed on  appeal.  The  Claimants  then
    arrived in the United Kingdom as visitors in April 2013.

 2. They subsequently applied for leave to remain as  dependants  of  their
    mother who is a naturalised British citizen but these applications were
    refused and they were  served  with  documents  as  overstayers  on  24
    November 2015. The Claimants claimed asylum on 28 April 2016 and  their
    applications were refused on 10 July 2017.  They appealed against  that
    decision and their appeals came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal
    Gurung-Thapa for hearing on 8 November 2017.

 3. In a decision and reasons promulgated on  5  December  2017  the  judge
    dismissed the asylum appeals but allowed the  appeals  with  regard  to
    Article 8 human rights outside the Immigration Rules.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, by the Secretary of State  on
    the basis that the judge had erred materially in law  in  allowing  the
    appeals without having  had  regard  to  the  public  interest  factors
    outlined in Section 117B of the NIAA 2002.  It was asserted that  given
    the judge's credibility findings in respect of  the  Claimants'  asylum
    claim and inconsistencies between their mother's account  and  evidence
    in her own asylum appeal, there were no  exceptional  circumstances  to
    justify a grant of leave outside the Rules and that the  case  did  not
    show that there were family ties above and beyond  normal  family  ties
    between the Claimants and their younger siblings and mother.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    in a decision dated 5 January 2018 on the basis that there was merit in
    the grounds of appeal and it was arguable that the judge  had  made  an
    error of law in her assessment of  Article  8  and  in  particular  her
    consideration of the public interest.

     Hearing

 6. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, I raised at the  outset  with
    Mr  Tan  that  the  grounds  of  appeal  essentially  appeared  to   be
    misconceived in that it was clear from [79]  through  to  [84]  of  her
    decision that the judge had in fact made reference to Section  117B  of
    the NIAA 2002 and related case law and had taken into consideration the
    statutory public interest considerations, which Mr Tan accepted.

 7. Mr Tan sought  instead  to  show  that  the  judge  had  erred  in  her
    application of those principles to the facts of the case  in  light  of
    the fact that the asylum  claims  had  been  rejected  along  with  the
    credibility of those claims and that the  Claimants  had,  in  essence,
    circumvented immigration control by applying for visit  visas  with  no
    intention to return and had overstayed  rather  than  apply  for  entry
    clearance  in  the  proper  manner  and  that  this  was  material   to
    consideration of the public interest.  However, these were not  matters
    raised in the grounds of appeal and thus his submissions  fell  outwith
    the remit of the grant of permission.

 8. In his submissions, Mr Misra agreed with the point raised by the  Upper
    Tribunal in that there was clear and direct  reference  to  the  public
    interest considerations  at  [79]  to  [85]  and  the  judge  had  made
    reference to the substance of those considerations, including the  fact
    that the Claimants  speak  English  and  she  addressed  the  issue  of
    financial independence.

 9. Mr Misra submitted the judge went into  quite  some  depth,  considered
    each point individually in turn and the relevant case law  in  relation
    to the subsistence of family life.  The judge had heard  oral  evidence
    and the unique circumstances in play, from which she  was  entitled  to
    find it would not be proportionate in this particular family set up for
    the Claimants to be removed and that this would be contrary to  Article
    8 family life.

10. The judge heard evidence as to the role of the Claimants with regard to
    their younger siblings particularly the oldest  Claimant  who,  despite
    having moved out due to a lack of space, remained living less than  one
    kilometre away and effectively took almost  a  father  figure  role  in
    relation to caring for the younger siblings. This is due  to  the  fact
    that his mother and  the  three  younger  siblings,  all  of  whom  are
    British, require him to assist as she is a  single  mother  and  he  is
    responsible for ensuring the chores are done and  their  homework.   It
    was clear that the British citizen siblings look up to  him  and  there
    was no distinction between sibling and half-sibling.  He  submitted  it
    was open to the judge to reach the findings and conclusions she did but
    it was an exceptional case and there were more  than  normal  emotional
    ties between the Claimants, their mother and younger siblings.

11. I announced my decision at the hearing.  I now provide my reasons.

     Findings

12. I find no material error of law in the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Gurung-Thapa and that the grounds of appeal are misconceived.  It
    is clear, even from a superficial reading of the judge's decision, that
    she did indeed take full account of the public interest  considerations
    beginning at [79] where she states

         "As part of  an  Article  8  assessment  I  have  to  consider  the
         statutory  provisions  found  in  Part  5A  of   the   Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

         80.  In considering the public interest  question  Section  117A(2)
             states that the Tribunal must in particular have regard (a) in
             all cases to the considerations listed in Section  117B.   ...
             Sub-Section 3 provides that  'the  public  interest  question'
             means a question of whether an interference  with  a  person's
             right to respect for private  and  family  life  is  justified
             under Article 8(2).

         81.  I have had regard to Section 117B which outlines a  number  of
             factors that the Tribunal must consider when assessing whether
             an interference with a person's right to respect  for  private
             and  family  life  is  justified   and   proportionate.    The
             maintenance of an effective system of immigration  control  is
             in the public interest."

13. The judge then at [82] referred to the decision in AM  (s.117B)  Malawi
    [2015] UKUT 0260 (IAC) and the  issue  of  the  precarious  immigration
    status of the Claimants and at [83] to the decision  in  Forman  [2015]
    UKUT 00412 (IAC).  The Judge went on to make the following findings:

         "84. It is in the public interest that a person who seeks to remain
             here is  financially  independent.   The  first  Appellant  is
             supported through NASS.  The second Appellant is supported  by
             his mother.  The  Appellants  speak  English  but  this  is  a
             neutral factor that does not weigh in favour of them remaining
             in the UK.  I accept that the  Appellant's  private  life  was
             formed  whilst  their  immigration  status   was   precarious.
             However I find that the appeals turn on their family life with
             their mother and siblings.

         85.  ... while the first Appellant may  be  living  on  his  own  I
             accept he is playing a principal role  in  the  lives  of  his
             younger siblings and I take note of the fact he moved from his
             mother's current address in November 2016.  Prior to the  move
             he had also resided at the family home.

         86.  The reasons I come to the conclusion that it is in the  second
             Appellant's best  interest  to  remain  with  his  mother  are
             because he has re-established a close bond with his mother and
             has established a close bond with his half-siblings and accept
             that they make no distinction that they are half-siblings  the
             second Appellant is still 16 years old."

14. The Judge then concluded that it  would  be  disproportionate  for  the
    Claimants to be removed from the United Kingdom in light  of  the  fact
    that they have formed family life bonds with their younger siblings and
    their mother and bearing in mind the second appellant was  a  minor  at
    all material times.

15. Whilst it may be that  the  reasons  provided  by  the  judge  and  her
    assessment of the public interest considerations are not perfect,  this
    was not a point taken in the grounds of appeal, which instead  asserted
    bluntly that the Judge has  entirely  failed  to  look  at  the  public
    interest considerations at all, which is palpably not the case.

16. The only other possible point that can be gleaned from the  grounds  of
    appeal is  that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  whether  there  were
    exceptional circumstances justifying consideration of Article 8 at all,
    in light of her wholesale rejection of the  Claimants'  asylum  appeal.
    However that aspect of  the  grounds  of  appeal  fails  to  take  into
    consideration the fact that when  considering  Article  8  outside  the
    Rules the judge at  [64] expressly found  that  there  were  compelling
    circumstances justifying such consideration given the best interests of
    the minor child i.e. the second Appellant were involved.

17. In these circumstances I find no material error of law in the  decision
    of First-tier Tribunal Judge Gurung-Thapa, with  the  effect  that  her
    decision is upheld.

Notice of Decision

The appeal by the Secretary of State  is  dismissed.  The  decision  of  the
First tier Tribunal allowing the Claimants' appeal on human rights  (Article
8) grounds is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 14 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

