
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/06555/2017
     DA/00082/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 18 December 2017                   |On 07 February 2018                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT

                                   Between

                                     MT
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr E Fripp, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 1. This is an appeal against the decision promulgated on 26  October  2017
    of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pears.  The   decision   refused   the
    appellant's appeal against deportation under the Immigration  (European
    Economic Area) Regulations 2006 ("the EEA Regulations") and his  appeal
    on protection and human rights grounds.

 2. The background is that the appellant was born in 1998  in  Gambia.   He
    arrived in the UK in 2010 at the age of 11 to join his mother  who  was
    in the UK on a non-EEA family member resident card, granted to  her  in
    2010.  When the appellant's mother was granted  a  permanent  residence
    card in 2012, the appellant was also  recognised  as  having  permanent
    residence under EEA law.

 3. On 22 February 2013 the appellant was  convicted  of  using  disorderly
    behaviour. He offended again whilst a minor on a  number  of  occasions
    including assault on a constable, theft, possessing a knife  or  bladed
    article in a public place and resisting or obstructing a constable.  On
    15 April 2014 he was convicted of failing to comply  with  a  detention
    and training order.

 4. On 2 July 2014 the appellant was convicted of robbery and possessing  a
    knife in a public place and was sentenced  to  30  months  in  a  Young
    Offenders' Institution.  The offence was committed while the  appellant
    was on bail.

 5. On 2 August 2016 the respondent served the appellant with a  notice  of
    his liability to deportation.  That decision was issued on the basis of
    the appellant's criminality, including both the index offence  and  the
    earlier offences and that since his conviction in July 2014 he had been
    recalled to prison on two occasions.  Those recalls were on  7  October
    2015 and 3 March 2016 for breaching his licence.

 6. Further, on 16 August 2016 the appellant was again convicted,  on  this
    occasion of common  assault  and  he  was  sentenced  to  four  months'
    detention and a training order.  That offence was committed when he was
    on a period of recall at Feltham Young Offenders' institute.

 7. On 20  December  2016  the  respondent  served  the  appellant  with  a
    deportation decision.  The  appellant  appealed  that  decision  on  10
    February 2017.

 8. After lodging that appeal, the appellant claimed  asylum  on  17  March
    2017. The asylum claim was made on the basis  of  the  appellant  being
    bisexual. The asylum claim was refused on 3 July 2017.   The  appellant
    also appealed that decision on 3 July 2017.

 9. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears  on  19  October
    2017.  In summary, the First-tier Tribunal accepted that the  appellant
    had permanent residence under EEA law and so the relevant  test  to  be
    applied was  whether  there  were  serious  grounds  of  public  policy
    justifying  the  appellant's  expulsion.   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant's offending history and significant risk of  reoffending  met
    that test. The judge also found  that  it  was  proportionate  for  the
    appellant to be returned to Gambia in line  with  EEA  legislation  and
    that return would not be  an  interference  with  his  Article  8  ECHR
    rights. The judge did not accept the  appellant's  claim  that  he  was
    bisexual and therefore rejected the protection claim.

10. The grounds of appeal set out four  main  grounds  of  challenge.   The
    first ground states that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in law  in
    finding that the appellant posed the genuine, present and serious level
    of threat to society as someone who had permanent residence. The second
    ground argued that the First-tier Tribunal failed to address  correctly
    the  issue  of  rehabilitation.  The  third   ground   challenged   the
    rationality of the proportionality assessment under  Regulation  21  of
    the EEA Regulations. The fourth ground maintained that the judge  erred
    in the credibility assessment in the asylum claim by  placing  improper
    adverse weight on the lateness of the claim.

11. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pears set out the legislation  and  case  law
    relevant to the "genuine, present and sufficiently  serious  threat  to
    society" and "serious grounds of public policy" tests at [4]-[11]. This
    included specific reference to Straszewski v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ  1245
    at [10] and at [11] and to the principle that the criminal  convictions
    alone cannot constitute grounds  for  deportation.  At  [35]-[48],  the
    judge set out the professional evidence concerning the appellant's risk
    of reoffending, including an ASSET report and report from a  Consultant
    Forensic Psychiatrist.

12. Having set out those matters, the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    on whether the appellant  here  represented  a  "genuine,  present  and
    sufficiently serious threat to society" and whether there were "serious
    grounds of public policy justifying his expulsion" are at [72]-[79]:

         "72. I accept that the Appellant is young and his offences occurred
             when he was a minor.  I also accept that he has  comprehension
             and communication difficulties.   His  family  life  has  been
             troubled and there has been less  support  for  him  from  the
             family than perhaps there should have been.

         73.  I also accept that serious as his offences may be  it  is  not
             difficult to imagine offending of a much  more  serious  kind.
             However having considered the circumstances of this  Appellant
             he has  committed  a  series  of  offences  involving  assault
             against members of the public and two where offences have been
             committed  against  or  involving  police  officers.   He  has
             committed an offence when on bail and when in  detention.   He
             has been recalled to  detention  on  two  occasions.   He  has
             denied to the doctor that he was responsible for some offences
             and as  the  ASSET  report  remarks  there  is  escalation  in
             seriousness and that he expresses concerning attitudes towards
             offending such as lack of insight into the seriousness of  his
             behaviour, not taking responsibility for  it  and  tending  to
             justify and minimise the violence.  It  reports  that  he  has
             expressed no remorse and he 'perceives a sense  of  notoriety,
             and status through offending behaviour'.  The ASSET report  is
             clear about the high  risk  he  presents  of  reoffending  and
             despite the Appellant's Counsel's assertion that the  doctor's
             report shows a much lower risk the doctor concludes that  this
             is only the case if there is a  period  of  stability  in  his
             personal and social life and with successful interventions  to
             address  a  number  of  different  issues  but  he  offers  no
             timeframes or indications of the  prospect  of  success.   Why
             should a period of personal and social  stability  appear  and
             what interventions and what are the prospects of the Appellant
             engaging?  The reality  is  that  he  agrees  with  the  ASSET
             assessment of his current risk saying that  the  Appellant  is
             emotionally unstable and has antisocial personality traits and
             that there are 'significant risk factors for future  offending
             behaviour'.  He says that 'in terms of risk  prediction,  past
             behaviour is usually the best predictor  of  future  behaviour
             but there are also  a  number  of  other  risk  factors  which
             increase the level of risk, namely  denial  and  minimisation,
             low victim empathy and disregard for social norms and criminal
             justice sanctions and what is concerning about the Appellant's
             prognosis is the recurrent nature of antisocial behaviour with
             multiple convictions starting from an early age.

         74.  I conclude that the  relevant  personal  conduct  is  (1)  the
             behaviour that led to the convictions, (2) the breach of rules
             and terms relating to punishment imposed  and  (3)  'disregard
             for external restrictions around his behaviour' as it  is  put
             in the ASSET report.

         75.  The deportation is clearly based exclusively on  the  personal
             conduct  of  the  Appellant  and  not  just  the   convictions
             themselves.

         76.  The Appellant will in my considered  view  based  on  the  two
             reports commit further serious offences against the person  as
             well as other offences.

         77.  I have considered the issue of rehabilitation.  The  Appellant
             in his attitude to his previous offences as  set  out  in  the
             ASSET  report  has  shown  none  of   the   requirements   for
             rehabilitation.  Neither of the experts expressly address  the
             issue and there is no evidence  that  he  has  undertaken  any
             rehabilitative work.  His previous  social  and  family  links
             fail to prevent him from offending on repeated  occasions  and
             there is no evidence of the Appellant being willing to work to
             rehabilitate himself.  He might express the  correct  formulas
             to me as he faces deportation but there is no evidence that he
             would in fact engage.  In any event it is not clear to me that
             rehabilitation needs to take place in the UK.

         78.  I find that  the  Respondent  has  shown  on  the  balance  of
             probabilities that the Appellant represents a genuine, present
             and sufficiently serious  threat  to  society  and  there  are
             serious grounds of public policy  justifying  the  Appellant's
             expulsion.

         79.  I accept that the Appellant has lived in the UK since 2010 and
             has only just ceased to be a minor.  However  his  convictions
             date back several years and start less than three years  after
             his arrival.  He is fit and healthy.  I  accept  that  he  has
             family in the UK but it  seems  limited  in  relation  to  its
             connection with him.  He has not lived  with  his  family  for
             sometime although his sister seems to  be  prepared  to  house
             him.  His mother seems to  be  in  Senegal  according  to  the
             doctor's report but she has not provided a statement or played
             any part in these proceedings.  He has friends in the UK.  His
             road to employability will not be straightforward and some  of
             his hopes such  as  joining  the  army  seem  unrealistic  and
             therefore it is not likely that he will be economically  self-
             reliant.  He was in Gambia until 2010 and returned for a visit
             in 2012, he speaks Wolof  but  he  may  have  difficulties  in
             reading and writing it.  There has  to  be  a  balance  struck
             between the grounds of public  policy  and  the  consideration
             such  as  those  set  out  in  Regulation  21(6)  of  the  EEA
             Regulations.  I find that the deportation is  appropriate  and
             necessary for the attainment of the  public  policy  objective
             sought  and  does  not  impose  an  excessive  burden  on  the
             Appellant.  I conclude that the public policy grounds outweigh
             the  other  considerations  and  the  decision  to  deport  is
             proportionate."

13. The appellant sought to rely on Straszewski to challenge  the  findings
    of the First-tier Tribunal on his representing  a  "serious"  risk.  Mr
    Straszewski, who also had permanent residence, had  committed  offences
    of unlawful wounding and two counts of robbery and  received  sentences
    of 15 months' and 42 months' imprisonment. The Court  of  Appeal  found
    that those offences in themselves were not  capable  amounting  to  the
    "serious" level of  threat,  the  question  of  deterrence  and  public
    revulsion normally playing  no  part  in  the  assessment.  Where  this
    appellant's offences were less serious, it was argued,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  erred  in  finding  that  he  was  a  genuine,  present   and
    sufficiently serious threat.

14. The difficulty for this appellant is that the First-tier Tribunal  here
    did not rely on the past offending as the sole or even principle  basis
    for the finding that he was a "serious" threat.  The  consideration  at
    [73] shows that the First-tier Tribunal found that  the  appellant  had
    not expressed responsibility for his actions and that the offending had
    escalated. Judge Pears goes on to conclude, based on the  ASSET  report
    and the psychiatric report, that where there was little  likelihood  of
    the stability that would be required for the  risk  of  reoffending  to
    diminish, it remained significant and  met  the  threshold.  The  judge
    refers to the correct approach for assessing the "personal  conduct  of
    the Appellant and not just the convictions  themselves"  at  [75].  The
    assessment  here  of  whether  there  was  a   genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious threat is entirely  in  line  with  the  ratio  of
    Straszewski in which the Court of Appeal  indicates  clearly  at  [17],
    [20] and [23] that future conduct and risk of reoffending are  critical
    aspects  of  the  assessment  of  whether  a  "genuine,   present   and
    sufficiently serious" threat.

15. The second ground challenges the approach in [77] to  the  question  of
    rehabilitation and has no merit.  The First-tier Tribunal  did  compare
    the prospects for rehabilitation in the UK and Gambia and the  evidence
    here entitled him to find that they were negligible in either country.

16. The third ground is a challenge to the EEA proportionality  assessment.
    It  is  argued  that  the  FTTJ  mentioned  to  but  failed  to   weigh
    appropriately the appellant's learning difficulty into account. That is
    not arguable where the judge indicated that this factor was taken  into
    account throughout the decision.  He  noted  the  appellant's  learning
    disability at [38], stating "I bear that out in assessing his  evidence
    as well as in the proportionality exercises". A further  indication  of
    the attention given to this feature is at [43] of  the  decision  where
    the First-tier Tribunal sets out  the  evidence  from  the  psychiatric
    report on the appellant's learning disability and states "I  bear  that
    in mind during this decision". At [72] he refers again to having  taken
    this aspect of the appellant's profile into account.  The  difficulties
    with reading and writing are taken  into  account  expressly  at  [79].
    This ground also argues that  it  was  irrational  or  unreasonable  to
    conclude  that  the  appellant  was  not  likely  to   be   financially
    independent. Given his history and  risk  of  reoffending  this  was  a
    conclusion open to the judge, however, the grounds really only  seeking
    to reargue the point. It is  unarguable  that  the  judge  applied  the
    correct test in the  proportionality  assessment,  deciding  where  the
    balance lay between public policy  and  the  relevant  aspects  of  the
    appellants' profile; see [79].

17. The fourth ground of appeal states that the judge acted  unlawfully  in
    placing adverse weight on the late disclosure of the appellant's  claim
    to be bisexual.  Paragraph 24 of the grounds also states that the judge
    failed to take into account the appellant's  young  age  as  a  way  of
    explaining his reticence of disclosing his bisexuality.  The  case  law
    relied on by the appellant in the grounds at paragraphs 22  and  23  of
    the grounds, ABC v Staatsscecretaris van Veilgheid en Justitie C-148/13
    to C-150/13, does not preclude a delay in claiming as being a  relevant
    factor at all, however, but calls for a sensitivity  to  this  being  a
    potentially more likely credible explanation in the case of  sexuality.
    Further, the judge here does not make an  adverse  credibility  finding
    simply because of the late  claim.  The  late  disclosure  was  in  the
    context of the appellant claiming asylum in March 2017  only  two  days
    prior to his scheduled removal to Gambia.  This was after the appellant
    was informed in August 2016 that he was going to be removed and  served
    with a s.120 Notice specifically asking him to  provide  any  basis  of
    stay, in response to which he mentioned nothing  about  his  sexuality.
    Secondly, only a month prior to the asylum claim  he  had  referred  to
    having been in a relationship with a woman and stated that he  was  not
    in a relationship with a man.  Further, the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    sets out at [50]-[63]  the  manifestly  inconsistent  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his witness, the  evidence  including  statements  as  to
    being in a relationship that had lasted four  years  but  also  to  not
    being in a relationship.  It is therefore my  conclusion  that  in  the
    context of all of evidence and findings here, it was open to the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge to draw an adverse inference from the late claim.

18. For these reasons I did not find that the grounds of  appeal  showed  a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  which
    shall stand.

Notice of Decision

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  a  material
    error on a point of law and shall stand.

Signed: [pic]                                    Date: 5 February 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt





