











UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA069052016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House             |Decision and Reasons Promulgated         |
|On: 6 July 2017                   |On: 14 July 2017                         |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer

                                   Between


                                 C N L A S A
                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent
Representation

For the Appellant:     Ms D Revill, counsel, instructed by MTC & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.  This  direction
      applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply
      with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

   2. The appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka,  born  on  [  ]  1987.  She
      appeals  with  permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal dismissing her asylum and human rights appeal in  a  decision
      promulgated on 19 April 2017.

   3. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Brunnen
      found that it was arguable that the Judge misapprehended the  date  of
      the psychiatric examination, and thus failed to  appreciate  that  the
      resulting diagnosis was recent and accordingly  failed  to  take  into
      account  her  psychiatric  condition  when  making  his  findings;  by
      treating the appellant's mother as  complicit  in  procuring  a  false
      arrest warrant and discounting her evidence without taking account  of
      her evidence that she was ignorant of the fact that  the  warrant  was
      false; by failing to consider  the  appellant's  explanation  for  the
      delay in claiming asylum, and by treating her departure from Sri Lanka
      using her own passport as an indication that she was not  of  interest
      to the authorities there without considering  the  evidence  that  her
      departure was assisted by payment of a bribe.

   4. Ms Revill, who represented the appellant at  the  hearing  before  the
      First-tier Tribunal, adopted her grounds seeking permission to appeal.
      She noted at the outset that the respondent  in  her  Rule  24  notice
      accepted that the Judge misapprehended the  date  of  the  psychiatric
      report, and incorrectly found that the appellant was under no risk for
      leaving the airport. That is contrary to the Country Guidance.  It was
      however not accepted as constituting a material error in the  Rule  24
      response.

   5. She submitted that the Judge mistakenly believed that the  psychiatric
      examination took place on 15 December  2015  and  was  followed  by  a
      report dated 31 October 2016. However, the examination  in  fact  took
      place on 29 October  2016.  The  Judge  confused  the  date  when  the
      examination took place  with  the  date  of  the  appellant's  initial
      contact and screening interview with the respondent.

   6. The Judge stated that he was willing to accept that  she  did  exhibit
      symptoms of PTSD in 2015, but that there was no evidence that  she  is
      not recovering or that she is still  exhibiting  signs  of  PTSD  now.
      However, had the Judge appreciated that  the  examination  and  report
      dated from late October 2016, and not a year earlier,  he  might  have
      accepted that the appellant was displaying  PTSD  symptoms  relatively
      recently, approximately four months before the hearing  and  that  she
      may continue to do so. That in turn affected  his  assessment  of  her
      accounts during her interview and evidence, since he would  have  been
      obliged to consider whether any perceived vagueness  or  inconsistency
      might be explained by her mental health problems.

   7. Moreover, the Judge failed to consider  that  the  appellant  and  her
      mother had always acted in good faith in  relation  to  the  purported
      arrest warrant. She believed that she had  paid  for  a  copy  of  the
      genuine document and not a forgery. The Judge failed to consider  this
      account or give reasons for rejecting it. He in fact assumed that  the
      appellant's mother had knowingly obtained false documents  to  support
      the appeal. He stated that she had been  obviously  complicit  in  the
      production of the documents and is willing and  able  to  support  the
      appellant  even  to  the  extent   of   obtaining   false   documents.
      Accordingly, he found that there is no credible evidence that  she  is
      wanted by the Sri Lankan authorities now.

   8. This error as to the content of the appellant's evidence  is  material
      and it appears to be the  basis  upon  which  the  Judge  rejects  the
      mother's written evidence that she had been told in 2011 of a  warrant
      in the appellant's name and that the police had come in search of  her
      every year since then. If, however, the  appellant's  mother  was  not
      complicit in supplying the false document there was then no reason  to
      regard her evidence as tainted.

   9. Ms Revill submitted that the Judge had failed to have  regard  to  the
      country guidance when he stated at [28] that the appellant was able to
      leave Sri Lanka using her own passport. The Judge found that  this  is
      indicative that she was not on a stop list.

  10. She referred  to the decision  in  GJ  and  Others  (Post  Civil  War:
      Returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT  0031  (IAC)  where  the  Tribunal
      accepted the evidence of the expert that it was  possible  for  wanted
      persons to pass safely through Colombo airport on payment of a  bribe.
      In MM (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 36 the  respondent  accepted,
      and the Court of Appeal found, that in the  light  of  GJ,  it  was  a
      material error of law for a Judge to conclude that the appellant would
      not have been able to depart from the airport  unnoticed  if  the  Sri
      Lankan authorities had an interest in him.

  11. The evidence of the appellant's mother was that the man  to  whom  she
      paid a bribe for the appellant's release had also helped them with  an
      immigration officer for the appellant to leave Sri Lanka (respondent's
      bundle page G2). Accordingly that suggested that her  passage  to  the
      airport had been facilitated through payment of a bribe. That affected
      the Judge's finding that the appellant having left Sri  Lanka  on  her
      own passport would not be of adverse interest as she claimed.

  12. Mr Singh on behalf of the respondent accepted with regard to Ground 3,
      that the Judge erred in finding that the appellant failed  to  give  a
      reasonable explanation for her failure to claim asylum earlier in that
      he did not consider that she was a vulnerable witness. She  had  given
      an explanation  for  the  failure  to  claim  asylum  earlier  at  the
      substantive interview. There she stated that she did not  want  anyone
      to know what she went through. She just wanted to  come  here  and  be
      safe. She never opened her mouth about it.

  13. Moreover, the Judge had no regard to the evidence of Dr Obuaya that in
      his experience of working with survivors of sexual  abuse,  shame  and
      embarrassment associated with the  index  trauma  often  serves  as  a
      barrier to full disclosure and the seeking of  help.  The  Judge  also
      failed to consider the  content  of  the  Istanbul  Protocol  and  the
      judgement in R v SSHD ex parte Ejon [1998] INLR 195 as to the  conduct
      of survivors of sexual violence which had  been  referred  to  in  the
      appellant's skeleton argument.

  14. Mr Singh also accepted that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
      appellant had been able to leave Sri  Lanka  using  her  own  passport
      which was indicative that she was not on any stop list.

  15. He initially contended that the question  as  to  how  material  those
      errors were is a matter for the Tribunal, but eventually accepted that
      the findings were unsafe.







      Assessment

  16. I accept for the reasons referred to  already  that  there  have  been
      errors of law. In particular, the conclusion that the  appellant  left
      Sri Lanka on her own passport which was indicative that she was not of
      adverse interest cannot be sustained in the light of the  authorities.
      Moreover, the Judge did not have  proper  regard  to  the  appellant's
      explanation at interview as to why she failed to claim asylum  earlier
      than she did. Those matters had been dealt  with  in  the  psychiatric
      report, the Istanbul Protocol and the decision in Ejon.

  17. I find  that  the  errors  are  material.  It  cannot  be  confidently
      contended that but for the errors the Judge would have arrived at  the
      same conclusion.

  18. I accordingly set aside the decision.  Mr  Singh  did  not  oppose  Ms
      Reville's application that the appeal be referred  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal (Taylor House), for a de novo hearing.

  19. I have had regard to the President's Practice Statement regarding  the
      remittal of an appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision.
      I am satisfied that the effect of the errors has been to  deprive  the
      appellant of a fair and proper opportunity for her case to be properly
      put and considered by the First-tier Tribunal.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and it is set aside.


      The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor House)  for  a
      fresh decision to be made by another Judge.


      Anonymity direction continued.














      Signed                             Date:  13 July 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge C R Mailer

