
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/06871/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at by Skype for business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 5 May 2021                    |On the 19 May 2021                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     MJI
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:    Mr M. West, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant.
For the Respondent: Mr Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:

      1. An anonymity direction has previously been made in this matter  and
         neither party requested that it be set  aside.  This  is  a  matter
         concerning an application for international  protection  and  I  am
         mindful of Guidance Note 2013 No1 which is concerned with anonymity
         directions and confirmed that the starting point for  consideration
         of such directions in this chamber of the upper Tribunal, as in all
         Courts and Tribunal, is open justice. However, I observe  paragraph
         13 of the Guidance Note where  it  is  confirmed  that  it  is  the
         present practice of both the First-tier Tribunal and this  tribunal
         that an anonymity direction is made in all appeals  raising  asylum
         or other international protection claims. I am therefore  satisfied
         that it is appropriate for the anonymity direction to  continue  in
         this matter, to avoid the likelihood of serious harm arising to the
         appellant from the contents of his protection claim being known  to
         the wider public.

      2. The direction is detailed at the conclusion of this decision.

      3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh.

      4. On 14 February 2010, the appellant was granted leave to  remain  in
         the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 general student valid until 13 April
         2013.

      5. His leave was curtailed on 12 March 2012. He lodged an  appeal  and
         on 20 June 2012 his appeal was allowed and later  on  17  September
         2012 his leave to remain was reinstated valid until 13 April 2013.

      6. The appellant thereafter submitted  an  application  as  a  Tier  4
         general student which was granted until 4 January 2015. However  on
         5 July 2013 his leave to  remain  was  curtailed  to  expire  on  3
         September 2013.

      7. A further application was submitted as a Tier 4 general student and
         he was granted leave to remain until 27 June 2015. Again his  leave
         was curtailed on 21 May 2014 to expire on 27 July 2014.

      8.  On  21  September  2016  the  appellant  was  encountered  on   an
         enforcement visit and was cautioned, questioned, and served with  a
         number of documents. He was also detained.  The  appellant  claimed
         asylum.

      9. On 5 October 2016 screening interview was completed.

     10. On 16 October 2016 and asylum interview was completed.

     11. On 31 October 2016 a supplementary interview was not completed.  It
         was agreed that he would have  five  working  days  to  submit  any
         further representations.

     12. The application was refused. The appellant  instituted  proceedings
         for judicial review.

     13. On 28 December 2016 a judicial review application was lodged and on
         15 February 2017 permission to  proceed  for  judicial  review  was
         granted however it was closed following the failure to pay a fee to
         continue the proceedings on 28th of March 2017.

     14. In October 2017 the judicial review claim  was  reinstated.  On  16
         February 2018 it was agreed  that  the  Secretary  of  State  would
         reconsider the asylum decision.

     15. The basis of the appellant's claim made to the Secretary  of  State
         that he was involved with the Jamaat-e-Islami party  in  Bangladesh
         and that he would be at risk of harm as  a  result  of  his  sexual
         orientation as a gay man.

     16. In a decision taken on 4 July 2019 the application by the appellant
         was refused on all grounds.

     17. As to his claim based on his sexual orientation, the  Secretary  of
         State consider that he had been inconsistent about this  aspect  of
         his claim. As to his claim that he was threatened in Bangladesh  as
         a result of his sexuality, as it was not accepted that he  was  gay
         there would be no reason for him to be threatened in Bangladesh for
         that reason.

     18. However it was further  noted  that  he  was  inconsistent  in  his
         account of who we feared. When  encountered  by  the  officials  he
         stated that he feared politicians make no fear  of  his  family  or
         society due to sexuality.  In  the  first  screening  interview  at
         paragraph 4.1, he said that he feared "someone  from  the  opposite
         political party" but did not mention a fear of  family  or  society
         due to his sexuality.

     19. The respondent considered that the appellant had given  conflicting
         accounts of his fear and return. Furthermore  the  claim  that  his
         family found out about his sexuality will be killed one return  was
         also based upon speculation. The  inconsistencies  in  his  account
         were considered to damage the credibility of the claim.

     20. The respondent considered the credibility of  the  account  of  the
         first appellant was damaged by the  appellant's  failure  to  claim
         asylum at the earliest opportunity and  not  waited  until  he  was
         encountered before lodging the claim for asylum (Section 8  (2)  of
         the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

     21. The respondent therefore refused his protection claim.

     22. As to his claim made an Article 8 grounds, taking into account  his
         length of residence since 2010 were  not  accepted  that  he  lived
         continuously in the United  Kingdom  for  at  least  20  years  and
         therefore failed to meet the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE  (1)
         (iii).

     23. It was not accepted that there would be very significant  obstacles
         to his integration into band - if  required  to  leave  the  United
         Kingdom  because  he  had  spent  the  majority  of  his  life   in
         Bernadette, including his formative years. He was familiar with the
         language and culture, he had family in Bangor - with  whom  it  was
         considered he could establish a relationship and support on return.

     24. As to whether there were any exceptional circumstances  that  would
         rent refusal a breach of article  8  because  it  would  result  in
         justifiably harsh consequences for him, the  respondent  considered
         that the appellant had not  provided  evidence  to  establish  that
         there were any such exceptional circumstances in his case.

     25. Consideration was given to a medical claim that on the basis of the
         evidence provided, it did not indicate the  medical  condition  was
         such a critical stage that it would be unhuman to remove  him  from
         the United Kingdom. In any event, the respondent set out that there
         were medical  facilities  available  in  Bangladesh  (applying  the
         country information) and that he  would  be  able  to  access  such
         treatment on return to Bangladesh.

     26. The respondent refused his claim on all grounds.

     27. The appellant appealed the decision and it came before the  FtT  on
         17 October 2019. In a decision promulgated on the 7 November  2019,
         Judge Chohan dismissed the appeal having heard  evidence  from  the
         appellant and two witnesses. The FtTJ concluded that the claim  was
         a fabrication  and  that  the  appellant  could  safely  return  to
         Bangladesh.

     28. The appellant sought permission on four grounds:

          i) That the FtTJ erred in  her  credibility  assessment  and  the
             reasons given for her credibility findings;

         ii) That the FtTJ failed to provide any or  any  adequate  reasons
             for his adverse findings in respect of the  oral  evidence  of
             his witnesses;

        iii) That the FtTJ failed to consider  the  UT's  decision  on  the
             appellant's judicial review claim dated 9 February 2019; and

         iv) That the FtTJ made no findings on the psychologist's report.

     29. In an error of law decision promulgated on 16 September 2020  under
         Rule 34 of the Procedure Rules,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  was
         satisfied that the decision of Judge Chohan involve the  making  of
         an error on a point of law and set aside the decision. It was to be
         listed for a de novo hearing; no findings of  fact  were  retained.
         There is a copy of the decision of UTJ  Kekic  in  the  court  file
         dated 16 September 2020.

     30. Following that decision, the appeal was listed to be remade  before
         the Upper Tribunal.

     31. The hearing took place on  5  May  2021,  by  means  of  Skype  for
         Business. The advocates attended remotely via video. There were  no
         issues regarding sound, or any technical issues and I am  satisfied
         both advocates were able to make  their  respective  cases  by  the
         chosen means. It was not possible for the Upper  Tribunal  to  hear
         the appeal by way of a remote  hearing  in  light  of  the  witness
         evidence that was required.  It  is  also  the  case  that  in  his
         skeleton argument Mr West had identified  issues  of  vulnerability
         relevant to the conduct of the proceedings and the evidence of  the
         appellant.

     32. The Upper Tribunal proceeded to consider the future case management
         of the appeal. In doing so, the parties provided their  submissions
         on whether the appeal should be retained in the Upper  Tribunal  or
         be remitted to the FtT.  As  Mr  West  pointed  out,  the  original
         decision made was one under Rule 34 (a paper hearing) and that  the
         Tribunal did not hear any submissions on this issue and before  the
         decision was made. It is also the  position  that  in  his  written
         submissions at paragraphs 63-64 he set out that in the event of the
         appeal being allowed ( and the decision set aside) that the  appeal
         should be remitted to the FtT and expressly at London, Taylor House
         in the light of the witnesses and that he is acting pro bono.  This
         was further set out at paragraphs 22 -23 of his further  reply.  Mr
         West also highlighted  that  one  of  the  grounds  referred  to  a
         "fairness point" and that the FtT had not taken  into  account  the
         evidence of the psychologist and that the appeal  fell  within  the
         practice statement.

     33. Mr Diwnycz did not disagree with those submissions noting that this
         was to be a de novo hearing in respect of his protection claim  and
         would involve findings of facts to be made on the evidence.

     34. Having had the opportunity to hear the advocates, I have  therefore
         considered whether it should be remade in  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
         remitted to the  FtT  for  a  further  hearing.  In  reaching  that
         decision I have given careful consideration to the  Joint  Practice
         Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal  concerning
         the disposal of appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal  is  likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before  the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case  to  be  put  to  and  considered  by  the  First-tier
         Tribunal; or

         (b) the nature or extent of any  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made  is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2,  it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."

     35. In the light of the error of law and that the protection claim will
         be heard de novo with factual findings made  with  three  witnesses
         giving evidence, it falls within subparagraph (b) above.  Therefore
         in my judgement the best course and consistent with the  overriding
         objective is for it to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a
         hearing. Judge Kekic did not preserve any factual findings relevant
         to his protection claim. Whilst reference is made to the Article  8
         claim, it is advanced on the same basis as his protection claim. In
         any event, any Article 8 claim would be considered as at  the  date
         of the hearing of the appeal.

     36. For those reasons, it has been demonstrated that  the  decision  of
         the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on a point of  law  and
         that the decision should be set aside and remitted to  the  FtT  in
         accordance with the following directions:

          1)  It is directed that the appeal shall be listed for a face  to
             face hearing on a date  to  be  fixed  before  the  First-tier
             Tribunal (Taylor House, London).

          2) An anonymity direction is made as set out at  paragraph  1  of
             this decision.

          3) Counsel's availability should be taken account of when listing
             the appeal.

          4) A Bengali/Sylheti interpreter will be required.

          5) Any issues  arising  from  the  case  of  AM  (Afghanistan)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
             1123 and the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2  of  2010:
             Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive Appellant ("the guidance
             note") and also the Practice Direction, First-tier  and  Upper
             Tribunal  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive  Witnesses
             should be set out in advance of the hearing.




    Notice of Decision.

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of an error
    on a point of law and therefore  the  decision  is  set  aside  and  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  the  directions
    set out above.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

     Dated 5 May 2021
