
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06220/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 February 2018                           |On 28 February 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                               Sr (bangladesh)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Syed-Ali, Counsel instructed by Uzma Law Limited
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals from the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge RG Walters sitting at Taylor House on 8 August 2017)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State to refuse  to
    recognise  him  as  a  refugee  on  the  grounds  of   his   homosexual
    orientation.   Although  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  not  make   an
    anonymity direction,  I  consider  that  it  is  appropriate  that  the
    appellant is afforded anonymity for  these  proceedings  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal, given the nature of his claim.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal

 2. On 20 November 2017 the First-tier Tribunal Judge Brunnen  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal for the following reasons: "Much of  the
    grounds consists simply of  disagreement  with  the  Judge's  findings.
    However, it is arguable that he erred in law in that he did not analyse
    the appellant's case in terms of HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31."

Relevant Background

 3. The appellant is a national of Bangladesh, whose date  of  birth  is  1
    July 1986.  The appellant entered the United Kingdom as a student on 13
    October 2009.  He subsequently obtained leave to remain  as  a  student
    until 30 September 2014.  On 13 June 2014 the Home Office wrote to  the
    appellant to inform him that his leave had been curtailed, as they  had
    received information that  he  had  ceased  studying.   His  leave  was
    curtailed to expire on 17 August 2014.

 4. On 19 June 2014 the appellant was encountered by  Immigration  Officers
    at a restaurant in Sidcup.  He was considered to be working  in  breach
    of the conditions of his student visa, and he was served with a  notice
    requiring him to leave the country.  His then representative asked  the
    Home Office to review the decision not to give him an in-country  right
    of appeal on the ground that he was not in breach of his  student  visa
    conditions, because he was enrolled on a supplementary  course  run  by
    Brilliant  Training  Centre.   However,  on  checking  with   Brilliant
    Training Centre, the Home Office established that they had no record of
    the  appellant's  enrolment  with  them.   The  appellant  applied  for
    judicial  review.  His  application  was  refused  and   certified   as
    manifestly unfounded on 22 July 2015.

 5. On 22 February 2016 the appellant claimed asylum on the grounds that he
    was gay.  He said that he had had a relationship in Bangladesh  with  a
    boy, "TM", when he was aged about 15 or 16.  Since arriving in the  UK,
    he had entered into a relationship with 'PB'.  Their  relationship  had
    begun on 20 January 2015.

 6. On 18 August 2016 the respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  to
    recognise the appellant as a refugee.  She  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant was gay.  He did not qualify for leave to  remain  under  the
    Partner route, as his claimed relationship with PB was only of  1  year
    and 7 months' duration, and it appeared that they had not  been  living
    in a relationship akin to marriage for 2 or more years.

 7. PB is a national of Bangladesh, and he has a  similar  profile  to  the
    appellant.  He arrived in the UK on 27 October 2013  with  valid  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 (student) migrant.  As the result of the  closure
    of his college, his leave was curtailed to expire on 23 June 2015.   PB
    made three unsuccessful attempts for leave to remain on  the  basis  of
    family/private life.  Following the last rejection on 2 February  2016,
    PB contacted the Home Office to claim asylum, and  he  is  recorded  as
    making his asylum claim on 23 February 2016.  PB said that he was in  a
    gay relationship with the appellant.



The Decision of the First-tier Tribunal on the asylum appeal of the  claimed
Partner

 8. PB's asylum claim was refused, and his appeal came before Judge  Parker
    sitting at Taylor House on 11 May  2017.   Both  parties  were  legally
    represented.  The Judge received oral evidence from PB,  the  appellant
    ("SR"), and two further witnesses.

 9. In his decision promulgated on 24  May  2017,  Judge  Parker  made  the
    following findings:

          a) PB and his claimed partner, SR, were  not  living  together  -
             alternatively, they had only been living in the same household
             since October 2016;

          b) PB was gay, but he was not living openly as a gay man  in  the
             United Kingdom;

          c) PB had invented an account of informing his parents about  his
             sexuality in an attempt to  provide  evidence  of  a  risk  on
             return at the hands of his family.

10. On the issue of risk on return, the Judge said that he had  had  regard
    to the decision in HJ (Iran) & HD (Cameroon) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31 in
    which the Court had held that  a  gay  man  "cannot  and  must  not  be
    expected to conceal aspects of  his  sexual  orientation  which  he  is
    unwilling to conceal."  He said that the Court further stated  that  if
    he feared persecution as a result, and that his fear was  well-founded,
    he would be entitled to asylum, "however unreasonable  his  refusal  to
    resort to concealment may be."  Judge Parker then cited  the  following
    passage: "...  The next stage, if it is found  the  appellant  will  in
    fact conceal aspects of his  sexual  orientation  if  returned,  is  to
    consider why he will do so.  If this will  simply  be  in  response  to
    social pressures or for cultural religious reasons of his own  choosing
    and not because of a fear of persecution, his claim for asylum must  be
    rejected.  But if the reason why he would resort to concealment is that
    he genuinely fears that otherwise he will be  persecuted,  it  will  be
    necessary to consider whether that fear is well-founded."

11. Judge Parker held, at paragraph [63]  of  his  decision,  that  PB  had
    concealed aspects of his sexual orientation in the UK, "and there is no
    question of his doing this because of  a  fear  of  persecution."  PB's
    evidence was that he did not like to discuss his private  life  and  he
    was worried about the disapproval of his friends within the Bangladeshi
    community.  He was worried that they would ignore him.  This was not  a
    fear of persecution.  He had attended Gay Pride rallies but he did  not
    view this as a public declaration of his sexuality.

12. At paragraph [65], the Judge held that there was no reason  to  believe
    that PB would behave differently in Bangladesh.  While  he  might  fear
    persecution in Bangladesh, he already concealed his sexual  orientation
    in the UK, and he would not be living discreetly because of any fear of
    persecution. He would be doing so because that  was  how  he  chose  to
    live.

13. PB applied for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.   Permission
    to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal on 3 October 2017, and
    on a  renewed  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, permission was refused on 9 November 2017.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  SR's
Appeal

14. At the hearing before Judge Walters on 8 August 2017, both parties were
    legally represented.  Mr Syed-Ali appeared on behalf of the  appellant.
    At the outset of the hearing, Counsel for  the  Home  Office  drew  the
    Judge's attention to the decision of Judge Parker in PB's  appeal.   In
    light of the findings made by Judge Parker, she conceded on  behalf  of
    the Home Office that the appellant was  in  a  homosexual  relationship
    with PB. Judge Walters received oral evidence from the  appellant,  PB,
    and 2 further witnesses.

15. In his subsequent decision, Judge Walters noted at paragraph [23]  that
    Judge Parker had found that PB would  not  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh because he lived discreetly as a gay man in the UK.

16. At paragraphs [25]-[29], the Judge gave his reasons for  rejecting  the
    appellant's account of being  disowned  by  his  father  following  the
    discovery in 2008 that he was in a gay relationship with TM.  He  found
    that  if  his  father  had  been  angry  and  upset  about  his   son's
    homosexuality, then he would have  expected  him  merely  to  send  the
    appellant from his home and to tell the appellant to  be  reliant  upon
    his own resources from  now  on,  rather  than  providing  him  with  a
    significant amount of funding for his studies in the UK.

17. At paragraphs [30]-[33], the Judge referred to the  evidence  given  by
    the appellant as to the reasons why he had not told anyone  in  the  UK
    that he was gay, or that he was in a relationship with PB.

18. At paragraph [45], the Judge said that he had asked  Mr  Syed-Ali  what
    elements of his behaviour the appellant would have to modify if he were
    to return to Bangladesh in order to  avoid  persecution.   Mr  Syed-Ali
    replied that the appellant would not be able to attend  gay  clubs;  he
    could not visit friends with PB as a couple; and he would not  be  able
    to participate in demonstrations such as "Gay Pride"  as  he  would  be
    subject to possible harassment and  arrest  by  police.   At  paragraph
    [46], the Judge said: "I do not accept that a couple living as  quietly
    and modestly as the appellant and [PB] would in fact miss any of  these
    things.  They have shown no propensity to attend gay clubs  in  London.
    There is reference to attendance at a Gay Pride demonstration by  them,
    but, as the Respondent points out, there was a  "rainbow-themed  march"
    participating in the main Bengali  New  Year  celebration  and  causing
    little reaction from mainstream society.  I also took into account  the
    fact that it arouses little comment in  Bengali  society  if  men  hold
    hands in public, live together and even share the same bed."

19. The Judge held, at paragraph  [47],  that  there  was  nothing  in  the
    country material to show that a couple such as the appellant and  PB  -
    who lived quietly together - would suffer any  adverse  attention  from
    the police or indeed general society in Bangladesh.  He  concluded,  at
    paragraph [48], that there was no real risk that the appellant would be
    persecuted on return.

The Rule 24 Response

20. On 13 December 2013, Mr Kotas settled a Rule 24 response on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State opposing the appeal.  He  submitted  that  there
    was little merit in the HJ (Iran) point in view of the findings of fact
    made by the Judge that the appellant chose to live discreetly in the UK
    as a gay person.  Such findings of fact were  rationally  open  to  the
    Judge on the evidence.  The grounds of appeal merely disagreed with the
    outcome of the appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

21. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Syed-Ali developed the arguments advanced  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal.  He referred me to the Press Summary of  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in HJ (Iran) and to the guidance given at paragraph  [82]
    of HJ (Iran) by Lord Rodger as to the proper approach to be followed by
    tribunals.

22. The Press Summary said that the Court of Appeal in  HJ(Iran)  had  held
    that it was permissible for a state party of the Convention  to  refuse
    asylum to a homosexual person who, if returned to their  home  country,
    would deny their identity and conceal their sexuality in order to avoid
    being persecuted, provided that the homosexual person's situation could
    be regarded as "reasonably  tolerable".   Mr  Syed-Ali  submitted  that
    Judge Walters had wrongly followed the approach of the Court of Appeal,
    rather than following the correct approach set out by Lord Rodger.

23. Given the evidence of the appellant which was  recorded  at  paragraphs
    [30]-[33] of the decision, the Judge ought to have held that a material
    reason for the appellant concealing his sexuality in  Bangladesh  would
    be a  fear  of  persecution.   This  was  the  only  finding  that  was
    reasonably open to the Judge on the evidence. Accordingly, I could, and
    should, remake the decision in the appellant's favour  without  hearing
    any further evidence.

24. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Kotas adhered to his Rule 24  response.
    He agreed with Mr Syed-Ali that, if an error of law  was  made  out,  I
    could remake the decision without hearing  any  further  evidence.   He
    submitted that, in the light of the findings made  by  Judge  Parker  -
    which had not been successfully challenged by  way  of  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal  -  the  appeal  should  be  remade  in  favour  of  the
    respondent.

Discussion

25. In HJ (Iran) and HT (Cameroon)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2010]  UKSC  31,  the  Supreme  Court  gave  the  following
    guidance at paragraph [82]:

         "When an applicant applies for asylum on  the  ground  of  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution because he is gay,  the  Tribunal  must
         first ask itself whether it is satisfied on the evidence that he is
         gay, or that he will be treated as gay by potential persecutors  in
         his country of nationality.  If so, that a Tribunal must  then  ask
         itself whether it is satisfied on the available evidence  that  gay
         people who lived openly would  be  liable  to  persecution  in  the
         applicant's country of nationality.  If so, the Tribunal must go on
         to consider what the individual  applicant  would  do  if  he  were
         returned to that country.  If the  applicant  would  in  face  live
         openly and thereby be exposed to a real risk of  persecution,  then
         he has a well-founded fear of persecution - even if he could  avoid
         the risk by living  'discreetly'.   If,  on  the  other  hand,  the
         Tribunal concludes that the applicant would in fact live discreetly
         and so avoid persecution, it must go on to ask itself why he  would
         do so ... If the Tribunal concluded that a material reason for  the
         applicant living discreetly on  his  return  would  be  a  fear  of
         persecution which would follow if he were to live openly as  a  gay
         man, then, other things being  equal,  his  application  should  be
         accepted.  Such a person has a well-founded fear of persecution."

26. The Judge gave adequate reasons for finding that  the  appellant  would
    live discreetly as a gay person in Bangladesh, and  would  thereby  not
    come to the adverse attention of potential persecutors.

27. The Judge did not overtly go on  to  ask  himself  whether  a  material
    reason for the appellant's discretion in Bangladesh would be  the  fear
    of persecution that would result if he drew  attention  to  his  sexual
    orientation.

28. However, I do not consider that the Judge's error  in  this  regard  is
    material.  It was not the appellant's case that he and BP  were  highly
    discreet about their relationship in  the  UK  because  of  a  fear  of
    persecution.  Accordingly, it is implicit in the  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraphs [45] and [46] that their continued discretion in  Bangladesh
    would not be caused or contributed to by a  fear  of  persecution,  but
    would be entirely motivated, as it was in the UK, by a desire to  avoid
    familial and societal disapproval.

29. Mr Syed-Ali submitted that the evidence  given  by  the  appellant,  as
    rehearsed at paragraphs [30]-[33] of the decision, evinced  a  fear  of
    persecution, and not merely a fear of societal disapproval. However,  I
    consider it was open to the Judge to treat the appellant as  expressing
    no more than a fear of social stigmatisation.

30. Mr Sayed-Ali also mounted a collateral attack on the decision of  Judge
    Parker.  He submitted that Judge Parker had wrongly failed to treat  PB
    as expressing a fear of persecution, and that  this  fundamental  error
    had been replicated by Judge Walters.  However, I consider  that  Judge
    Parker's rehearsal of the evidence given by PB at paragraph [53] of his
    decision only serves to  reinforce  (a)  the  sustainability  of  Judge
    Parker's findings and (b) the sustainability of the parallel conclusion
    reached by Judge Walters.  PB initially said  that  he  was  scared  to
    reveal his sexuality, but on appeal he clarified that what he meant was
    that he was "embarrassed".  He stated that he  had  not  disclosed  his
    sexuality because his  friends  who  formed  part  of  the  Bangladeshi
    community would ignore him if he did so.  He was specifically asked why
    he was afraid "to come out", if he believed that the UK was  safer  and
    more accepting. PB replied that he was not scared, but  he  thought  he
    would lose his friends.

31. In South Bucks District Council v Porter (2) [2004] UKHL 33 Lord  Brown
    said at [26]:

         "The reasons for a decision must be intelligible and they  must  be
         adequate.  They must enable the reader to understand why the matter
         was decided as it was and what  conclusions  were  reached  on  the
         'principal important  controversial  issues',  disclosing  how  any
         issue of law or fact was resolved.  Reasons can be briefly  stated,
         the degree of particularity  required  depending  entirely  on  the
         nature of the issues falling for decision.  The reasoning must  not
         give rise to a substantial doubt as to whether the  decision  maker
         erred in law, for example, by misunderstanding some relevant policy
         or some other important matter or by failing to  reach  a  rational
         decision on relevant grounds.  But such adverse inference will  not
         readily be drawn (My emphasis).  The reasons need only refer to the
         main issues in the dispute, not to every material consideration."

32. The Judge made no  reference  to  the  "reasonable  tolerability"  test
    applied by the Court of Appeal in HJ (Iran) and  there  is  nothing  to
    indicate that he applied such a test.  He made clear findings that  the
    appellant and PB chose to live discreetly in the UK and that they would
    not have to modify their behaviour in  Bangladesh  in  order  to  avoid
    being persecuted. He did not accept that the appellant had suffered any
    adverse consequences in Bangladesh from his father discovering that  he
    was gay - still  less  any  serious  harm.  Accordingly,  his  line  of
    reasoning does not give rise to a substantial doubt that he accepted  -
    rather than rejected - the proposition that a material reason  for  the
    appellant not living as an openly gay man in Bangladesh would be a fear
    of persecution.

33. Moreover, if the Judge had reached a different conclusion on this issue
    (the reason for discretion in the country of return) from that  reached
    by Judge Parker, I consider that he would have said so.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not contain  an  error  of  law,
and accordingly the decision stands.  This appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 19 February 2018

Judge Monson
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
