
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06610/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House, London         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday 10 August 2021            |On Thursday 07 October 2021          |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MR ATAUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Karim, Counsel instructed by Kalam solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                  DECISION

BACKGROUND

Procedural Background

1.    By a decision made on the papers pursuant to Rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
      Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, I found an error of law in  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge N M Paul itself  promulgated  on
      11 February 2020 dismissing the Appellant's appeal on asylum and human
      rights grounds.  Although the Respondent's decision under appeal dated
      21 June 2019 was in response to a protection claim, that was abandoned
      before the First-tier Tribunal and the claim is now limited to a claim
      based on Article  8  ECHR.   That  is  based  in  large  part  on  the
      Appellant's  relationship  with  his  British  partner,   [SB]   ("the
      Sponsor").  As a result of my error of law decision, I set aside Judge
      Paul's decision.

2.    By a judgment handed down on 20 November 2020, in the  case  of  Joint
      Council for the Welfare of Immigrants v The  President  of  the  Upper
      Tribunal (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  and  another  ([2020]  EWHC
      3103 (Admin),  Fordham J found the Practice Direction of the President
      of this Tribunal in relation to the making of error of  law  decisions
      on the papers to be unlawful because it  involved  "an  overall  paper
      norm".  No issue was taken with the error of law decision in this case
      for that reason.  There was no application to  set  aside  my  earlier
      decision.  That is probably unsurprising since the decision was to the
      benefit of the Appellant.

3.    The hearing proceeded as a face-to-face hearing.  I had before me  the
      core documents in the appeal, the Respondent's bundle (referred to  as
      [RB/[annex]]), the Appellant's bundle before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      (referred to as [AB/[page]]), a first supplementary  bundle  filed  by
      the Appellant in October 2020 (referred  to  as  [ABS/[page]])  and  a
      second supplementary bundle filed by the Appellant on  8  August  2021
      (referred to as [ABS2/[page]]).  The second supplementary  bundle  was
      filed well beyond the date provided for by my directions.  Mr  Lindsay
      did not however object to the admission of that evidence.

4.    I heard oral evidence from  the  Appellant  via  a  Bengali  (Sylheti)
      interpreter.  I  was  satisfied  that  the  Appellant  understood  the
      interpreter and vice versa.  I was informed by Mr Karim  that  he  did
      not wish to call oral evidence  from  the  Sponsor  given  her  mental
      health condition.  Mr Lindsay did not seek to  cross-examine  her  for
      that reason.  I have a witness statement from  her  dated  17  January
      2020 ([AB/7-12]) and an updated statement dated 6 August 2021 ([ABS2/2-
      4]).  I have regard to those statements so far as necessary below.

5.    I have read and had regard to all the documentary evidence  before  me
      but refer below only to that which is relevant to the issues I have to
      determine.

Factual Background

6.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He came to the UK in  2007
      as a  working  holidaymaker  with  leave  valid  to  April  2009.   In
      September 2009, he sought to remain based on  his  Article  8  rights.
      That application was refused on 22 September 2010 and again  following
      reconsideration on 27 May 2015.  He appealed that  decision,  but  his
      appeal was dismissed.  His appeal rights were exhausted  on  12  April
      2017. He has had no valid leave since April 2009.

7.    The Appellant claimed asylum on 21 April 2017.  His claim was  refused
      on 18 October 2017 and dismissed on  appeal  on  20  March  2018.   He
      sought permission to appeal that decision but that was  refused.   His
      appeal rights were exhausted on 9 May 2018.

8.    The Appellant made further submissions on  12  July  2018  which  were
      refused on 13 August 2018 and rejected as  a  fresh  claim.   He  made
      further submissions on 13 May 2019 still  relying  on  his  protection
      claim but also raising for a second time  his  relationship  with  the
      Sponsor.  Those claims were refused by the decision under appeal.  The
      further submissions were accepted as amounting to a fresh claim.  As I
      have already noted, the Appellant no  longer  pursues  his  protection
      claim and the appeal therefore focusses only on the Article 8 claim.

9.    The Sponsor is originally from Bangladesh.  She comes  from  the  same
      area as the Appellant.  She left Bangladesh in 2009 to marry a Mr  Ali
      who was living in the UK.  Mr Ali died from organ failure on 9 January
      2013.  She met the Appellant soon after.   They  married  on  2  April
      2014.  The Sponsor suffers from  various  psychological  and  physical
      health  conditions.   I  will  come  to  the  detail  of  her  medical
      conditions below.

LEGAL FRAMEWORK AND ISSUES

10.   The  relevant  provisions  of  the  Immigration  Rules  ("the  Rules")
      relating to leave to remain in the UK as a spouse are to be  found  in
      Appendix FM to the Rules ("Appendix FM").

11.   On the part of the Respondent,  it  is  accepted  that  the  Appellant
      meets the suitability requirements in Appendix FM.  It is not disputed
      that the Appellant and the Sponsor are in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
      relationship and therefore meet the eligibility requirements in  terms
      of their relationship.


12.    It  is  accepted  by  the  Appellant  that  he  cannot  satisfy   the
      eligibility requirements for leave  to  remain  as  a  partner  unless
      section EX.1 of Appendix FM ("EX.1") is met.  EX.1 reads as follows:

           Section EX: Exceptions to certain eligibility  requirements  for
           leave to remain as a partner or parent

           EX.1. This paragraph applies if

           (a) ... ; or

           (b) the applicant has a genuine and subsisting relationship with
           a partner who is in the UK and is a British  Citizen,  ...,  and
           there are insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  with  that
           partner continuing outside the UK.

           EX.2. For the purposes  of  paragraph  EX.1.(b)  "insurmountable
           obstacles" means the very significant difficulties  which  would
           be faced by the applicant or their partner in  continuing  their
           family life together outside the  UK  and  which  could  not  be
           overcome or would entail very serious hardship for the applicant
           or their partner.

13.   The Appellant is unable to meet all the  eligibility  requirements  of
      Appendix  FM  unless  EX.1  is  met  because  he  does  not  meet  the
      immigration status requirements.  He is an  overstayer  and  therefore
      fails under paragraph E-LTRP.2.2(b) unless EX.1  is  met.   Similarly,
      the Appellant and Sponsor do not satisfy  the  financial  requirements
      and cannot succeed for that reason unless EX.1 is met.  However, it is
      I understand common ground that the Sponsor does not have to show that
      she meets the minimum income requirement  as  she  is  in  receipt  of
      personal independence payment ("PIP") (see paragraph E-LTRP.3.3(a)(iv)
      of Appendix FM).  Under that paragraph, the Appellant must  show  that
      he and the Sponsor are able to  maintain  and  accommodate  themselves
      without recourse  to  public  funds.   However,  E-LTRP.3.4  does  not
      require evidence of adequate  accommodation  for  the  family  without
      recourse to public funds where EX.1 is met.   Nor  is  there  evidence
      that the Appellant can satisfy the English  language  requirements  of
      paragraph E-LTRP.4.1 which apply unless EX.1 is met.


14.   For those reasons, the essential question within the Rules is  whether
      there are insurmountable obstacles to the  Appellant's  and  Sponsor's
      family life continuing in Bangladesh.  I accept as Mr Karim  submitted
      that  "insurmountable  obstacles"  is  not  to  be   read   literally.
      Nevertheless, as EX.2 makes  clear,  the  threshold  is  a  high  one,
      amounting  to  "very  significant  difficulties"  or   "very   serious
      hardship" for the Appellant and/or the Sponsor.


15.   Although I accept that, if I find that EX.1 is not met, I  still  have
      to consider whether there is a breach of Article 8  ECHR  outside  the
      Rules  on  the  basis  that  removal  of  the  Appellant  would   have
      unjustifiably harsh consequences, in practice that is unlikely to make
      a difference in this case.  If the difficulties faced  by  the  couple
      relocating to Bangladesh would not reach the requisite  threshold,  it
      is unlikely that the threshold  of  unjustifiably  harsh  consequences
      could be met.  That is because the focus of the Appellant's Article  8
      claim is the Sponsor's medical conditions and  therefore  the  central
      issue is whether family life can be continued in Bangladesh.


16.   I accept however that I may  need  to  have  regard  to  the  position
      outside the Rules if I do not accept that EX.1 is met  but  go  on  to
      consider whether it would be nonetheless disproportionate  to  require
      the Appellant to return  when  balancing  the  interference  with  the
      Appellant's and Sponsor's private and family lives against the  public
      interest.  Mr Karim submits that, in that  situation,  I  need  to  be
      guided by what is said in Chikwamba v Secretary of State for the  Home
      Department [2008] UKHL 40 ("Chikwamba").  He submits that Chikwamba is
      relevant because even a  temporary  separation  whilst  the  Appellant
      sought entry clearance to return would be disproportionate  given  the
      Appellant's caring responsibilities for the Sponsor.


17.   If I do reach the stage of considering Article 8 outside the Rules,  I
      must have regard to the public interest considerations in Section  117
      Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("Section 117B").


PREVIOUS DECISION


18.   In accordance with the "Devaseelan" guidelines, my starting  point  is
      the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Welsh dated  20  March  2018
      ("the  2018  Appeal  Decision")  which  reached  certain  findings  in
      relation to the Appellant's family life.  The 2018 Appeal Decision  is
      at [RB/B].  I have regard to that decision as appropriate below, but I
      record Mr Lindsay's concession for the  Respondent  that  matters  had
      moved on since that  decision  in  relation,  in  particular,  to  the
      Sponsor's medical condition.  I have to consider the issues  based  on
      the up-to-date evidence.


19.   Judge Welsh accepted, based on the decision in the previous appeal  in
      2015, that the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  was
      genuine and subsisting even though the marriage was  entered  into  so
      that the Appellant could stay in the UK.  The  Judge  found,  however,
      that EX.1 was not met.  He had regard to the Sponsor's background.  As
      I have already noted, the Sponsor comes from Bangladesh and  has  been
      in the UK since 2009.  She has family in  Bangladesh,  living  in  the
      same area as the Appellant's home.  Judge  Welsh  was  told  that  the
      Sponsor "communicate[d] regularly"  with  her  mother  and  sister  in
      Bangladesh.  Judge Welsh found that the Sponsor could obtain treatment
      for her medical conditions in Bangladesh.   At  that  time,  the  main
      issue was that she was seeking fertility treatment.  Her mental health
      conditions are described by the Judge  as  "anxiety  and  depression".
      Her physical health conditions were said to be diabetes and  menstrual
      complications.  At the time, the only evidence was a letter  from  the
      Sponsor's GP.


20.    In  relation  to  the  Appellant's  own   family   circumstances   in
      Bangladesh, Judge Welsh recorded that the Appellant ran  a  stationery
      shop in Bangladesh which was still operating.  His mother  and  sister
      at the time of that hearing (February 2018) were living in Bangladesh.
       His brother was said to be living in  Saudi  Arabia.   The  Appellant
      spoke to his mother every day.


EVIDENCE, FINDINGS AND DISCUSSION


21.   The Appellant has provided two witness  statements  dated  17  January
      2020 ([AB/1-6]) and 29 September 2020 ([ABS/1-3]).


22.   In his first witness statement, the  Appellant  says  this  about  the
      Sponsor's medical conditions:


           "9.   My wife, [SB] suffers from severe medical conditions.  She
           suffers from; type 2  diabetes;  excessive  bleeding;  fertility
           problem; Insomnia; chronic menstrual disorders and she also  has
           a past abortion history which makes these conditions worse.  Due
           to these circumstances, I give my wife majority of  my  time  as
           she needs help around the house, she cannot cook or clean.   She
           is completely dependent upon me and it does get  very  difficult
           at times as I have to look after her all time and I do not  have
           the right to work,  which  makes  us  financially  unstable  and
           limited.  I  have  been  continuously  supported  my  wife  care
           coordinator as well as our bilingual support worker attached  to
           the CMHT.  Her care coordinator and the bilingual support worker
           are engaging with her regularly and giving me the feedback.   It
           was brought to her attention that I am supporting her very  well
           which includes escorting her to all her medical appointments.  I
           would like to confirm that my wife remains depressed because  of
           her current social circumstances of potential deportation of her
           husband with continuing auditory hallucinations.


           10.   My wife intakes a lot of  medication  throughout  the  day
           which makes her feel depressed and isolated.  I try my  best  to
           keep her happy and entertain her; however it's hard when there's
           no  guarantee  for  our  future.   My   wife   condition   would
           deteriorate further if she continued to suffer with  the  stress
           of being potentially separated from me.  I also confirm that the
           opinion the bilingual support worker stated that provided by her
           husband could contribute as a  stabilising  factor  as  well  as
           helping to improve her mental state."


23.   The Appellant goes on to say that the Sponsor is  "completely  reliant
      upon [him] to take her medications and help  her  in  her  daily  care
      routines and activities".


24.   In his second witness statement, the Appellant says that  the  Sponsor
      suffers from "various complex medical issues  including  steatosis  of
      liver, conjunctivitis, offer of stain [sic] therapy, severe depressive
      episode  with  psychotic  symptoms,  thyroid,  non-organic  psychoses,
      pernicious  anaemia,  depressive  disorder  NEC,  type   2   diabetes,
      haemoglobin E trait etc."  He  says  that  he  has  "obtained  updated
      documents in relation to [his] wife's diagnosis".


25.   In his second witness statement, the Appellant  also  deals  with  the
      decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul (set aside by my  error  of
      law decision) and in particular the finding that the  Appellant  still
      has business  interests  in  Bangladesh.    He  says  this  about  the
      situation:


           "4.   In relation to my business interest in Bangladesh, I would
           like to confirm that  I  currently  do  not  have  any  business
           interest in Bangladesh whatsoever.  While I acknowledge  that  I
           used to own a business called Jamal Enterprise jointly  with  my
           brother Zilu Miah, I currently do not have any business interest
           with this as my brother has taken over ownership  from  me  long
           ago.  I attach herewith the following documents to confirm  that
           I do not have any business interest in Bangladesh:


              Letter from local Union Parishad Chairman dated 13  September
              2020


              Ledger  of  Land  Registry  No  268  dated  03  October  2005
              confirming that I jointly own the business  with  my  brother
              Zilu Miah


              Ledger of Land Registry No 268 dated 17 May  2018  confirming
              that my brother Zilu Miah solely own the business; and


              Dormant  bank  account  statements  of  my   business   Jamal
              Enterprise.


           5.    The above documents clearly demonstrate that I do not have
           any business interest in Bangladesh whatsoever and I will not be
           able to afford my wife's treatment in Bangladesh."


26.   The Appellant was asked about this  part  of  his  statement  and  the
      documents (which appear at [ABS2/20-28]) in oral  evidence.   He  said
      that he had received the documents from his mother.


27.   Mr Lindsay asked me to treat the documents with some caution  applying
      the principles in Tanveer Ahmed.  Although he did  not  make  specific
      submissions about the content of the documents, I have considered them
      carefully.  I am concerned in particular  about  the  content  of  the
      ledger entries relied upon.  The document at [ABS/23-24]  purports  to
      be a certified translation of a page of a journal number  129  showing
      that a "House" plot number 177 is owned jointly by the  Appellant  and
      Jilu Miah who are described as "S/O Jahir Ullah".  The ledger entry is
      undated, but the translation is certified as a true copy on 3  October
      2005.  The second entry at [ABS/25-26] is dated 24 April 2017 although
      certified as translated on 15 September 2020.  It shows the sole owner
      as being Zilu Miah who is described as "C/o late Jahir Ullah" and also
      describes the land class as a "store".   Given  the  evidence  of  the
      Appellant that the property when owned jointly and solely was always a
      stationery business, it is unclear why it would be  described  in  the
      first ledger entry as a house.


28.   There also appears to be some minor discrepancy in the description  of
      the relationship between the owners  and  Zahir  Ullah  although  that
      might be down to translation, and I do not place weight on it.  It  is
      also not clear to me why, if the document is as it appears to be dated
      April 2017, the Appellant's brother would have taken over the business
      at that stage as the Appellant told  Judge  Welsh  in  2018  that  his
      brother was still living  in  Saudi  Arabia.   The  bank  document  at
      [ABS/28] also raises more questions than it answers as it appears that
      the Appellant had access to the business bank account after April 2017
      (when his brother is said to  have  taken  over  the  business)  until
      December 2017 and the Appellant was also able to obtain a statement of
      the account in September 2020.  That suggests that although  the  bank
      account is dormant, it remains in being some  three  years  after  the
      Appellant claims to have given up his interest in the business.


29.   Be that as it may, and even taking the  documents  at  their  highest,
      they show at most that the Appellant's brother has taken over the sole
      running of the business.  They do not show that  the  Appellant  could
      not regain an interest on return.  In that regard, the Appellant  said
      in his oral evidence that his relationship with his brother has broken
      down.  He implied that his brother had taken  sole  ownership  of  the
      business without his consent.  I do not  place  any  weight  on  these
      assertions.  They are not  mentioned  in  his  statements  or  in  his
      evidence given to Judge Welsh.   I do not accept that the  Appellant's
      interest in the business has been lost nor that he  does  not  have  a
      continuing relationship with his brother.


30.   The letter  from  the  Syedpur  Shaharpara  Union  Parishad  dated  13
      September 2020 at [ABS2/20-21] is supportive  of  that  position.   It
      states that "[s]ince Mr Ataur Rahman is currently live in the UK,  his
      brother Mr Jilu Miah has taken over the business in  his  name...there
      is no business in the name of  Mr  Ataur  Rahman  at  present".   That
      suggests that the Appellant's brother  has  taken  over  the  business
      whilst the Appellant is in the UK for convenience only.  It  may  well
      be that the Appellant has also encouraged that position to assist  his
      case.  Either way, the letter does not suggest that the Appellant  has
      lost any interest in that business, any breakdown of the  relationship
      between the brothers or  that  the  business  was  taken  without  the
      Appellant's consent but rather that  the  reason  is  the  Appellant's
      absence from Bangladesh and that presently therefore the Appellant  is
      not named as having an interest in that business.


31.   Mr Lindsay drew attention in his  cross-examination  to  documents  at
      [AB/40-42] which suggest that the Appellant has access to  more  funds
      than he is willing to admit.  For  example,  at  [AB/41]  there  is  a
      letter showing that the  Appellant  had  a  platinum  credit  card  in
      January  2020.   There  is  limited  evidence  about  the  Appellant's
      finances but there is a letter from Lloyds Bank showing that he has or
      had  a  savings  account.   Whilst  I  accept  that   some   financial
      institutions do not always fully check a  person's  credit  worthiness
      when offering credit cards, I do not accept that the  Appellant  would
      be offered and given a platinum credit card without evidence  of  some
      income beyond the Sponsor's benefits.  I do not consider  it  credible
      that he would be given such finance without even a current account.


32.   Mr Karim suggested that Mr Lindsay's questioning  of  the  Appellant's
      financial situation in the UK was a "red herring".  He submitted  that
      it was irrelevant to the situation the  Appellant  and  Sponsor  would
      face on return to Bangladesh.  I disagree.  If the Appellant  is  able
      to re-establish himself in business with his brother  or  obtain  some
      form of support from his brother whilst he finds  himself  employment,
      then that is relevant to whether the couple are able to return.


33.   I accept however that the more  crucial  question  is  what  treatment
      will be available for the Sponsor's medical problems in Bangladesh.  I
      turn therefore to the evidence which there is about those problems and
      the treatment she receives in the UK.


34.   I did not understand it to be suggested that the Sponsor is unable  to
      obtain treatment for her physical health issues in Bangladesh.   As  I
      have already noted, the main issue at the  time  of  the  2018  Appeal
      Decision related to the Sponsor's inability to conceive.  Judge  Welsh
      noted at [39] of the 2018 Appeal Decision evidence from the  Sponsor's
      GP which stated that "in June 2017 [the GP] diagnosed her as suffering
      from severe on-going anxiety and depression".  That was said  to  have
      been triggered by the death of her first husband and her inability  to
      conceive naturally.  Judge Welsh noted at  [73]  of  the  2018  Appeal
      Decision that he was "bound by the  previous  finding  that  fertility
      treatment is available in Bangladesh".  He also noted that "the  issue
      no longer has the force it once had, given [SB] is now in her 40s  and
      is no longer at the  crucial  time  in  her  life  identified  by  the
      previous immigration judge."


35.   Judge Welsh went on in the same paragraph to deal with  the  Sponsor's
      anxiety and depression.  He concluded that there was "no evidence that
      she cannot be treated for this condition  in  Bangladesh".   Based  on
      that finding, he concluded that the Appellant had failed to show  that
      there were insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  continuing  in
      Bangladesh.


36.   I turn then  to  evidence  arising  after  the  2018  Appeal  Decision
      focussing as did Mr Karim on the Sponsor's mental health problems.


37.   I begin with the Sponsor's own statement dated 17 January  2020  which
      appears at [AB/7-12].   She lists her medical conditions at [4] of the
      statement.  In relation to  her  mental  health,  she  says  that  she
      suffers from "[d]epressive disorder-worsening symptoms  of  low  mood,
      feels weak all time" and "[s]evere depressive episode  with  psychotic
      symptoms".


38.   The Sponsor develops the evidence about the treatment she receives  as
      follows:


           "7.   To make the situation worse, my health has  not  been  the
           best lately.  I suffer from ongoing anxiety and depression; this
           was first triggered by the death of my first husband in  January
           2013.  Due to this I am treated by antidepressants and hypnotics
           and these medications only make me feel more  lazy  and  drowsy.
           Moreover, it is unlikely for me  to  conceive  naturally  as  my
           mental state plays a major role.


           8.    I  have  been  in  and  out  of  hospital  several  times,
           suffering from severe  chronic  abdominal  pain,  gynaecological
           problems  and  excessive  bleeding  for  which  I've  seen   the
           specialist clinic at the Royal London  hospital.   I  have  been
           suffering severe conditions and been trying to conceive for  the
           last few years.  I've been investigated by the fertility  clinic
           and  they're  also  been  investigating  my  husband.   If  such
           measures need to be taken due to my condition it makes me quiver
           about the consequences that will need to be taken if I  move  to
           Bangladesh as I don't trust the medical  system  there  at  all,
           they're not professionally trained  and  they  wouldn't  provide
           exceptional and quality services.


           9.    Over this difficult  time  my  husband  has  been  a  huge
           support both emotionally and mentally on  a  regular  basis,  on
           nights when my pain was unbearable he  would  sit  with  me  all
           night.  Most of the time he was the one that suggested me to  go
           to the hospital, not only that as I was bleeding excessively,  I
           also felt dizzy and weak majority of the time.   I  couldn't  do
           simple tasks such as taking a shower as I was  scared  I'd  fall
           down, so my husband would hold me  while  I  showered.   Not  to
           forget  he  did  all  the  household  chores  like  cooking  and
           cleaning, I felt guilty and helpless.  I don't think I will  get
           over how much support he has showed me during my time  of  need.
           But I guess that is the beauty of marriage, you  stand  by  your
           partner in sickness and in health so how can I  abandon  him  in
           this  situation.   Under  my  current  situation  relocating  to
           Bangladesh would be out of question as neither am I mentally  or
           physically fit to embark on that journey to start my  life  from
           scratch.


           10.   The decision of the SSHD is worrying as I will  be  unable
           to endure any form of separation from my  husband.   Even  if  I
           wanted to, I would be unable to relocate to Bangladesh  with  my
           husband because I have been living in  the  United  Kingdom  for
           more than a decade and I  have  no  connection  with  Bangladesh
           whatsoever.  I do not have any recourse to provide for myself in
           Bangladesh except my mother and a sister.


           11.   Accordingly, I would be unable to  survive  in  Bangladesh
           and it would be emotionally very distressing for me, thus having
           a  negative  impact  on  my  wellbeing.   I  have  had  horrible
           experiences there.  I could not  cope  with  the  life-style  in
           Bangladesh.  I am also on regular medication which I may not  be
           able to obtain in Bangladesh.   At  the  end  of  the  day,  any
           attempt to remove my husband from the UK will be unjustified and
           undoubtedly will have a negative impact on  me  as  I  would  be
           unable to live without him.  Moreover, if my husband is  removed
           from the UK then maintaining any  meaningful  relationship  with
           him through visits to Bangladesh and/or by using modern  methods
           of communication is not a long- or short-term viable solution.


           12.   The thought of relocating to Bangladesh makes me  anxious,
           I have been there before for a short time so I know  the  issues
           in Bangladesh and  there  is  a  lot  of  conflict  between  the
           governments.  There is not one person that can convince me  that
           it's the place one should settle down and  start  a  family.   I
           have lived here all my life, yes I  am  Bangladeshi  origin  but
           that does not disregard my interests and desires  for  the  UK."




39.   I disregard  the  Sponsor's  assertion  there  and  elsewhere  in  her
      statement that she has "lived [in the UK] all [her]  life"  not  least
      because it is patently inconsistent with what she says at [10] of  her
      statement which reflects the position as stated  elsewhere.   She  has
      lived in the UK since 2009. I appreciate that this is now a period  of
      twelve or so years, but it is not the whole of her life.   Nor  is  it
      accurate to say that she lived in Bangladesh for "a short time".   The
      Sponsor was born in 1974 and therefore lived in Bangladesh  until  she
      was in her mid-thirties.


40.   Although the Sponsor says that she lacks ties to  Bangladesh,  I  note
      that her statement had to be translated  for  her  and  so  she  still
      speaks Bengali (and presumably little English).   Both  the  Appellant
      and her first husband were from Bangladesh.  She has family ties  with
      Bangladesh in the form of her mother and sister.  There is no evidence
      that either she or the Appellant have  family  ties  in  the  UK.  The
      Sponsor would therefore have a greater degree  of  family  support  in
      Bangladesh than she has in the UK.


41.   The Sponsor mentions having "horrible experiences" in  Bangladesh  but
      does not expand.  Although she provides evidence at [13] and following
      of her statement about the safety of Bangladesh, I  can  place  little
      weight on what she says as by her own admission she has lived  in  the
      UK for over ten years and therefore would not have  direct  experience
      of the incidents  she  recounts.   I  do  not  doubt  that  there  are
      incidents of violence towards women in Bangladesh as  there  recounted
      but there is no evidence that they are on such a scale  to  make  life
      for  a  woman  in  Bangladesh  generally  unsafe.   Sporadic   violent
      incidents  against  women  are  unfortunately  not  confined  to  that
      country.


42.   Similarly, I can place little weight on  the  Sponsor's  own  evidence
      about medical problems in Bangladesh nor the  treatment  available  to
      her as also dealt with in her second statement dated 6 August 2021  at
      [ABS2/2-4].  I will  consider  the  background  evidence  below.   The
      Sponsor's general focus in her statement is on her  fertility  issues.
      As Judge Welsh pointed out, whilst that is naturally upsetting for the
      Sponsor and is not unnaturally a concern which she continues to  have,
      it is  unrealistic  to  suggest  that  she  will  receive  any  better
      treatment for her problems in that regard in the UK than in Bangladesh
      due to her age.


43.   It is notable that, although the Sponsor speaks of her  mental  health
      problems in her statement, she says little  about  the  treatment  she
      receives in that regard.  She says  that  her  treatment  consists  of
      medication.  The impression given by her statement is that  any  other
      support she receives comes from her husband.   She  does  not  mention
      counselling,  care  in  the  community  or  regular  reviews  of   her
      condition.   There is some limited reference to  the  support  from  a
      care co-ordinator and bilingual  support  worker  in  the  Appellant's
      statement at [AB/3] (set out at [22] above).  However,  he  says  only
      that they engage regularly (without saying how  frequently)  and  give
      him feedback.  I note in this regard the similarity of wording between
      what is there said and what Dr Hajamohideen says in his  letters  (see
      below).  It is  not  entirely  clear  why  the  Appellant  would  need
      feedback on his wife's condition since he lives with her.   I  do  not
      though place any great weight on that  peculiarity  of  wording  as  I
      accept that the statement was  probably  drafted  by  the  Appellant's
      solicitors who may have lifted the wording from what  Dr  Hajamohideen
      says.  The lack of any detail about the assistance given by  the  care
      co-ordinator and bilingual support worker both in the  statements  and
      the letters written by professionals is something on which I do  place
      weight.


44.   I accept that the Sponsor is in receipt of PIP at  the  standard  rate
      of �57.30 per week ([AB/25]).  She receives  no  assistance  with  her
      mobility needs.   The  assessment  at  [AB/28-29]  suggests  that  the
      Sponsor is able to look after herself  so  far  as  personal  care  is
      concerned.


45.   As I have noted above, the Sponsor updated her statement on  6  August
      2021 (ABS2/2-4].  She says that her "physical  conditions  remain  the
      same but [her] mental health [has] further been deteriorated [sic]".


46.   I turn then to consider the professional evidence from those who  have
      been treating the Sponsor.


47.   I begin with the letter from Dr AA  Hussain  dated  14  February  2018
      ([AB/21-23].  He is or was the Sponsor's GP.  He records that, in June
      2017, he assessed her "and found  her  to  be  suffering  from  severe
      ongoing anxiety and depression".  Dr Hussain attributes the  onset  of
      the Sponsor's mental health problems to the sudden death of her  first
      husband in 2013.  He also says that the Sponsor's inability  naturally
      to conceive is "a major contributory  factor  in  her  ongoing  mental
      state".  He reports the Sponsor's own assertion that "the  uncertainty
      surrounding [the Appellant's] immigration status is  exacerbating  her
      conditions" which Dr Hussain accepts would be the case  "if  her  sole
      source of support was removed".   Attached to Dr Hussain's letter is a
      record of the Sponsor's  past  medical  history  confirming  that  the
      Sponsor has suffered from anxiety with depression since December 2016.
       She has been prescribed mirtazapine since January 2018.    The  other
      medications there  listed  are  unconnected  with  her  mental  health
      problems.


48.   At [AB/20] there is a letter from Dr  Mohamed  Hajamohideen  dated  19
      July 2019.  He is a "Speciality Doctor" within  the  Isle  of  Dogs  &
      South Poplar CMHT.  He records that the Sponsor had been attending the
      Community Mental Health Team since January 2019 following a review  by
      the Tower Hamlets Early Intervention Psychosis Team who had  diagnosed
      her with severe depression with psychosis.  There is an absence of any
      report connected with that diagnosis in the Appellant's evidence.   It
      is said that the Sponsor's GP records disclosed that she attended  him
      with depression and anxiety in November  2018.   As  indicated  by  Dr
      Hussain's evidence, the Sponsor's problems in fact began before  then.
      Be that as it may, Dr Hajamohideen states  that,  by  this  time,  the
      Sponsor was prescribed antipsychotic medication (aripiprazole) as well
      as mirtazapine.  Dr Hajamohideen also states that the Sponsor  has  "a
      Care Coordinator" who reviews her periodically and visits her at home.
       He says that the Sponsor is also supported  by  a  bilingual  support
      worker at the CMHT and is regularly reviewed by himself.  There is  no
      evidence from either the care coordinator  or  the  bilingual  support
      worker in the Appellant's evidence.


49.   Dr Hajamohideen says this about the situation if  the  Appellant  were
      removed:


           "Her husband is the current carer, providing all around support.
            We are of the opinion her symptoms  have  recently  intensified
           markedly in light of potential deportation [sic] of her  husband
           which would leave  her  completely  socially  isolated  in  this
           country."


      Dr Hajamohideen also says that the Sponsor is at "high risk of suicide
      attempt" if the Appellant is removed but I assume  that  this  too  is
      predicated on the Sponsor remaining in the  UK  if  the  Appellant  is
      removed.  He there provides no detail of any previous suicide attempt,
      nor does he indicate that the Sponsor has ever expressed any  suicidal
      ideation.

50.   Dr Hussain has provided  an  updated  letter  dated  10  January  2020
      ([AB/16-19]).  This largely  repeats  what  is  said  in  his  earlier
      letter.  However, he provides an update.  In June  2018,  it  is  said
      that the Sponsor's depression had deteriorated, and the level  of  her
      antidepressants had increased.  She was  seen  again  by  the  GP  for
      anxiety and depression and by January 2019,  was  "under  psychiatrist
      and  on  medication"  (consistent  with  what  is   recorded   by   Dr
      Hajamohideen).  She was  seen  again  in  April  2019  for  depressive
      disorder and because she needed a medical certificate.  She  was  seen
      again for her depression in  June  2019  when  she  is  said  to  have
      "worsening symptoms of low mood, feels weak all  the  time,  forgetful
      and poor concentration".  In July  2019,  the  Sponsor  was  seen  for
      "severe depressive episode with  psychotic  symptoms".   There  is  no
      record of any interventions for mental health by the GP in the  period
      thereafter to the  date  of  the  letter.   The  list  of  medications
      confirms that the Sponsor was prescribed aripiprazole and  mirtazapine
      for her mental health condition.

51.   There is a rather fuller report from Dr Hajamohideen dated 15  January
      2020 at [AB/13-15].  That report again refers to the GP attendance  in
      November 2018.  Dr Hajamohideen says that at that  time,  the  Sponsor
      was suffering depression, had expressed a death wish but had no active
      suicidal thoughts.  The GP became concerned in December 2018 when  the
      Sponsor said that she was experiencing auditory  hallucinations.   She
      was referred, as indicated  in  the  previous  letter,  to  the  Tower
      Hamlets Early Intervention Team and was seen by Dr Daniel Allen who is
      said to have conducted "a thorough assessment on 14th  January  2019".
      It is said that "Dr Allen's impression was a  psychotic  illness  with
      prominent, distressing auditory hallucinations".  However, Dr  Allen's
      "thorough assessment" is not in evidence.

52.   Dr Hajamohideen then refers to his examination  on  14  January  2019.
      He describes the Sponsor's  presentation  at  that  time  and  records
      reports that her mental health state had worsened as a result  of  the
      threat of the Appellant's  removal.   Dr  Hajamohideen  provides  more
      detail of his observations on that occasion.  He describes the Sponsor
      as "tense, anxious, distressed" and that her  mood  was  "reported  as
      very  low,  mainly  anxious  and  preoccupied   with   her   husband's
      deportation".   Although  Dr  Hajamohideen  says  that   the   Sponsor
      expressed suicidal ideations, he says that there was "no  evidence  of
      intent or actual planning".  It is  therefore  somewhat  difficult  to
      understand how he reaches the view that there is a  moderate  risk  of
      suicide.  Again, the risk is in  any  event  in  the  context  of  the
      Sponsor being left behind in the UK if the Appellant is removed.

53.   Dr Hajamohideen says that after  this  appointment,  the  Sponsor  was
      followed up by the Early  Intervention  Psychosis  Team  and  that  he
      reviewed her again on 12 February 2019 with her care  coordinator  and
      bilingual support worker.  The Sponsor continued to  report  much  the
      same symptoms as before and is now said to be a  "persistent  risk  of
      suicide" (although it is not reported that there is  any  evidence  of
      actual intent or planning).  Dr Hajamohideen is said to have seen  the
      Sponsor again on 26 June  2019  and  at  a  "Care  Programme  Approach
      review" in August 2019.  He reports "no significant improvement in her
      presentation.   She  remained  depressed  with   persisting   auditory
      hallucinations.   Suicide  risk  being  moderate".   Dr   Hajamohideen
      "provisionally diagnosed" a severe depressive episode with  psychosis.



54.   In terms of the Sponsor's treatment, she is said to  be  "continuously
      supported by her care coordinator as well  as  our  bilingual  support
      worker" who are said to engage with her  "regularly"  and  provide  Dr
      Hajamohideen with feedback.  He says  that  the  Sponsor  attends  his
      clinic "regularly" (although provides no  information  of  any  visits
      between August 2019 and the date of the letter).   He  says  that  the
      Sponsor was, at the date of the letter, waiting to be seen by him  "in
      the near future" and that a "Care Programme Approach Review" would  be
      arranged by her care coordinator every four to five months.

55.    There  is  limited  evidence  from  any  of  those  reviews  in   the
      Appellant's evidence. There are two brief reports from Dr Hajamohideen
      to the Sponsor's GP  recording  reviews  in  February  and  June  2019
      ([ABS/16-19] and an even briefer report from the review in August 2019
      ([ABS/14]). The latter two reviews suggest  some  improvement  in  the
      Sponsor's condition.  There  is  also  a  letter  dated  19  May  2020
      following a review by telephone  (during  the  pandemic)  at  [ABS/13]
      which reports little change.

56.   In Dr Hajamohideen's report he says that the feedback he has  received
      is that the Sponsor's "current mental state is variable .. because she
      is putting all the hopes in her husband's stay in the UK".   He  again
      opines  that  separation  from  her  husband  would  lead  to  further
      deterioration in her condition and that the support from the Appellant
      is a "stabilising factor" which also helps improve her mental state.

57.   Dr Hajamohideen reaches the following conclusion in his report:

           "In  my  opinion  separation  from  her  husband  and  all   the
           psychosocial support provided by him would be detrimental to her
           mental and physical health as  she  does  not  have  anybody  to
           support her.  It could cause further deterioration in her mental
           health condition with suicide risk becoming  high.   This  could
           also make adverse impact on her physical conditions  leading  to
           poor control of her diabetes with complications."

58.   I turn next  to  the  further  report  of  Dr  Hajamohideen  dated  23
      September 2020 at [ABS/4-5].  The report as to  the  Sponsor's  mental
      health diagnosis is a repetition of the 2019 report.  In  this  report
      though, Dr Hajamohideen reports suicidal thoughts "on  and  off".   He
      again notes the impact of the Appellant's potential removal  and  says
      that "[t]he prognosis of her psychiatric illness will be better if her
      husband is allowed to stay with her".  He records that  the  Appellant
      does not function well on a  daily  basis  and  needs  help  with  her
      medication and personal care.   He says that her "psychiatric problems
      are in a scale of being very severe affecting every aspect of her  day
      to day life".  I observe that this is  not  entirely  consistent  with
      what is said about her self-care in the PIP assessment at  [AB/24-29].
      Although that is dated a year earlier, it is not said that  there  has
      been any later assessment.

59.   In terms of ongoing treatment, Dr Hajamohideen says that  the  Sponsor
      is "care coordinated with a community Psychiatric Nurse and  supported
      by a Bilingual Support worker in the Community".  He does not  provide
      detail about the extent or regularity of their intervention.  He  says
      only that they provide him with feedback about  the  Sponsor's  mental
      state.  The doctor refers to the extensive  support  provided  by  the
      Appellant. He refers to the  Appellant  alerting  "the  Mental  Health
      professionals whenever her mental state  escalate  beyond  his  coping
      [sic]"  and  that  he  accompanies  the  Sponsor  to  her  psychiatric
      appointments.  However, he does not say when if at all it is has  been
      necessary for the Appellant  to  escalate  matters  to  mental  health
      professionals nor how regular  are  her  appointments.   There  is  no
      mention in this report of any further examination  following  that  in
      August 2019 recorded in the previous report.  The Appellant  does  not
      report occasions when he has had to escalate  the  Sponsor's  case  to
      healthcare professionals because he has been unable to cope.

60.   Dr Hajamohideen's conclusions on this occasion based it seems  on  the
      same presentation and diagnosis as previously are as follows:

           "If her husband is removed from UK it will affect her well being
           seriously.  Her mental and physical conditions could deteriorate
           further leading to self neglect, complications of  her  diabetes
           exposing her life to the danger of early death.  The deprivation
           of emotional and social support provided  by  her  husband  will
           significantly increase her risk of committing suicide.

           [SB] does not have the support of any relatives  or  friends  in
           the UK.  Her husband, Mr Ataur Rahman remains  the  only  person
           providing emotional and social support for her.   I  am  of  the
           opinion that his support will contribute a lot  for  her  mental
           and physical wellbeing in the future."

      I observe that although the document at [ABS/6-8] is dated also on  23
      September 2020, that is simply a repeat of the January 2020 report  to
      which I have already referred.

61.   I do not need to refer in any detail to the letter from  Dr  Lakdawala
      (the Sponsor's GP) at [ABS/9-12] as this repeats information from  the
      previous letters written by Dr Hussain.  It is however  notable  that,
      once again, there is no reference to the Sponsor approaching her GP in
      relation to mental health problems after July 2019.

62.   Unfortunately, it does  not  appear  that  the  Sponsor's  GPs  or  Dr
      Hajamohideen were asked to comment on  the  impact  on  the  Sponsor's
      mental health if she were to return to Bangladesh with the  Appellant.
      If she were to do so, she would have  the  support  of  not  only  the
      Appellant and his family but also her own mother and sister.

63.   In the context  of  the  treatment  and  care  which  the  Sponsor  is
      receiving, Mr Karim specifically drew my attention to what is said  to
      be   regular   review   of   the   Sponsor   by   a   dedicated   care
      coordinator/community  nurse  and  bilingual  support   worker.    The
      difficulty with that submission as it seems to me is that  I  have  no
      evidence from those persons about the role they  play.   If  they  are
      simply meeting with her periodically,  reviewing  her  current  mental
      state and feeding back updates to the doctor (as  appears  to  be  the
      evidence) that  is  very  different  to  the  Sponsor  having  regular
      counselling and therapy sessions with a qualified consultant.  Even if
      the Sponsor has the benefit of some care from a community nurse,  that
      is not the same as ongoing therapy and, again, I have no  evidence  as
      to the extent and regularity of the care provided.  I have no evidence
      from those said to be providing that care.

64.   The other difficulty with the medical evidence, as I observed  in  the
      course of the hearing, is the lack of any evidence after the documents
      which I have described above.   The most recent of those documents  is
      dated in September 2020.  I am hearing  this  appeal  in  August  2021
      nearly a year later.  Whilst I appreciate that the pandemic  may  have
      made the obtaining of evidence more difficult, I do  not  accept  that
      something could not have been obtained.  At the very least the  extent
      of the current medical treatment could have been  dealt  with  in  the
      Sponsor's  supplementary  witness  statement  dated  6  August   2021.
      However, as I have already set out, that statement says nothing  about
      her current treatment and provides no  detail  beyond  mere  assertion
      about the deterioration in her mental health since January 2020.   The
      only medical evidence about her mental health in that  period  is  the
      brief letter dated May 2020 recording a review which appears  to  have
      been conducted remotely by Dr Hajamohideen mainly with  the  Appellant
      and not the Sponsor and where the Appellant is reported to  have  said
      that "[o]verall she remained the same as  before"  and  was  complying
      with her medication.

65.   Although Dr Hajamohideen  does  not  set  out  his  qualifications  or
      expertise, I am prepared to accept his reports and to give  them  some
      weight in relation to  the  extent  of  the  Sponsor's  mental  health
      problems and treatment.  I do not give weight  to  any  comments  made
      about the Sponsor's physical health not simply because he is not  said
      to have any expertise  in  this  regard  (as  he  is  described  as  a
      specialty doctor in mental health)  but  also  because  the  Sponsor's
      physical health conditions are not the focus of the Appellant's  case.



66.   As I identify above, even accepting Dr Hajamohideen's evidence at  its
      highest, though, there are  gaps  in  that  evidence  particularly  as
      regards treatment.  His last report is nearly one year  old.   In  any
      event he and the Sponsor's GPs have provided a prognosis based  on  an
      assumption that the Sponsor would be separated from the  Appellant  if
      he were removed.  The issue for me is whether there are insurmountable
      obstacles preventing her accompanying him to Bangladesh.

67.   Based on the medical evidence such as it is, therefore, I turn now  to
      consider the background information about what treatment is  available
      to the Sponsor in Bangladesh should she return there.

 68.  Both parties rely on the Home Office Country  Policy  and  Information
      Note Bangladesh: Medical and Healthcare Issues Version 1.0  dated  May
      2019 ("the CPIN").  There is no dispute as to the  paragraphs  of  the
      CPIN which are relevant which are as follows:

                 "9. Mental health

           9.1.1 An Australian DFAT report of February 2018 noted, 'Despite
           considerable needs, there are few support services available for
           those suffering from mental health disorders and [there  is]  no
           specific mental health authority in Bangladesh.'  The  US  State
           Department 2018  Report  on  Human  Rights  Practices  similarly
           observed,  'Government  facilities  for  treating  persons  with
           mental disabilities  were  inadequate  [for  the  country  as  a
           whole].'

           9.1.2 MedCOI commented in a response of 4 September 2015:

           'Based on the  information  found  in  several  sources,  mental
           illness  in  Bangladesh  is  highly   stigmatized   and   mental
           healthcare is in its nascent  stages.  Healthcare  provision  is
           limited ... However, steps for change and improvement are taken.
           'Mental healthcare is offered by  both  government  and  private
           facilities, the vast majority being concentrated in urban areas,
           especially in metropolitan cities [...] Most psychiatrists  work
           in tertiary care in  urban  areas.  They  also  work  either  in
           private practice  or  in  a  mixture  of  teaching  and  private
           practice in cities. 'Healthcare at primary level is provided  by
           healthcare centres (PHC) where a physician can be found and [at]
           PHC clinics with no physicians.

           'According to  [a  WHO  report  of  2007],  all  or  almost  all
           physician-based clinics (81-100%) have assessment and  treatment
           protocols  for  key  mental  health  conditions  available,   in
           comparison to only a few clinics (1-20%) in non-physician  based
           primary health care centers.

           'Due to the dearth  of  mental  health  professionals  and  poor
           logistic support, the existing three tier health  care  delivery
           system is not functioning well  for  mental  health  conditions.
           Referrals of patient with  mental  disorders  to  mental  health
           specialists by the general practitioners or  other  health  care
           providers are almost non-existent. [Referrals are] also hampered
           due to superstitious beliefs related to psychiatric disorders.

           'The Bangladesh Health System Review counts 50 outpatient mental
           health  facilities,  31  community-based  psychiatric  inpatient
           units and 11 community residential facilities. Schizophrenia  is
           the most common condition treated in outpatient centers.'  9.1.3
           The National Institute of Mental Health &  Research  (NIMH),  in
           Dhaka, is  a  200-bed  teaching  hospital  which,  according  to
           MedCOI, offers free or lowcost psychiatric care on an  inpatient
           or outpatient basis. Professional  services  include  adult  and
           child psychiatry, psychotherapy and  clinical  psychology,  drug
           addiction and rehabilitation. 9.1.4 The Department of Psychiatry
           at Bangabandhu Sheikh Mujib Medical University (BSMMU), a public
           hospital,  provides  inpatient  or  outpatient  treatment  by  a
           psychiatrist  and  inpatient  or  outpatient  treatment   by   a
           psychologist.

           9.1.5 MedCOI  found  in  September  2017  that  these  treatment
           options were available for PTSD and a depressive disorder:

           -  Inpatient  or  outpatient  treatment  and  follow  up  by   a
           psychiatrist

           - outpatient treatment and follow up by a psychologist

           - treatment of PTSD by means of EMDR

           -  treatment  by  means   of   psychotherapy:   e.g.   cognitive
           behavioural therapy

           - treatment of PTSD by means of narrative exposure therapy.

           9.1.6 ...

           10.1.6 A broad range of medicines for psychiatric treatment  are
           obtainable. To check the availability of  a  particular  generic
           drug, its brand  names  and  the  pharmaceutical  company  which
           supplies it in Bangladesh, refer to BDdrugs.com: Central nervous
           system drugs.

           10.1.7 According to an Australian DFAT report of February  2018,
           'Considerable  social  stigma  attaches  to   reporting   mental
           illness.'

           See Annex A for list of available medications"

      Mirtazapine is on the list at Annex A.  Aripiprazole is  not  but  the
      CPIN indicates that there is a broad range of medicines available  for
      psychiatric treatment and I have no evidence that there  is  no  anti-
      psychotic medication obtainable in Bangladesh.

 69.  Mr Karim submitted that the Sponsor needs more than  just  medication.
      In the UK she is under the  supervision  of  a  care  coordinator  and
      support worker (and possibly also a community nurse).  That may be  so
      but, as I have already noted, the evidence about the  role  played  by
      those persons and the Sponsor's need for that assistance (assuming the
      Appellant is there to offer assistance) is very limited.  Even  if  it
      remains the case that the Sponsor has the benefit of a community nurse
      to keep her condition under review and report back to Dr  Hajamohideen
      that is not regular counselling or  therapy  treatment.   The  reviews
      carried out by Dr Hajamohideen himself appear to  be  at  regular  but
      relatively infrequent intervals with several months between each.  The
      evidence in the CPIN suggests that equivalent treatment is  likely  to
      be available if the Sponsor needs it. I accept that it may not  be  of
      the same standard, but the CPIN does not say that  such  treatment  is
      not available at all.

70.   I have regard to the reasons given  by  the  healthcare  professionals
      about the cause of the Sponsor's mental  health  issues.   Those  were
      initially and understandably triggered  by  the  death  of  her  first
      husband.  They were then exacerbated by her inability to conceive.   I
      accept that the threat of the Appellant's removal is recently said  to
      be a significant contributory factor and I accept that the Sponsor  is
      very concerned about being left  in  the  UK  without  the  Appellant.
      However, the evidence does not deal with the issue which I am required
      to  consider  which  is  the  impact  on  her  mental  health  if  she
      accompanies him to Bangladesh.

71.   The medical evidence is consistent in relation to the  care  which  is
      paramount to the Sponsor's well-being and that is the support given to
      the Sponsor by the Appellant.   The  medical  professionals  who  have
      reported on the Sponsor's condition and prognosis have all  worked  on
      the assumption that if the Appellant were removed, the  Sponsor  would
      remain in the UK and the couple  would  be  separated.   There  is  no
      consideration of the  position  if  the  Sponsor  were  to  return  to
      Bangladesh with the Appellant. The management of her  condition  there
      would also include assistance from other family members.  She has  her
      own family in Bangladesh and the Appellant also has family.  They live
      in the same area. Although I accept that  the  evidence  does  mention
      societal stigmatisation  of  those  with  mental  health  issues,  the
      Sponsor would have the assistance of the Appellant and family  members
      to help her in that regard. I will consider this  element  again  when
      looking at what are said to be barriers to the  Sponsor's  integration
      in Bangladesh.

72.   I accept Mr Karim's submission that I am not  considering  the  health
      issues of the Sponsor on the same basis as I  would  if  it  were  the
      Appellant who was suffering  from  those  problems.   This  is  not  a
      "health case" where I would be considering the mental health  problems
      against the high threshold which would apply if the  person  suffering
      from health issues were the person to be removed.   I  am  considering
      the position in relation to the level of obstacles to the Sponsor  and
      Appellant continuing their family life in Bangladesh.  I  accept  that
      insurmountable  obstacles  is  not  a  test  to  be  read   literally.
      Nonetheless, it is a high threshold  of  significant  difficulties  or
      very serious hardship for those affected by the decision.

73.   Mr Karim drew my attention in this regard to  the  Court  of  Appeal's
      judgment in Lal v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department  [2019]
      EWCA Civ 925 ("Lal").  Lal was a case where it is often suggested that
      the Court accepted that the appellant's husband's intolerance to  heat
      was sufficient to amount to insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life
      continuing in India.  The judgment has however to be read as a  whole.
      In particular, at [34] of the judgment, the Court said this:

           "The FTT judge based that conclusion entirely on her  acceptance
           of Mr Wilmshurst's evidence. It seems to us that the facts which
           Mr Wilmshurst's evidence, if  accepted  in  its  entirety,  were
           capable of proving were (i) that he is a retired man in his  70s
           who cannot bear hot temperatures and (ii) that for  this  reason
           he would feel unable to go, and would therefore not in fact  go,
           to India with his wife if she is required to leave  the  UK.  We
           think it clear, however, that proof of these  facts  is  not  by
           itself legally sufficient to establish insurmountable  obstacles
           for the purposes of paragraph EX.1.(b) of  Appendix  FM  to  the
           Immigration Rules and that the reasons  given  by  the  FTT  for
           reaching that conclusion were therefore inadequate."

      The Court accepted that the appellant's husband's age and  intolerance
      to heat were relevant factors but required consideration of what would
      occur if the couple did move to India and, in those circumstances, the
      relevance of those factors.  The Court therefore found that the First-
      tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give adequate reasons.

74.   The Court went on to consider the Upper Tribunal Judge's decision  and
      found that decision (dismissing the appeal) also to be  flawed.   That
      was not based on the Judge's reasoning as to the appellant's husband's
      health condition but because the Judge  had  failed  to  consider  all
      factors cumulatively.  The Court said  that  if  the  factors  of  the
      husband's age and sensitivity to heat had been considered in that  way
      alongside the fact that he had lived all his life in the  UK  and  had
      extensive family ties here, the Court did "not think that  the  answer
      to the question whether moving to  India  would  entail  very  serious
      hardship for him is a foregone conclusion". The Court  of  Appeal  did
      not remit the appeal for redetermination by this Tribunal but  allowed
      the appeal only because the Respondent had agreed  to  reconsider  the
      case.

75.   Mr Karim also drew my attention to the case of Secretary of State  for
      the Home Department v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813.  That  case  relates
      to  whether  there  would  be  very  significant   obstacles   to   an
      individual's integration on return to home country (in the deportation
      context).  It is therefore not  directly  relevant  to  the  Sponsor's
      situation.  Nonetheless, it is instructive to consider what  was  said
      by the Court of Appeal in relation to  the  ability  to  integrate  as
      follows:

           "14.   In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
           'integration' into the country to which it is proposed  that  he
           be deported, as set out  in  section  117C(4)(c)  and  paragraph
           399A, is a broad one. It is not confined to the mere ability  to
           find a job or to sustain life while living in the other country.
           It is not appropriate to treat the statutory language as subject
           to some gloss and it will usually be sufficient for a  court  or
           tribunal simply to direct itself in the  terms  that  Parliament
           has chosen to use. The idea of 'integration' calls for  a  broad
           evaluative judgment to be made as to whether the individual will
           be enough of an insider in terms of understanding  how  life  in
           the society in that other country is carried on and  a  capacity
           to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable opportunity  to
           be accepted there, to be able to operate on a  day-to-day  basis
           in that society and to build  up  within  a  reasonable  time  a
           variety  of  human  relationships  to  give  substance  to   the
           individual's private or family life."

76.   It goes without saying that the  Sponsor  is  neither  foreign  nor  a
      criminal.  I accept that she is a British citizen and that this  is  a
      relevant although not a weighty factor (see in  that  regard  what  is
      said by the Supreme Court in Agyarko and Ikuga v Secretaary  of  State
      for the Home Department [2017] UKSC 11 - "Agyarko" at �33-36).   Prior
      to naturalising as a British  citizen,  however,  the  Sponsor  was  a
      Bangladeshi citizen.  She grew up in that country.  She came to the UK
      only in 2009 and was already in her mid-thirties by then.   She  still
      speaks her native language.  She has family members remaining in  that
      country.  I cannot accept that she could not be described  as  "enough
      of an insider in terms of understanding how life  in  the  society  in
      that other country is carried on and a capacity to participate in  it"
      so as to be able to conduct her private life there.

77.   The only specific issue  which  requires  to  be  considered  in  this
      context is whether the Sponsor's mental health problems would lead  to
      societal  stigmatisation  which  would  impact  on  her   ability   to
      integrate.  Mr Karim relied on this factor.  There is however  limited
      evidential support for that submission.  There  is  reference  in  the
      CPIN  to  mental  illness  being  "highly  stigmatized"   and   mental
      healthcare being "in its nascent stages".   There is also reference to
      "superstitious  beliefs  related  to  psychiatric  disorders".   Those
      references emanate however from a 2015 report.  The indication is that
      there is treatment available albeit it  may  not  be  as  good  as  is
      offered in the UK.  There may not be the general acceptance of  mental
      health issues in Bangladesh as exists nowadays in the UK but there  is
      no evidence that the Sponsor would be ostracised or  mistreated  as  a
      result of her mental health problems.  As I have already pointed  out,
      she would have the Appellant and his and her family  members  to  help
      her reintegrate.

78.   I deal finally with  other  potential  obstacles  to  the  Appellant's
      family life being continued in Bangladesh.

79.   The Appellant says in his statement dated 17 January  2020  at  [AB/5]
      (paragraph [16]) that he would  be  sent  to  prison  if  returned  to
      Bangladesh because there is a judgment against him.  That is  repeated
      by the Sponsor in her statement of the same date at [AB/11] (paragraph
      18).  That latter assertion must be based on what  the  Appellant  has
      told her  as  she  did  not  know  the  Appellant  when  he  lived  in
      Bangladesh.   There  are  documents  relating  to  this  part  of  the
      Appellant's original case at [AB/44-66].  I was not referred to those.
       This claim was rejected as not credible by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      Welsh in the 2018  Appeal  Decision.   In  any  event,  the  Appellant
      abandoned this part of his case before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Paul
      in this appeal (see [10] of the First-tier Tribunal  decision).  I  do
      not therefore need to deal with this aspect.

80.   The Appellant and Sponsor have included in the bundle various  reports
      concerning the Covid-19 pandemic situation in  Bangladesh  ([AB/29-54]
      and [ABS2/5-48]).  These reports show  that  Bangladesh  has  problems
      arising from the pandemic as do most countries in the world with  both
      the treatment and containment of the virus and the resource  pressures
      arising from the virus in healthcare and economic terms.  There is  no
      evidence that the pandemic has hit Bangladesh more severely than other
      countries in the region nor even  than  the  UK.   The  Appellant  and
      Sponsor could obviously not be expected to return to Bangladesh  until
      any travel restrictions allow but I was  not  provided  with  evidence
      that Bangladesh does not allow its own or British nationals to  travel
      there whether with or without quarantine requirements.

81.   The  Appellant's  evidence  is  that  he  no  longer  has  friends  in
      Bangladesh.  I accept that the  Appellant  has  been  in  the  UK  for
      fourteen years and may have lost any contacts he had with  friends  in
      Bangladesh.  However,  there  is  little  if  any  evidence  that  the
      Appellant and  Sponsor  have  any  friends  in  the  UK  either.   The
      impression given from both their evidence and the letters  written  by
      the professionals is that they are a self-contained  unit  and  depend
      only on each other for support and  social  interaction.   As  I  have
      already observed, they might in fact  be  in  a  better  situation  on
      return to Bangladesh as both have family members there.

82.   Even assuming that the Appellant's  brother  will  not  allow  him  to
      become involved again  in  their  stationery  business,  there  is  no
      evidence that the Appellant could not  work  in  Bangladesh.   He  was
      brought up in that country and can speak the language.   There  is  no
      evidence that he has any physical or  mental  disabilities  preventing
      him from working.  He came to the UK initially to  work  although  has
      not been permitted to do so now for many years.  However, there is  no
      evidence that he could not find work on return.

83.   Considering all of the above factors cumulatively and  in  the  round,
      and, having regard to the threshold which applies  in  relation  to  a
      finding of insurmountable obstacles, I am unable to  accept  that  the
      evidence shows that there would be  insurmountable  obstacles  to  the
      Appellant and Sponsor continuing their family life in  Bangladesh.   I
      accept that returning  to  her  native  Bangladesh  may  involve  some
      hardship for the Sponsor and to a lesser extent the Appellant, but the
      evidence does not show that  such  hardship  would  be  very  serious.
      Relocation would not give rise to very significant  difficulties  such
      as to meet the threshold in EX.1.  Accordingly, that paragraph is  not
      met.  The Appellant cannot therefore succeed within the Rules.

84.   I am nonetheless required to go on to consider whether Article 8  ECHR
      is breached when considered outside the Rules.  The issue  is  whether
      the  refusal  of  the  human  rights  claim  is   a   disproportionate
      interference with the private and family lives of  the  Appellant  and
      the Sponsor.  Would removal have unjustifiably harsh consequences  for
      the Appellant and Sponsor? This assessment involves a balancing of the
      interference against the public interest.  When considering the public
      interest, I am required to have regard to Section 117B.

85.   I begin with Mr Karim's submission that  Chikwamba  is  in  play  when
      considering the appeal outside the Rules.  I struggle to see how  that
      case can apply to the facts here.    I  refer  again  to  the  Supreme
      Court's judgment in Agyarko where a similar argument to that  made  by
      Mr Karim was rejected.  It is difficult to  see  how,  if  the  couple
      could be expected to relocate permanently to  Bangladesh  to  continue
      their family life, a temporary interference could be disproportionate.
       Obviously, the Sponsor cannot be obliged to go to Bangladesh but  the
      situation here is very far from that arising in  Chikwamba  where  the
      sponsor could not be expected to return to his home country as he  was
      a refugee from that country. It is a matter of choice for the  Sponsor
      whether she accompanies the Appellant on return whether permanently or
      for a short period to allow him to apply for entry clearance  to  come
      back to the UK.  It is however reasonable to expect her to do so.

86.   Going on to balance the factors for and against the  Appellant,  I  do
      not repeat what I  have  already  said  about  the  obstacles  to  the
      Appellant and Sponsor moving to Bangladesh. I take those into account.
      I have  accepted  that  those  obstacles  involve  some  hardship  and
      difficulty but not such as to meet the threshold within the Rules.   I
      do not however seek to minimise those  difficulties  particularly  for
      the treatment of the Sponsor's health.  I recognise that she  receives
      some support from healthcare professionals in the UK  which  may  well
      not be replicated to the same standard in Bangladesh although  I  have
      found that she is likely to have  greater  family  support.    I  also
      recognise that she  may  encounter  some  societal  discrimination  or
      stigmatisation due to her mental health.  Again, though,  she  can  be
      assisted in this regard by  the  Appellant  and  his  and  her  family
      members.

87.   Looking at the issues through the lens of Section 117B, the  Appellant
      was here unlawfully when he entered into  his  relationship  with  the
      Sponsor.  For that reason, I am able to give only little weight to the
      Appellant's and Sponsor's family life (Section 117B  (4)).   I  accept
      that little weight does not mean no weight.   There  is  however  good
      reason for this provision.  The Appellant and Sponsor must have  known
      from the start of their relationship that the Appellant may  well  not
      be entitled to remain in the UK. They built up their  relationship  in
      full knowledge of the possible risk that he would be removed  at  some
      point.

88.   Similarly, I can give only little weight to  the  Appellant's  private
      life applying Section 117B (4) and  Section  117B  (5).   Whilst  that
      provision does not apply to the private life of the Sponsor, there  is
      limited evidence of a private life of either the Sponsor or  Appellant
      when it comes to relationships with others.  I give some weight to the
      fact that the Appellant has been in the UK for about  fourteen  years.
      However, neither he nor the Sponsor have family members in the UK  and
      there is little if any evidence of friendships.  I have already  noted
      the  Sponsor's  support  from  the  authorities  in  relation  to  her
      healthcare and also that she receives some benefits which I accept she
      will lose if she moves to Bangladesh. I accept that this  is  relevant
      to her private life and amounts to interference with it.  However,  as
      I have found, whilst healthcare is unlikely to be of the same  quality
      as in the UK, the Sponsor is likely to have  additional  support  from
      family members and of course the Appellant.  I have already found that
      the Appellant will be able to work on return to  Bangladesh  and  will
      therefore be able to provide the financial support to the  Sponsor  to
      replace her benefit income.

89.   There is no evidence that the  Appellant  or  Sponsor  speak  English.
      The Appellant gave his evidence via an interpreter.  I understood that
      if the Sponsor was to give evidence, she would need to do  so  via  an
      interpreter. Her witness statements had  to  be  translated  for  her.
      Although I would have expected that she would have needed to show some
      ability to speak English in order to naturalise,  that  may  not  have
      been the case at that time or her ability may have lapsed as  she  has
      to  use  a  bilingual  support  worker  to  engage   with   healthcare
      professionals.  It is in any event the Appellant's language  abilities
      which are at issue.  There is no evidence that he speaks  English  and
      that is a factor which weighs against him (Section 117B (2)).

90.   I am prepared to accept that the Appellant would be  able  to  support
      himself without recourse to public funds (Section 117B (3)).  Although
      the couple presently live on the benefits  to  which  the  Sponsor  is
      entitled, there is no evidence  that  they  have  obtained  any  other
      benefits to support the Appellant.  I have found it  likely  that  the
      Appellant continues to receive some financial support from his  family
      in Bangladesh.  I have found that the Appellant could find work if  he
      returned to Bangladesh. I have no reason to think that  the  situation
      would be any different if he remained in the UK.  However, that  is  a
      neutral factor (see  Rhuppiah  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
      Department [2018] UKSC 58 at �57).

91.   Section 117B (1) is however a weighty factor in this  case  in  favour
      of the public interest.  The Appellant has been in the  UK  for  about
      fourteen years.  However, he had the right to remain only until  2009.
      He has remained ever  since  without  permission.   He  is  unable  to
      satisfy the Rules based on his relationship  with  the  Sponsor.   The
      maintenance of effective immigration control is in the public interest
      and requires that those without permission to be in the UK and who are
      unable to satisfy the Rules permitting them the right to remain should
      be removed.

92.   Balancing the factors for and against the Appellant, I  conclude  that
      the public interest outweighs the interference  with  his  family  and
      private life and that of the Sponsor.  It is not  disproportionate  to
      expect them to continue their family and private lives in  Bangladesh.



CONCLUSION

93.   For the foregoing  reasons,  the  refusal  of  the  Appellant's  human
      rights claim is not a breach  of  Section  6  Human  Rights  Act  1998
      applying Article 8 of the Convention. He cannot meet  Appendix  FM  to
      the Rules because EX.1 is not satisfied. Outside the Rules, the public
      interest outweighs the interference with the private and family  lives
      of the Appellant and Sponsor.  The refusal of the human  rights  claim
      is therefore not disproportionate.  I therefore dismiss the appeal.



DECISION

The Appellant's appeal is dismissed.


Signed:     L K Smith                              Dated: 31 August 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith


                       APPENDIX: ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06610/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 without a      |Determination promulgated            |
|hearing                              |                                     |
|On Wednesday 26 August 2020          |.........4 September 2020.........   |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                               MR ATAUR RAHMAN
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

BACKGROUND

1.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh.  He  is  the  spouse  of  a
      British citizen.  She originates from Bangladesh and came to the UK in
      2009.  The  Appellant  appeals  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge  N  M  Paul  promulgated  on  11  February  2020  ("the
      Decision").   Although  the  Appellant  was  appealing   against   the
      Respondent's decision refusing a claim  on  protection  grounds,  that
      claim was abandoned and the  appeal  concerned  only  the  Appellant's
      Article 8 ECHR claim based on his wife's medical  conditions  and  the
      need for him to remain in the UK to care for her.

2.    By the Decision, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's  appeal,  finding
      that the Appellant and his  wife  could  relocate  to  Bangladesh  and
      continue their family life there.

3.    The Appellant appeals the Decision on three grounds as follows:

      Ground 1:  it was irrational for the Judge to conclude that there were
      no insurmountable obstacles to family life  continuing  in  Bangladesh
      (applying paragraph EX.1 of Appendix FM - "EX.1" - to the  Immigration
      Rules - "the Rules).

      Ground 2:   the  Judge  has  impermissibly  speculated  when  reaching
      certain findings about the situation which the couple  would  face  on
      relocation to Bangladesh.

      Ground 3:   the Judge has filed to consider  the  guidance  concerning
      the proportionality of requiring return where an  application  to  re-
      enter would be likely to succeed (applying Chikwamba  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2008] UKHL 40 -  "Chikwamba"  -  and  R
      (oao Agyarko and Ikuga) v Secretary of State for the  Home  Department
      [2017] UKSC 11 ).

4.    Permission to appeal was refused by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Grant-
      Hutchison on 13 March  2020  for  the  following  reasons  so  far  as
      relevant:

           "... 3.     The Judge has considered the evidence including  the
           oral evidence given on the day of the hearing.   The  Judge  has
           made appropriate findings which he was entitled to make in order
           to come to his decision.  It was open for the Judge to  consider
           what weight he felt it appropriate to place on all the  evidence
           before him.  The  Judge  has  given  adequate  reasons  for  his
           decision.

           4.    The grounds disclose no arguable error of law."

5.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara on  28
      May 2020 in the following terms so far as relevant:

           "... 2.     It was accepted by the judge [23] that the appellant
           cares full-time for his wife who suffers from poor  mental  ill-
           health.  She  is  a  British  citizen  in  receipt  of  Personal
           Independence Payment (PIP) and thus exempt  from  the  financial
           requirements in Appendix FM.  It  is  arguable,  that  in  those
           circumstances, the  judge  erred  in  failing  to  consider  the
           relevance of Chikwamba [2008]  UKHL  40.   The  recent  decision
           Younas (section 117B(6)(b); Chikwamba; Zambrano) [2020] UKUT 129
           (IAC) does not necessarily  alter  the  position  as  this  case
           [sic], as it could be argued that there is no  clear  breach  of
           immigration control which would require an application for entry
           clearance to be made where the Rules would be met.

           3.    Permission is granted on all grounds."

6.    By a Note and Directions sent on 30 June  2020,  having  reviewed  the
      file, Upper Tribunal Judge Perkins reached the provisional  view  that
      it would be appropriate to determine without a  hearing  (pursuant  to
      Rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  -  "the
      Procedure Rules") the following questions:

           (a)   whether the making of the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
           involved the making of an error of law and, if so

           (b)   whether that decision should be set aside.

      Directions were given for the parties to make submissions  in  writing
      on the appropriateness of  that  course  and  further  submissions  in
      relation to the error of law. The reasons for the Note and  Directions
      was the "present need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
      19, and the overriding objective expressed in the Procedure Rules".

7.    On 7 July 2020, the Respondent made written submissions  in  reply  to
      the Directions  also  to  be  treated  as  her  Rule  24  Reply.   The
      Respondent points to the previous appeal where it was determined  that
      it would  not  be  disproportionate  for  the  Appellant's  spouse  to
      relocate  to  Bangladesh.   Taking  that  as  a  starting  point,  the
      Respondent submits that the Judge was entitled to reach the conclusion
      he did.  In relation to the second ground, the Respondent asserts that
      the Judge has given sufficient reasons for his finding and that  there
      is no  impermissible  speculation.   On  the  "Chikwamba"  point,  the
      Respondent points out that it is unclear whether this issue was raised
      before Judge Paul.  In any event, the Respondent submits that the case
      is distinguishable from Chikwamba because the  Judge  has  found  that
      there is no reason why the Appellant's spouse cannot go to Bangladesh.
       The Respondent also points out that  the  Appellant  has  an  adverse
      immigration history and would therefore need to show  that  there  are
      exceptional circumstances in  order  to  succeed  outside  the  Rules.
      Finally, the  Respondent  asks  for  an  oral  hearing  but  makes  no
      submissions giving reasons for that view.

8.    On 9 July 2020, the Appellant provided  written  submissions.   As  to
      the forum for determining the error of law issue, the  Appellant  asks
      that, if  the  Respondent  does  not  concede  the  appeal,  then  the
      Appellant also wishes to have an oral hearing.  Again, no reasons  are
      given as to why the error of law issue cannot  be  determined  on  the
      papers.  The Appellant's  submissions  as  to  the  substance  of  the
      grounds do not differ substantially from the earlier submissions and I
      deal with those submissions so far as necessary below.

9.    In spite of the requests  for  an  oral  hearing,  for  reasons  which
      follow, I have concluded that I can fairly determine the error of  law
      issue on the papers based on  the  Decision  itself,  the  grounds  as
      pleaded and the documents before me (which documents were also  before
      Judge Paul).

10.   At this stage, the issue for me is whether the  Decision  contains  an
      error of law.  If I conclude it does, I need  to  consider  whether  I
      should set aside the Decision based on that error.  If I decide to  do
      so, I would either re-make the decision or remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First-tier Tribunal to do so.

DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSIONS

11.   I take the Appellant's grounds in order,  particularly  since  I  have
      concluded that there is an error disclosed in relation  to  the  first
      ground although not necessarily for the reasons  relied  upon  by  the
      Appellant.

12.   I begin by setting out the "Conclusions  &  Reasons"  section  of  the
      Decision.  I do so in full because  it  is  not  lengthy,  and  it  is
      necessary to consider the findings there made in context in  order  to
      address the grounds:

           "19.  Both parties addressed me on the family  life  aspects  of
           the case.  Mr Hasan relied  on  the  CPIN  Note  for  Bangladesh
           dealing with medical and healthcare issues.  He also submitted a
           World Health Organisation Report on the mental health system  in
           Bangladesh  dated  2007,  and  various  other   media   extracts
           highlighting the relatively poor conditions for the treatment of
           people with mental health problems in Bangladesh.

           20.   The respondent relied on the reasons for  refusal  letter,
           and the fact that the medical evidence tended to show  that  the
           real issue here related to having separated  from  her  husband.
           Thus, if she was to return to Bangladesh with her  husband,  she
           would have the benefit of not only his support, but that of  her
           immediate family. There was nothing in  the  report  to  suggest
           that a return to Bangladesh as a fact  in  itself  would  be  an
           exacerbating factor in her condition.

           21.   This is a protection/human rights appeal, and  the  burden
           is on the appellant to show that his human rights are engaged by
           the SSHD's decision, and it is for the SSHD to show that  it  is
           proportionate.  The central issue in this case  relates  to  the
           appellant's wife.

           22.   The appellant's position, taken by  itself  (in  my  view)
           would  not  engage  his  human  rights.   His  private  life  is
           contingent upon having been in this  country  for  a  number  of
           years with a precarious immigration status.

           23.   The burning issue is whether or not - if the appellant was
           to return to Bangladesh with his wife - that would so exacerbate
           her condition that it would amount to an interference with their
           human rights as a family.  He acts as a full-time Carer for her,
           and would benefit from additional  family  support  such  as  is
           available in Bangladesh.  So far  as  medication  is  concerned,
           whilst there may be  a  cost  element,  there  was  no  evidence
           adduced to say that he would not be able to  afford  it,  and  I
           have a strong suspicion that he still has business interests  in
           Bangladesh (based on the contradictory evidence  he  gave  about
           his stationary [sic] business).  In my view, it clearly would be
           in the best interests of husband and wife to stay together,  and
           given that although she is a British citizen, she only  came  to
           the UK in 2009.  Clearly the major part of her family  life  and
           family support networks are based on Bangladesh.

           24.   I strongly suspect that her  current  condition  has  been
           exacerbated firstly by the death of her first husband, which  is
           recorded in the medical evidence, and secondly by the dependency
           that she has on her second husband with the  consequential  fear
           that she might  lose  him.   However,  those  matters  would  be
           significantly ameliorated if they returned to  Bangladesh  as  a
           couple.

           25.   No evidence was advanced before me  to  suggest  that  she
           would, in those circumstances, choose to stay in the UK.  In  my
           view, therefore, the SSHD's decision  is  a  proportionate  one,
           because it seems abundantly clear to me that they  would  return
           to Bangladesh as a  couple  without  obvious  difficult  medical
           consequences.  For those reasons, the human rights  appeal  must
           fail."

13.   I begin by pointing out that, although the  Judge  was  right  to  say
      that the central issue was whether removal of the Appellant  would  be
      disproportionate based on the effect on his wife, that issue needed to
      be considered first in the context of the Rules.  Although  the  Judge
      referred at [5] of the Decision to the  Respondent's  contention  that
      paragraph EX.1 was not met and also that in the previous  appeal  that
      issue had been decided against the Appellant, the Judge's  first  port
      of call should have been to determine whether the  high  threshold  in
      paragraph EX.1 was met.  Although the grounds of appeal in this regard
      assert that the Decision is irrational in the finding  that  paragraph
      EX.1 is not met, in fact there is no finding at all in that regard.

14.   That is an error  of  law  in  the  approach  taken.   I  have  though
      carefully considered whether it can be said  to  be  a  material  one.
      After all, if the Judge has found, as he appears to have done, that it
      would not be unreasonable to expect the Appellant's wife to  accompany
      him to Bangladesh,  then  a  failure  to  consider  whether  a  higher
      threshold is met could not be material.

15.   I consider however that there is a further error made at [23]  of  the
      Decision as the focus of that paragraph is the impact on the Appellant
      and not on his wife.  The issue is whether  there  are  insurmountable
      obstacles to her relocating back to Bangladesh not simply  whether  it
      is reasonable for the couple to live there.  It  is  in  that  context
      that the Appellant's first  ground  becomes  relevant.   Although  the
      Judge refers at [19] of  the  Decision  to  evidence  adduced  by  the
      Appellant as to  medical  treatment  for  mental  health  problems  in
      Bangladesh, there is no finding made by the Judge about the impact  on
      the Appellant's wife of the loss of the  treatment  she  is  currently
      receiving and the loss of benefits to which she is entitled by  reason
      of her disability.

16.   The Judge has accepted that the Appellant acts  as  his  wife's  full-
      time  carer,  which  position  would  continue  if  both  returned  to
      Bangladesh.  The Appellant's wife also has other family in  Bangladesh
      who could also assist in her care.  However, the Judge still needed to
      consider the impact on the Appellant's wife's treatment and not simply
      her care.  The closest one comes  is  the  consideration  whether  the
      Appellant and his wife would be able to  afford  care  but  that  says
      nothing about the level of care available.  There was evidence  before
      the Judge set out at [19] of the Decision about which no  finding  has
      been made.  Although the case specific medical  evidence  is  limited,
      the Judge also needed to make findings about what  that  showed  about
      the impact on the Appellant's wife's treatment if she were  to  go  to
      Bangladesh.

17.   For those reasons, the first ground is made out.

18.   I would not have found any error in  relation  to  the  second  ground
      taken alone.  I can deal with  that  shortly,  particularly  given  my
      conclusion in relation to the first ground.  The Judge records at [14]
      of the Decision the unsatisfactory evidence  of  the  Appellant  about
      what had happened  to  his  business.   The  Appellant  had  told  the
      Tribunal about that business in his previous appeal.  He claimed  when
      asked about it on this occasion that he "was unclear  about  that  and
      that he was unable to recollect what he said at the previous  appeal".
      The Judge was entitled to find that evidence to be "contradictory" and
      therefore not to accept it.  Similarly, given what is said about  what
      the medical evidence shows at [20] of  the  Decision,  the  Judge  was
      entitled  to  conclude  that  the  Appellant's  wife's  condition  was
      exacerbated by the two events of the loss of  her  first  husband  and
      concern about separation from the Appellant.  Reasons are there  given
      for the finding made.

19.   The only possible error in relation to those matters is not  that  the
      Judge has  impermissibly  speculated  but  that  the  Judge  has  made
      findings based on a strong  suspicion  which  is  not  of  course  the
      correct standard.  He needed to make findings on those matters.  As  I
      have already noted, though, I would not have found an  error  on  this
      point alone as it is quite  evident  what  the  Judge  meant  for  the
      reasons he gave.  Nonetheless, since I found an error in  relation  to
      the first ground, I do not need to say more.

20.   Turning finally to  the  third  ground  which  is  the  focus  of  the
      permission grant, I agree with the Respondent that there is nothing to
      suggest that this issue was raised  with  Judge  Paul.   There  is  no
      record of any submission being made in this regard  in  the  Decision.
      There is no skeleton argument for the hearing but there is nothing  in
      the Judge's record of the  proceedings  referring  to  this  argument.
      Counsel who pleaded the grounds of appeal did not appear before  Judge
      Paul.

21.   It cannot be an error of law for  a  Judge  to  fail  to  consider  an
      argument which was not put to him unless it is abundantly  clear  from
      the evidence that the issue arises.  There is a further reason why the
      third ground as pleaded would fail and that is because it is far  from
      clear that the Appellant's case falls within the  Chikwamba  scenario.
      As the Respondent points out, the Appellant has been  in  the  UK  for
      about thirteen years now but has had no leave to remain  for  most  of
      that time.  He has made  application  after  application  to  seek  to
      remain all of which have failed.  Even if  he  is  able  to  meet  the
      criteria under the Rules save as to immigration status, that (adverse)
      immigration history would or  might  be  taken  into  account  in  any
      further application for entry clearance under the general grounds.   I
      note that there is no finding made by the Judge about the  balance  to
      be struck outside the Rules which would of course include  the  public
      interest factors at play in this case.   However,  for  the  foregoing
      reasons, I conclude that the third ground is  not  made  out.   Again,
      however, in light of my conclusion  on  the  first  ground,  that  has
      little impact as it will be open to the Appellant to argue his case on
      this basis if he contends that it applies when  the  decision  is  re-
      made.

22.   For the above reasons, an error of law is disclosed by  the  first  of
      the Appellant's grounds.  I have concluded that the error is  material
      and there are further findings which will need to be made.  For  those
      reasons, I set aside the Decision for re-making.

NEXT STEPS

23.   It is suggested in the Appellant's  written  submissions  that,  if  I
      were to find an error, I could go on to re-make the decision without a
      further hearing and that the Appellant would succeed on any one  of  a
      number of bases.  It is also suggested that this is a case  which  the
      Respondent may wish to concede.

24.   There is nothing to suggest that the  Respondent  intends  to  concede
      this case.  As will also be apparent from what I have said  about  the
      case more generally above that I do not consider this case  to  be  so
      clear-cut  that  a  determination  in  the  Appellant's  favour  would
      necessarily follow on the evidence.  For that reason, the appeal needs
      to be re-heard.

25.   There is no need for this appeal to be remitted.  Although there  will
      need to be fresh findings of fact made, the issues are  quite  narrow.
      I agree however that it is not appropriate  to  re-make  the  decision
      without hearing submissions orally.  Although there are no significant
      credibility issues raised, Judge Paul found some of the evidence to be
      overstated or did not accept that evidence  for  other  reasons.   For
      that reason,  it  is  appropriate  to  hear  oral  evidence  from  the
      Appellant (and his wife if she wishes and is able to do so).   I  note
      from the record of proceedings that the Appellant gave evidence via an
      interpreter and it would therefore be difficult  to  hear  the  appeal
      remotely.  For that reason, I have  listed  the  appeal  for  an  oral
      hearing on a face to face basis.  Although none  of  the  evidence  is
      particularly dated in this case and although there is  no  application
      to adduce further evidence, I have given the Appellant the opportunity
      to adduce further evidence prior to a further  hearing  should  he  so
      wish.



DECISION

I am satisfied that the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  N  M  Paul
promulgated on 11 February 2020 discloses an error  of  law.   I  set  aside
that decision.  I make the following directions for a resumed hearing:



DIRECTIONS

   1. Within 28 days from the date when this decision is sent, the Appellant
      is to file with the Tribunal and serve on the Respondent  any  further
      evidence on which he relies.

   2. The appeal is to be relisted for a hearing at Field House on a face to
      face basis with a time estimate of � day.  If the  Appellant  requires
      an interpreter for himself or any of his witnesses, he  is  to  notify
      the Tribunal within 14 days from the sending of this decision.

   3. The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these directions,  giving
      reasons, if they face significant practical difficulties in complying.




Signed:     L K Smith                              Dated: 26 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith

