

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06733/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                           |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 December 2017                            |On 26 February 2018               |
|                                              |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                  ATIF [K]
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Rungasamy instructed by Lawrence & Associates
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Harrison, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1     This is an appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal Borsada, in which the  Judge  dismissed  the  protection  and
      human rights appeals of the Appellant. The Appellant is a national  of
      Pakistan, who is married by way of Islamic marriage ceremony  only  in
      the UK to [SK], a national of Mauritius, who like the Appellant has no
      leave to remain.  Together they have two children, LK, born [ ]  2009,
      and HK, born [ ] 2012 in the UK.

2     The Appellant last arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2005  using  a
      false  passport.  He  had  entered  as  a  visitor  on  several  prior
      occasions.  The  Appellant  appears  to  have  made  some  attempt  to
      regularise his position in the United Kingdom in 2009,  but  it  would
      appear that the Respondent could  not  find  reference  to  any  valid
      application made  at  that  time.  The  Appellant  ultimately  made  a
      protection claim on 9 December 2015.

3     The Appellant claimed to fear a real risk of serious  harm  on  return
      to Pakistan due to a family feud with another family, arising  out  of
      his  first  marriage.  It  was  said  that  the  breakdown   of   that
      relationship had resulted in threats from his former spouse's  family.
      It was also asserted that the  Appellant's  second  wife  [SK]  feared
      serious harm in Mauritius, also because of a feud  arising  out  of  a
      marital dispute there. It was also argued that removal of  the  family
      from the UK would result in a disproportionate interference  with  the
      private and family lives of the four family members.

4     The Respondent refused that claim in a decision dated  2  April  2017.
      The Appellant appealed, the appeal coming before the Judge on 31 March
      2017.

5     The Judge records  the  Appellant's  submissions  regarding  the  best
      interests of the children at paragraph 7(vii). Submissions noted  were
      that LK had lived in the UK for more than  seven  years;  it  was  not
      reasonable for LK to leave the United Kingdom bearing in mind the time
      the child had spent in the UK, their immersion in all aspects of  life
      in  this  country,  the  stages  of  LK's  personal  and   educational
      development which had been reached, and the level of  connection  with
      their country of origin as well as the likelihood that  they  will  be
      able to make a useful contribution to the UK and its society, and that
      both children had spent all their lives in the UK and knew nothing  of
      life in either of their parents countries of origin.

6     The Judge rejected  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's  protection
      claim at paragraphs 9 - 11 of the decision, finding that the Appellant
      had relied upon bogus  documentation  in  support  of  his  claim  for
      protection including  a  counterfeit  passport,  and  noted  that  the
      Appellant had delayed his claim for protection since 2005.  The  Judge
      also found at para 12 that there was insufficient evidence provided by
      [SK] for the Judge to make any clear findings about her alleged  claim
      for protection and was not satisfied that there was any truth  to  her
      claims without more. The Judge held that it was open for the Appellant
      and [SK] to enter and reside in Pakistan [12].

7     At paragraph 13, the Judge turned to the position of the  children  as
      follows:

         'As for the children: I note that they were both born in the UK and
         have known no other life. I note too that the older child has  been
         here for more than seven years and therefore the parties were right
         to direct me to the reasonableness  test.  I  have  considered  the
         welfare of the children as (sic) primary matter and  my  conclusion
         is that given their ages their key welfare need is to remain in the
         care of their parents and for their parents  to  continue  to  look
         after them. In determining reasonableness, I note the factors  that
         it is necessary to take into account as  set  out  in  paragraph  7
         (vii) above and having regard to those factors it was my view  that
         in respect of the children the Appellant has not demonstrated  that
         it  would  be  unreasonable  for  the  children  to  leave  the  UK
         particularly given that this would be with their two loving parents
         one of whom is from Pakistan and who would  therefore  be  able  to
         help them make the necessary adjustments to life in  that  country.
         In make (sic) these findings I note  that  there  was  very  little
         evidence provided beyond the school reports which might  have  made
         me question the reasonableness of expecting the children  to  leave
         the UK. Certainly the fact that the  children  were  now  going  to
         school in this country and were doing well at  school  was  not  in
         itself grounds the finding that the Respondent's  decision  was  an
         unreasonable one particularly given that  these  children  are  not
         British and therefore should not automatically expect to receive an
         education in this country. In stating this I also note that I  have
         seen no evidence that the children would not be able to  receive  a
         similar education in Pakistan or indeed  in  Mauritius  should  the
         family choose to move to either of these places. I am therefore not
         satisfied even having regard to the Appellant's article 8 claim and
         that of his family that his claim under this heading is  made  out.
         The  decision  of  the  Respondent  which  necessarily  entails  an
         interference with the Appellant's private and family  and  that  of
         his wife and children is indeed a proportionate one  having  regard
         to the Respondent's legitimate interest  in  maintaining  effective
         immigration  control  taking  all  of  the  factors  into   account
         including  those  that  I  have  specifically   discussed   already
         including all the factors going for and against the  Appellant  and
         not forgetting that the Appellant's private life and  that  of  his
         wife was established in this country at a time  when  they  had  no
         immigration status or a precarious one (see also five stages in N v
         Razgar [2004] UKHL 27) (see also section 177B of  the  Nationality,
         Immigration and Asylum Act 2002)."

8     The appellant was dismissed.

9     Grounds of appeal against that decision  argue  in  Ground1  that  the
      Judge's  assessment  in  relation  to  s.55  Borders  Citizenship  and
      Immigration Act 2009 was irrational, in light of  the  fact  that  the
      Judge had accepted that the children were born in the UK,  have  known
      no other life except for one in the UK, were doing well at school. The
      grounds also assert that it had been submitted before the  Judge  that
      'the child'  (presumably  LK)  speaks  only  English  and  would  have
      language barrier and either Mauritius or Pakistan.

10    It was also argued that the Judge's finding that  '...  my  conclusion
      is that given the ages their welfare is to remain in the care of their
      parents and their parents to continue to look after them',  the  Judge
      treated the presence of the parents in the LK's life as an  overriding
      factor in establishing that it would be reasonable for  the  child  to
      relocate outside of the United Kingdom, disregarding all other factors
      under section 55.

11    It was also argued that the Judge failed to give  adequate  weight  to
      the fact that LK had been resident in the United Kingdom for more than
      seven years (indeed eight years) and  referred  to  the  ratio  in  MA
      (Pakistan) & Ors, R (on the application of) v Upper Tribunal  (IAC)  &
      Anor [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that length of  residence  itself  can  be  a
      major factor in granting leave  to  remain  unless  there  are  strong
      reasons to deny it.

12    A second Ground argued that the Judge failed  to  apply  the  guidance
      set out in PD and Others (Article 8 :  conjoined  family  claims)  Sri
      Lanka [2016] UKUT 108 (IAC) that:

         "In considering the conjoined Article 8  ECHR  claims  of  multiple
         family members decision-makers should first apply  the  Immigration
         Rules to  each  individual  applicant  and,  if  appropriate,  then
         consider Article 8 outside the Rules. This exercise will  typically
         entail the consideration and determination of all  claims  jointly,
         so as to ensure that all  material  facts  and  considerations  are
         taken into account in each case."

13    In a decision dated 24 August 2017, Judge of the  first-tier  Tribunal
      Pullig granted permission to  appeal,  expressing  the  view  that  in
      relation to the best interests of each child, there was little  to  be
      found regarding the evidence of their respective circumstances.

14    I heard submissions from the parties which are set out  in  my  record
      proceedings.

15    In summary, Mr Rungasamy for the Appellant relied upon the grounds  of
      appeal, but additionally argued (only in his  reply  to  Mr  Harrison)
      that the Judge erred procedurally by failing to adjourn the appeal  of
      his own motion (there having been no  application  on  behalf  of  the
      Appellant before the Judge for  any  adjournment)  to  obtain  further
      information as to the circumstances of the children. I  observed  that
      this argument was not a ground of appeal set out  in  the  grounds  of
      appeal, and I do not find that it is a  Robinson  obvious  point,  and
      reject it, although the potential for further evidence relating to the
      children's circumstances is a matter to which I returned below.

16    The his part, Mr Harrison  sought  to  defend  the  Judge's  decision,
      relying upon a Rule 24 reply dated 13 September 2017, and expanding on
      it orally.

      Assessment

17    Although in both PD and Ors, and in MA Pakistan,  it was held that  it
      was not appropriate for the position of   children  to  be  considered
      first, or in isolation from the position of adult applicants,  it  was
      common ground in both decisions, and consistent with now long-standing
      jurisprudence, that the best interests  of  a  child  affected  by  an
      immigration decision need to be determined prior to the  determination
      of the proportionality of the immigration decision, and for those best
      interests to be taken into account in that proportionality assessment.

18    In general terms, the grounds of appeal challenge  the  way  that  the
      best  interest  assessment  was  carried  out,  and  that   inadequate
      consideration was given to the length of time that the older child  LK
      had remained in United Kingdom, particularly in light of the  guidance
      set out in MA Pakistan.

19    I find that those grounds are made out. Whereas  the  Judge  finds  at
      paragraph 13 that the children's key welfare need is to remain in  the
      care of the parents and for their parents to continue  to  look  after
      them, this does not represent a decision as to where it  would  be  in
      the best interests of the children to remain. There is  a  distinction
      between finding that  in  general  terms  it  would  be  in  the  best
      interests of children to remain in the care of their parents,  on  the
      one hand, and  a  further,  more  specific  finding,  that  such  best
      interests were to remain in their  parents'  care  in  country  A,  as
      opposed to country B. The importance of determining where it may be in
      the best interests of children to reside, not  merely  with  whom,  is
      apparent from, for example,  EV (Philippines) &  Ors  v  Secretary  of
      State for the Home Department [2014] EWCA Civ 874 , paras 33-34 .

20    Without determining in which country it may be in the  best  interests
      of the children to reside, with their parents, it is difficult to find
      that  the  Judge  has  thereafter  proceeded  to  determine,  on   the
      proportionality issue, whether other factors, including the importance
      of maintenance of immigration control, outweigh that which is  in  the
      children's best interests.

21    Further, paragraph 49 of MA Pakistan provides as follows:

         "1.      Although this was not in fact a seven year  case,  on  the
         wider construction of section 117B(6), the  same  principles  would
         apply in such a case. However, the fact that the child has been  in
         the UK for seven years would need to be given significant weight in
         the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related  reasons:  first,
         because of its relevance to determining the nature and strength  of
         the child's best interests; and second, because it establishes as a
         starting point that  leave  should  be  granted  unless  there  are
         powerful reasons to the contrary." (Emphasis added)

22    I am of the view that the Judge's reasoning at  paragraph  13  of  the
      decision does not demonstrate  that  the  Judge  directed  himself  in
      accordance with the principle that  leave  should  be  granted  to  LK
      unless there were powerful reasons to the contrary.

23    I note that the submission that the child (or  possibly  children)  do
      not speak any language  of  Pakistan  is  not  recorded  at  paragraph
      7(vii). I am inclined to find that such submission was made, as it  is
      an important feature of the Appellant's case  that  it  would  not  be
      reasonable for LK to leave the UK. In any event, even if not made, any
      language difficulties likely to be experienced by a child upon leaving
      the UK are, I find, matters on which findings of fact need to be  made
      irrespective of whether any specific submission is made in relation to
      it. There is no such finding.

24    I observe that the  adverse  immigration  history  of  the  Appellant,
      including his use of false documents in relation to his entry  to  the
      UK and his asylum claim, does not appear to have  been  factored  into
      the Judge's assessment of whether it would be reasonable to expect the
      children to leave the UK (and, following MA (Pakistan), paras  43  and
      45, the Judge was entitled to take  such  factors  into  account).  It
      could be said therefore that there are matters potentially  in  favour
      of the Appellant, and those militating against  the  Appellant,  which
      have been left of out account  in  the  reasonableness  assessment  in
      relation to LK. I cannot say with  any  confidence  what  the  Judge's
      decision might have been if all those considerations  had  been  taken
      into account in the assessment.

25    I therefore find that there are material errors of law in the  Judge's
      assessment of  the  proportionality  of  the  removal  of  the  family
      members.

26    On behalf of the Appellant Mr Rungasamy  indicated  that  he  now  had
      instructions that one of the Appellant's children may in fact  have  a
      hearing difficulty, and that if the matter were to be remitted to  the
      First-tier Tribunal, the Appellant would benefit from the  opportunity
      of adducing further evidence as to any health problems relating to the
      children.

27    I find that due to the degree of  further  fact-finding  that  may  be
      required in this matter, that it is necessary for  the  matter  to  be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

      Decision.

      I find that the making of  the  decision  involved  the  making  of  a
      material error of law.

      I set aside the Judge's decision.

      I remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  There  being  no
      challenge against the Judge's decision to  reject  as  incredible  the
      Appellant's protection claim, the Judge's findings in relation to that
      claim, at paragraphs 9 to 11, are retained.


Signed:                Date: 19.1.18

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan



