

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/06798/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons         |
|                                           |Promulgated                |
|On 6 January 2020                          |On 16 January 2020         |
|                                           |                           |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                     S I
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna of Counsel instructed by Wimbledon
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. This appeal comes before me following the grant of  permission  to
          appeal by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Povey  on  21  November  2019
          against the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge Swinnerton,
          promulgated on 4 October 2019 following a hearing at Hatton  Cross
          on 1 October 2019. the final paragraph of Judge  Povey's  decision
          refusing permission is clearly an error given the contents of  the
          document and the heading which grants permission.
       2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on  21  February  1989.
          She entered the UK on 21 June 2013 on a visit visa and  then  made
          an unsuccessful application for leave  and  two  applications  for
          resident cards under the EEA Regulations. She then overstayed  and
          claimed asylum on 5 July 2017. That was  refused  on  28  December
          2017 and her appeal against  the  decision  was  dismissed  on  23
          February 2018. Her appeal rights were exhausted on in  June  2018.
          the appellant still failed to embark and on 6 November  2018  made
          further submissions which led to a refusal on 2 July 2019 and  the
          current appeal.


       3. The appellant claims that her father who was a very religious  and
          abusive man who arranged a marriage for her to a man  to  whom  he
          owed money. The appellant did not agree and  came  to  the  UK  to
          visit her brother. When he tried to persuade her to agree  to  the
          marriage, she went to live with her cousin for four years and made
          her EEA applications. When her cousin could no longer support  her
          due to family pressure the appellant became destitute and has been
          in receipt of support and accommodation from the Refugee  Council.
          Relatives informed her that an FIR had been lodged accusing her of
          stealing jewellery and running away with a non-believer. A  second
          FIR has since been filed; this accuses her  and  three  others  of
          threatening her brother with a gun. The appellant fears her family
          and her situation if she were to be returned and unable to turn to
          her family for support.


       4. In her grounds of appeal, the appellant maintains that  the  judge
          failed to reach any findings on whether or not the  appellant  was
          vulnerable and how that would impact on her  evidence,  failed  to
          assess credibility in light of  key  conclusions  in  the  medical
          evidence, failed to reach findings as to the evidence of a witness
          and  failed  to  consider  credibility  in  the  context  of   the
          background evidence.


       5. The Rule 24 response from  the  Secretary  of  State  opposes  the
          appeal.


          The Hearing


       6. The appellant attended the hearing at which  I  heard  submissions
          from the  parties.  Ms  Patyna  expanded  upon  her  grounds.  She
          submitted that the  judge  was  asked  to  take  the  Presidential
          guidance on vulnerable witnesses into account but  had  failed  to
          make any reference to it or how it applied to the  appellant.  The
          guidance from various authorities required  findings  on  how  the
          appellant  was  vulnerable  and  how  that  was  relevant  to  the
          credibility assessment. She pointed me to  her  skeleton  argument
          before the First-tier Tribunal in which  lengthy  submissions  had
          been made about vulnerability. She also argued  that  the  medical
          report referred  to  problems  of  concentration  but  that  these
          matters were not taken into account when credibility was assessed.
          The medial report was only referred to for an  assessment  of  any
          suicide risk. She submitted that no finding had been  made  as  to
          whether the appellant suffered from anxiety and PTSD as the doctor
          had diagnosed and that the doctor's finding that  the  appellant's
          scars were consistent with the abuse she claimed to have  suffered
          at the hands of her  father  had  not  been  referred  to  in  the
          determination.  These  failings   meant   that   the   credibility
          assessment  could  not  be  sustained  and  fresh  findings   were
          required.


       7. Ms Patyna submitted that the  evidence  of  the  witness  was  not
          assessed. The witness had provided corroborating evidence.  Whilst
          this was noted, no findings had been made on it.  There was also a
          failure  to  look  at  the  background  evidence   against   which
          credibility should have been assessed. The appellant's account had
          been consistent with the CPIN report. Ms  Patyna  asked  that  the
          determination be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal
          for a fresh decision to be made.


       8. Mr Whitwell submitted that the determination was sustainable.  The
          judge had accepted that the appellants was  a  vulnerable  witness
          and adjustments had been made. The appellant had  already  had  an
          unsuccessful  appeal  when  she  was  found  to  be   lacking   in
          credibility and so she was not starting out on an even footing but
          had to overcome previous adverse findings. The judge raised  valid
          issues over the two FIRs  noting  that  the  first  had  not  been
          provided for  the  previous  hearing  even  though  the  appellant
          claimed to have  had  it  for  some  months  prior  to  that.  The
          appellant's  vulnerability  had  no  bearing  on  the  highlighted
          difficulties. The judge confirmed that al the  evidence  had  been
          considered and set out the difficulties with the doctor's  report.
          The Tribunal was now being asked to reach a different decision  on
          the same evidence. The evidence of the witness was immaterial.  It
          was recorded by the judge but it was essentially what the  witness
          believed to be true. There had been no need to refer to the  CPIN.
          It contained nothing controversial. It was accepted that marriages
          could be used to settle outstanding issues. The appeal  should  be
          dismissed.


       9. In response, Ms Patyna submitted that  the  Devaseelan  principles
          did not absolve judges from deciding the case in front of them and
          that credibility challenges could still be made by appellants.  In
          this case there was fresh medical  and  other  evidence  and  that
          required a thorough analysis by the judge. As  for  the  issue  of
          vulnerability, it was not enough for the judge to state  that  was
          accepted. There was then a  need  to  link  vulnerability  to  the
          evidence. The appellant's explanation for not having provided  the
          FIR at the  first  hearing  could  be  explained  by  her  anxious
          condition. Whilst the GP had  found  the  appellant  fit  to  give
          evidence, the judge was still required to assess it in the context
          of  her  vulnerability.  The  evidence  of  the  witness  was  not
          immaterial. It dealt with the plausibility issue  which  had  been
          raised at the first hearing. The  CPIN  was  not  irrelevant.  The
          first judge assessed credibility without any reference to  country
          evidence and this report was, therefore, relevant to the findings.




      10. At the conclusion of the hearing, I reserved my decision  which  I
          now give with reasons.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      11. I have considered all the evidence and the submissions made.


      12. There are, I find, several serious shortcomings with  the  judge's
          determination  and  decision  making  which  render  the  decision
          unsustainable.


      13. Whilst I accept that the judge agreed to treat the appellant as  a
          vulnerable witness and made adjustments accordingly (at 11)  there
          is no further consideration of how this vulnerability impacted, if
          at all, on her evidence. The  absence  of  any  reference  to  the
          Presidential Guidance Note would not in itself be an error had the
          judge followed its contents but regrettably she failed to  do  so.
          There is no analysis at all of how this  accepted  state  of  mind
          affects the evidence. That is the first error.


      14. The second error emerges from the  judge's  consideration  of  the
          medical evidence. I accept that she refers to  Dr  Gupta's  report
          and lists the respondent's criticisms of it but she then fails  to
          make her own findings  as  to  what  parts  of  it,  if  any,  are
          accepted. She uses it only to assist her findings on suicide  risk
          whereas it is much wider than that.


      15. The third criticism of the determination is that no findings  were
          made on the supporting evidence of the appellant's witness. Whilst
          I accept that the judge recorded that evidence and noted that  the
          witness believed the appellant, no findings are made on how, if at
          all, that corroborative evidence furthers the appellant's case.


      16. The fourth and final failing in the determination is  the  judge's
          failure to consider the appellant's account in the context of  the
          country information. It is not enough for a judge to simply  state
          that all the evidence has been considered. There has  to  be  some
          indication that that is the case and given the complete absence of
          any reference to the background material I do not find  that  this
          has been done here.
      17. It follows therefore that the decision is  unsustainable  and  the
          determination is set aside other than as a Record of  Proceedings.
          No findings are preserved.


          Decision

      18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  material  errors
          of law. The appeal shall be re-heard by another judge of the First-
          tier Tribunal and a fresh decision shall be made.


                 Directions


      19. Any further documentary evidence is to  be  filed  and  served  no
          later than 5 working days prior to the next hearing.


      20. An interpreter shall be booked. If an interpreter is not  required
          the appellant is to notify the Tribunal forthwith.


          Anonymity


      21. No request for anonymity order has been made at any stage  however
          in view of the  appellant's  vulnerability  I  make  an  anonymity
          order.


    Signed






       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 14 January 2020












