
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06076/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 September 2018                          |On 05 November 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                  mr a b a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Kiai, Counsel, instructed by B.H.T. Immigration
Legal
     Services
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The decision  under  consideration  in  this  case  is  that  by  Judge
    Manyarara of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (FtT)  sent  on  11  July  2018
    dismissing the appeal of the appellant, a national of Iran, against the
    decision made by the respondent dated 26 April 2018 refusing his asylum
    claim on protection grounds but allowing it on Article 8 grounds.   Her
    decision attracted two challenges, one from the  appellant  challenging
    the dismissal of the appeal on protection grounds; the other  from  the
    respondent challenging her decision to allow the appeal  on  Article  8
    grounds.

2.   I received excellent submissions from both representatives.

3.   I am persuaded by both sets of grounds that the judge materially  erred
    in law.

4.   In respect of the judge's treatment of the appellant's appeal based  on
    protection grounds, the judge noted at paragraphs 13 and  29  that  the
    appellant  was  a  minor  and  that  she  was  required  by  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note of 2010 on vulnerable witnesses to treat him
    as a vulnerable witness.  Whilst in some passages in her assessment she
    noted that she took into account  the  appellant's  age,  35,  54,  her
    approach to two inconsistencies in the appellant's account (relating to
    the nature and extent of his brother's  political  involvement  and  to
    whether he always accompanied his  brother  on  smuggling  trips)  (see
    paragraphs 57 and 59) failed to show she considered whether to make any
    allowances for his young age, either when evaluating the weight  to  be
    attached to these inconsistencies or his explanation for them.

5.   The error interacts with  another  connected  to  the  fact  that  when
    assessing the evidence of a minor the judge was required  by  paragraph
    351 of the Immigration Rules to place  more  weight  on  the  objective
    indications of risk.  In the bundle of documents before the judge there
    was a report from country expert, Sheri Laizer.  The judge referred  to
    this report when  assessing  the  appellant's  nationality  (which  the
    respondent had disputed) (see paragraph 54) and also  when  considering
    the appellant's claim to have been involved in smuggling (see paragraph
    60), but in the latter context considered that all it showed  was  that
    "smuggling occurs in the appellant's home area" and that it  "does  not
    necessarily establish the  appellant's  claim  to  have  been  actively
    involved in  smuggling  and  to  have  been  placed  in  a  climate  of
    insecurity as a result".  However, Ms Laizer's report went much further
    than simply saying smuggling occurred  in  the  appellant's  area.   At
    point 2 of her conclusions she stated that "I consider [the  appellant]
    very likely engaged in smuggling ..." and she also noted that  somebody
    with the appellant's father's name had been arrested and  the  incident
    had been reported.  At the very least,  the  judge  should  have  given
    reasons why she  did  not  consider  Ms  Laizer's  conclusions  carried
    weight.

6.   Ms Willocks-Briscoe stated that she  would  have  to  accept  that  the
    judge failed to make material findings on some salient  matters.   That
    acceptance adds to my reasons for considering the judge's assessment of
    the credibility of the appellant's protection claim vitiated  by  legal
    error.

7.   I reach the same conclusion regarding the  respondent's  criticisms  of
    the judge's treatment of the Article 8 grounds of appeal.  At paragraph
    104 the judge stated:

     "Having considered the appellant's circumstances through  the  lens  of
         the Rules, I find that there is an existing gap in  the  Rules  and
         the part played by the respondent's discretion is greater when  the
         appellant's circumstances are considered against the background  of
         his mental health problems, for which  he  is  currently  receiving
         input.   I  find  that  to  prematurely  disrupt  the   appellant's
         treatment at this stage would be detrimental to his mental  health.
         This is not a finding that the appellant would not be able  to  get
         medical treatment in Iran but is a balanced appraisal of all of the
         circumstances of his case in light of the current treatment  he  is
         receiving.  I find that the appellant would benefit from the  grant
         of a temporary period of leave whilst he is receiving mental health
         services, in light of his age."

8.   Given that the judge expressly did not base her  Article  8  assessment
    on a finding  that  the  appellant  would  be  unable  to  get  medical
    treatment in Iran (nor make any finding that if  returned  to  Iran  he
    would lack family support), the only possible contents to her "balanced
    appraisal" was her finding that the  appellant  had  a  serious  mental
    health  condition  for  which  he  is  currently  receiving  help  from
    professional medical services in the UK.  When one  turns  to  consider
    the extent and severity of the appellant's medical condition,  however,
    the medical evidence the judge recites says  only  that  the  appellant
    displays high levels of stress and PTSD with some record of attempts of
    self-harm (see paragraphs 97-99).  Such evidence falls  well  short  of
    establishing that the mental health condition of the  appellant  is  of
    such severity that he needs to continue to receive treatment for it  in
    the UK as opposed to Iran.  It shows no awareness of the high threshold
    set for success in both Article 3 and Article 8  ill  health  cases  by
    Strasbourg jurisprudence.

9.   A further difficulty, acknowledged by Ms  Kiai,  is  that  the  judge's
    proportionality assessment provides no analysis of the public  interest
    factors outlined in S. 117B of the NIAA 2002; it is impossible  to  say
    in this case that the judge gave the  statutory  requirements  of  this
    section full effect.  At most one can extract from the judge's  lengthy
    quotes from case law and her observations at  paragraph  105  that  she
    required that little  weight  could  be  attached  to  the  appellant's
    private life because his immigration status was precarious.  The  judge
    nowhere  squares  this  recognition  with  her  earlier  attachment  of
    decisive weight to  the  appellant's  private  life  based  on  medical
    grounds: see paragraphs 95-96.

Notice of Decision

10.  For the above reasons I consider that the  judge  materially  erred  in
    law and her decision needs to be set aside in its entirety.

11.  I see no alternative to the case being remitted to the FtT (not  before
    Judge Manyarara).


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 4 October 2018

            [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

