
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06430/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at The Royal Courts of Justice |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 December 2019                   |On 18 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                 BAHMAN [M]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Trent (the judge) who, in a  decision  promulgated  on  28
         August 2019, dismissed the appellant's protection and human  rights
         appeal against the respondent's decision of 28 June 2019 to  refuse
         his protection and human rights claim.

Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Iran, of Kurdish ethnicity, born  on
         21 March 1990. He arrived in the UK on 1 December 2015 and  claimed
         asylum fearing persecution from the Iranian  authorities  based  on
         his Kurdish ethnicity and his activities as a smuggler, and on  the
         basis of a political opinion that would be imputed to  him  by  the
         Iranian authorities based on his Kurdish ethnicity and  the  belief
         likely to be held by the Iranian authorities that he was  smuggling
         arms for Kurdish insurgent groups.

      3. The respondent did  not  believe  the  appellant  gave  a  credible
         account of events that caused him to  leave  Iran.  The  respondent
         pointed to inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account  and  his
         initial failure to mention being  tortured  when  detained  by  the
         Iranian authorities.

      4. The appellant exercised his right  of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      5. The judge had before him a bundle  of  documents  prepared  by  the
         appellant's representatives. This included, inter alia,  a  country
         expert report prepared by Dr Emile Joffe dated  2  August  2019,  a
         scarring report prepared by  Dr  Lohawala  dated  20  May  2018,  a
         psychiatric report prepared by Dr Lohawala also dated 20 May  2018,
         a letter  from  the  appellant's  GP  dated  15  July  2019  and  a
         psychiatric report by Dr Syed Zia Ali dated 5 August 2019.

      6. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant and  from  one  of
         his friends and summarised the appellant's account,  the  basis  of
         his appeal (which also included an Article 3 suicide risk), and the
         submissions made on his behalf (the respondent failed  to  field  a
         Presenting Officer). The judge noted that  the  appellant  made  an
         asylum application in Bulgaria  (where  he  claimed  to  have  been
         seriously ill-treated) and that the respondent had initially sought
         to remove him to Bulgaria pursuant to  the  Dublin  III  regulation
         (according to the Grounds the respondent only  decided  to  process
         the asylum claim in the UK on 10 May 2019).

      7. At [24] and [25], under the heading 'The Appellant's activities  in
         Iran',  the  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  credibility  was
         undermined by several inconsistencies and omissions relating, inter
         alia, to his failure in the early stages of his asylum  application
         to mention a letter allegedly left by the  Iranian  authorities  at
         his family home,  the  length  of  his  detention  by  the  Iranian
         authorities, and his claim to have been  tortured  by  the  Iranian
         authorities  while  detained.  At  [26]  the  judge  rejected   the
         appellant's  claim  to  be  of  adverse  interest  to  the  Iranian
         authorities and to have been previously detained and ill-treated by
         those authorities.

      8. Then under the separate heading 'The Appellant's mental state', the
         judge considered, inter alia,

      9. The judge then went on to consider  the  appellant's  mental  state
         making reference to the two psychiatric reports ([27] -  [28]).  At
         [29] to [32] the judge concluded there was no real  risk  that  the
         appellant would be  subjected  to  persecution  or  Article  3  ill
         treatment by the Iranian authorities, and at [33] to [35] the judge
         concluded there was no real risk that the  appellant  would  commit
         suicide if removed to Iran. There being no significant  private  or
         family life, the appeal was dismissed.

The challenge to the judge's decision and the error of law hearing

     10. The  grounds  contend  that,  in  making  his  adverse  credibility
         findings, the judge failed to take into account or have  regard  to
         material evidence, and in particular, the  expert  report  from  Dr
         Joffe and the medical evidence, and the circumstances in which  the
         appellant's first witness statement (1 April 2016) was  taken.  The
         grounds further contend that the judge made  a  number  of  factual
         mistakes, including a mistake as to whether the appellant mentioned
         being tortured while in Iran prior to  his  asylum  interview.  The
         grounds argue that the judge failed to give any or adequate reasons
         in relation to findings on material matters and that he misdirected
         himself in  respect  to  his  approach  to  the  medical  evidence.
         Permission was granted on all  grounds,  although  with  particular
         reference to the absence of any reference to Dr Joffe's report.

     11. At the error of law hearing Mr Lindsay accepted  that  the  judge's
         decision contained an error on a point of law requiring  it  to  be
         set aside. Mr Linday accepted that the judge  failed  to  make  any
         mention of Dr Joffe's report, and that there  was  consequently  no
         consideration of Dr Joffe's assessment of specific issues  relating
         to the appellant to be found at C46  and  C47  of  the  appellant's
         bundle. Mr Lindsay accepted that several of the factors  considered
         by Dr Joffe potentially fed  into  the  issue  of  the  appellant's
         credibility. In these circumstances Mr Lindsay considered that,  in
         light of the low threshold  relating  to  the  materiality  of  the
         existence of an error of law, the outcome of the  judge's  decision
         may have been different if he  had  specifically  referred  to  and
         considered those  parts  of  the  expert  report.  As  the  judge's
         credibility findings were not sustainable, both parties agreed that
         there had not been a fair hearing and that  the  matter  should  be
         remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.

     12. I indicated my agreement with the agreed position of the parties.

Discussion

     13. For the reasons that are apparent in light of the  agreed  position
         of the parties I need only summarise my reasons  for  finding  that
         the judge made errors on points of law. It is surprising  that  the
         judge failed to make any material reference to  Dr  Joffe's  expert
         report. Dr Joffe is a renowned expert on Iran and  his  report  was
         specifically written for the appellant. Dr Joffe contextualised the
         appellant's claim and provided support for the plausibility of  the
         appellant's account of  events.  Dr  Joffe  found  the  appellant's
         account of being tortured by the Iranian authorities  plausible  as
         well as his claim to have been initially released after first being
         caught smuggling. Dr Joffe also  found  plausible  the  appellant's
         claim that poverty forced him to engage in smuggling, and that  the
         Iranian authorities would have issued an  arrest  warrant  for  the
         appellant if arms had been discovered.  While  the  judge  was  not
         obliged to accept Dr Joffe's analysis, and  whilst  the  judge  may
         have found that Dr Joffe's analysis was  outweighed  by  his  other
         findings, the judge could not ignore this relevant evidence. It was
         incumbent on the judge to have  engaged  with  the  expert  opinion
         contained within Dr Joffe's report. Had he done so, it is far  from
         certain that his conclusions on credibility  would  have  been  the
         same.

     14. I am further persuaded that, in finding the appellant's account  of
         events causing him to leave Iran incredible, the  judge  failed  to
         take into account the medical evidence relating to the  appellant's
         mental state concerning his fear of being returned to  Iran.  While
         the judge accurately  noted  that  some  of  the  medical  evidence
         concerned  the  appellant's  earlier  fear  of  being  removed   to
         Bulgaria, there was evidence, particularly the  psychiatric  report
         dated 5 August 2019,  stating  that  the  appellant  suffered  from
         severe depression and sever symptoms of PTSD  and  presented  in  a
         'fragile mental state'. This evidence was capable of supporting the
         appellant's  claim  to  have  a  genuine  fear  from  the   Iranian
         authorities. While  the  judge  was  not  obliged  to  accept  this
         evidence, it was incumbent on him to have engaged with  it  in  the
         context of his assessment of the appellant's  credibility  and  not
         just in respect of the mental health Article 3 claim.

     15. I have additional concerns with the judge's finding  at  24(b)(iii)
         that the appellant's description of the ill-treatment he claims  to
         have suffered in Bulgaria had "very little, if  any,  overlap  with
         his description  of  torture  in  Iran"  when  assessing  Dr  Ali's
         evidence of the likelihood of the appellant merging  two  different
         traumatic  events  in  his  memory.  There  were  in  fact  several
         instances of potential overlap as described in paragraph 10 of  the
         Grounds of Appeal. this evidence  does  not  appear  to  have  been
         considered by the judge.

     16. For these reasons I am satisfied that the entirety of  the  judge's
         adverse credibility findings are unsustainable. This  was  material
         to the judge's decision.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

     17. Under Part 3  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the  Upper  Tribunal  Practice
         Statement of the 18 June 2018 the case may be remitted to the First-
         tier Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal.

     18. In this  case  I  have  determined  that  the  adverse  credibility
         findings cannot stand. The appeal will be remitted  to  the  First-
         tier  Tribunal  so  that  a  new  fact-finding  exercise   can   be
         undertaken. None of the  findings  of  fact  are  to  stand  and  a
         complete re-hearing is necessary.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and requires the decision to be set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh  (de  novo)
hearing, to be heard by a judge other than Judge Trent.


D.Blum                                  13 December 2019

Signed                                  Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
