
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06452/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                    'AAR'
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               The secretary of State for the Home department
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
By virtue of the appellant appealing an asylum decision, unless and until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead
to contempt of court proceedings.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Patyna Counsel, instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood Solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms A Everett, Counsel.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 0. These are a written record of the oral reasons given for my decision at
    the hearing.

Introduction

 0. This is an appeal by the appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Thew (the 'FtT'), promulgated on 14 January 2020, by
    which she dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's
    refusal on 24 June 2019 of the appellant's protection and human rights
    claims.  That decision had in refused the appellant's application for
    leave to remain on the basis of asylum or in the alternative
    humanitarian protection and the appellant's claim that such refusal
    would breach his rights under articles 2, 3 or 8 of the European
    Convention on Human Rights ('ECHR').

 0. The core points taken against the appellant by the respondent were as
    follows.  While it was accepted that the appellant was an Iraqi citizen
    of Kurdish ethnic origin, she disputed that the appellant was a minor,
    as claimed (aged 16) at the time he claimed asylum.  She further
    disputed that the appellant's father had been the subject of adverse
    interest from a Shia militia, the 'Popular Mobilisation Forces,' or
    'PMF'.  She rejected his account that ISIS had attacked the appellant's
    village and mistreated him; and that he had lost contact with family
    members.  The respondent concluded that the appellant could internally
    relocate in Iraq if necessary.

The FtT's decision

 0. The FtT did not accept that the appellant was a minor when he entered
    the UK. The FtT did not regard it as necessary to treat the appellant
    as a vulnerable witness, by virtue of his educational or social
    background, ([18]).  The FtT accepted that ISIS had attacked the
    appellant's village as claimed ([23]) although she did not appear to
    make any reference to the appellant's claims of ill-treatment.

 0. The FtT then went on to consider the appellant's general credibility
    and accepted that, as a result of the ISIS attack, the appellant's
    family had moved to Tuz Khurmatu, but she did not accept the remainder
    of the account, including adverse interest by the PMF, as truthful.
    This included the account of the circumstances in which the appellant
    and his father received a telephone call to say that weapons had been
    found in his father's lorry; and the circumstances in which the
    appellant had fled Iraq.

 0. The FtT noted that at the time of the FtT hearing, there was an
    expectation that country guidance, later reported as SMO KSP & IM
    (Article 15 (c); ID documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 IAC, would be
    issued.  At [10], she recorded that 'there was some discussion about
    further written submissions being made, time permitting, but I have not
    received any further submissions.'  The FtT then in her decision
    applied the guidance set out in SMO, including that the appellant could
    return to Tuz Khurmatu (see [433] of SMO), and considered whether the
    appellant had a sufficiently enhanced risk profile so as to engage
    Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.  The FtT found that the
    appellant was not a credible witness on the core of his claim, as to
    the reason why he left Iraq; and he had provided a false identification
    document,  with no evidence of how the false document was obtained.
    The FtT concluded that the appellant would be able to obtain a
    replacement CSID card and also concluded that there would not be very
    significant obstacles to his integration in Iraq, as a man of 24, in
    good health, who would be returning to where his family still lived.

 0. Having considered the evidence as a whole, the FtT rejected the
    appellant's appeal.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 0. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on six grounds:

      1. Ground (1) - the appellant's Counsel had, at the FtT hearing, asked
         to be given the opportunity to make further written submissions on
         any country guidance, if it were issued prior to the FTT's decision
         being determined.  The FtT had ignored Counsel's request, which was
         a material error in light of the FtT's application of SMO.

      2. Ground (2) - the FtT had appeared to accept the appellant's account
         of ISIS invading his village but failed to proceed on the basis
         that the appellant had previously been ill-treated which was a
         material fact relevant to his credibility, including his
         vulnerability and future risk, applying paragraph 339K of the
         Immigration Rules.

      3. Ground (3) - the FtT had erred in concluding that the appellant was
         not a vulnerable witness for the purposes of the Joint Presidential
         Guidance Note No. 2.

      4. Ground (4) - the FtT had failed to take into account the expert
         evidence of Dr Fatah about the consistency of the appellant's
         account of adverse interest from the PMF in Tuz Khurmatu, with
         objective evidence.  The assessment instead focussed on the
         plausibility of the appellant's account, was consequently flawed.

      5. Ground (5) - the FtT had failed to apply SMO correctly, in
         particular by reference to the sliding scale risk to the appellant
         as someone of Kurdish ethnic origin, having previously been the
         victim of previous ill-treatment by ISIS, and having moved from an
         area previously controlled by ISIS; and as someone who did not
         speak Arabic.  Even on the basis of his Kurdish ethnic origin
         alone, the appellant would face risk.

      6. Ground (6) - the FtT's conclusions on whether the appellant
         remained in contact with his family were unclear at [52] to [55].

 0. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison granted permission on 14
    February 2020.  She regarded it as arguable that there had been a
    misunderstanding about the circumstances in which the appellant's
    Counsel would be given the opportunity to make further written
    submissions in light of SMO.  The grant of permission was not limited
    in its scope.

The hearing before me

 0. At the beginning of the hearing Ms Everett made concessions on grounds
    (1) and (5), specifically that the FtT had erred in law in proceeding
    to reach her decision without providing the opportunity to Counsel to
    address her on the country guidance authority of SMO.  In relation to
    ground (5), Ms Everett conceded that the FtT had failed to apply SMO
    correctly including by reference to the risk factors already
    identified.

 0. Whilst the remainder of the grounds were not conceded in the same
    terms, Ms Everett accepted that as a consequence of these errors of
    law, that with an exception of one preserved set of findings, the terms
    of which were agreed by the representatives, the conceded errors went
    to the core of the decision, which required a complete remaking,
    including in relation to the appellant's credibility.  The findings
    that it was agreed I should preserve were at [23] and [41] of the FtT's
    decision:

"Given the respondent accepted in the refusal letter that there were ISIS
offensives in the area, albeit that the appellant's own village had not
been identified as invaded, I find it plausible that there was ISIS
activity in his home area, as described."

 0. Paragraph [41] continues:

    "I find it reasonably likely that the attack on his village of Albu
    Najm happened as claimed and that the family moved to Tuz Khurmatu."

 0. Subject to these preserved findings, the representatives agreed with me
    that in light of the remainder of the findings being unsafe, it was
    unnecessary for me to determine the other grounds of appeal, suffice it
    to say that by reference to ground (3), I have not preserved any
    findings in relation to the appellant's age, noting that there is no
    bright line in terms of vulnerability between somebody who may either
    be only just a minor or only just an adult; and that the FtT is not
    tasked with carrying out an age assessment by way of judicial review.

Decision on error of law

 0. In light of the respondent's concessions, I find that the decision of
    the FtT contains errors of law, such that it is unsafe and cannot
    stand, subject to the preserved findings that the attack on the
    appellant's village of Albu Najm happened as claimed and that the
    family moved to Tuz Khurmatu.

Disposal

 1. With reference to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice
    Statements and the necessary fact-finding relating to the appellant's
    credibility, this is one of the rare cases that has to be remitted to
    the First-tier Tribunal for a complete rehearing.  Both representatives
    were agreed on this course of action should I find there to be material
    errors of law.

 0. I direct that it is remitted to be reheard at Taylor House Hearing
    Centre, but not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew.  A Kurdish
    Sorani interpreter is needed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law and I set  it
aside.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  complete  rehearing,
subject to the preserved findings that  findings  that  the  attack  on  the
appellant's village of Albu Najm happened as claimed  and  that  the  family
moved to Tuz Khurmatu.

The remitted appeal shall not be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Thew.

The anonymity directions continue to apply.



Signed J Keith                  Date:  19 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Keith



