
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06049/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24th June 2019                    |On 2nd July 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     H D
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Saeed of Aman Solicitors Advocates (London) Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge Kelly made
    following a hearing at Bradford on 24th January 2019.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Turkey born on 1st September 1992.

 3. He has a lengthy immigration history.  He says that he was detained and
    beaten by Turkish police in 2009 and his father  arranged  for  him  to
    travel to the UK as a student.  He entered the UK with leave to  remain
    until 2010 but was nevertheless still here in  May  2013  when  he  was
    discovered by Immigration Officers to be working in his  cousin's  fish
    and chip shop.  At that stage he  made  an  unsuccessful  human  rights
    claim under Article 8 of the Human Rights  Convention,  but  no  asylum
    claim.  He says that he was hoping that the situation in  Turkey  would
    improve. He was removed there in July 2013.

 4. In mid 2016 the appellant claims to have been  assaulted  and  his  arm
    broken by six people, he says, on account  of  his  membership  of  the
    Alevi faith.  In November he was arrested on suspicion  of  involvement
    in the Gulan movement.  In September 2017 he was arrested when visiting
    the house of a friend  and  detained  and  sexually  abused.   He  then
    travelled to Ankara where he  went  into  hiding.   He  was  prescribed
    medication by a doctor and attempted suicide.

 5. The appellant  did  not  mention  these  events  during  his  screening
    interview on two occasions because he said that he was scared  that  he
    would be treated  in  the  same  way  as  happened  when  he  made  his
    unsuccessful human rights claim, and he was tired after his twelve hour
    trip to the UK so he did not think to mention them.

 6. The judge said that he  attached  significant  weight  to  the  various
    medical reports as evidence supportive of his claim  to  have  suffered
    physical and emotional trauma.  He said that,  whatever  the  cause  of
    that trauma may have been, he accepted that it potentially rendered the
    appellant vulnerable and so he  had  factored  this  into  his  overall
    assessment of his credibility.  Nevertheless,  he  concluded  that  the
    appellant had not told the truth about his reasons for coming to the UK
    and dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to apply Article 1 of the Refugee  Convention,  had  applied
    the wrong standard of proof, and had  made  contradictory  findings  in
    that he had accepted that the appellant was potentially vulnerable  and
    yet criticised the appellant for not disclosing details of  the  sexual
    abuse that he suffered in Turkey.

 8. Permission to appeal was granted  by  Judge  Adio  on  the  second  two
    grounds.

Submissions

 9. Mr Saeed relied upon his Grounds of Appeal.  He drew  my  attention  to
    the medical evidence set out in the  appellant's  supplementary  bundle
    which shows a consistent generalised anxiety  disorder  and  low  mood.
    The general report, entitled "Psychology, Trauma and  the  Law"  by  Dr
    Georgina Smith and Dr Sarah Heke demonstrated the effect  which  trauma
    has on memory in that people can sometimes remember  events  they  have
    not in reality experienced and the traumatic  memories  which  they  do
    have are likely to  be  fragmented.   A  common  feature  of  traumatic
    experience is to dissociate in  an  attempt  to  create  distance  from
    distress  which can disrupt the trauma victim's ability to remember.

10. He submitted that the judge had accepted the medical reports  and  said
    that he had taken them into account when reaching his  conclusions  but
    it was apparent from the determination that he had not in fact done so.
     It was a contradiction for the judge  to  say  that  he  had  attached
    significant weight to the medical reports but in  effect,  treated  the
    appellant as an individual who was fit and well.

11. Second, he submitted that the judge had not applied the proper standard
    of proof at paragraph 34 of his determination when he said that he  was
    left in no real doubt that his account of ill-treatment in  Turkey  was
    fabricated.

Findings and Conclusions

12. Dealing with the last point first, there is no substance to  the  claim
    that this experienced judge applied the wrong standard of  proof.    In
    fact he set it out   clearly  and  accurately  in  his  conclusions  at
    paragraph 36 of the determination when he said:

         "Whilst I do not exclude the possibility that the  appellant  is  a
         practising Alevi  Muslim  I  am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  a
         reasonable degree of likelihood of him either:

         (a)  having previously experienced persecution as  such  from  non-
             state actors and/or

         (b)   requiring  surrogate  protection  in   view   of   sufficient
             protection being available from the Turkish state."

13. At paragraph 27 the judge said that he attached significant  weight  to
    the medical reports, and there is no basis upon which to conclude  that
    he did not do so.  The judge accepted that there was evidence of trauma
    which potentially rendered the appellant vulnerable but did not  accept
    that the cause of the trauma was as stated by him.

14. The judge was obliged to take into account a number of aspects  of  the
    appellant's behaviour.  He failed to return to Turkey  when  his  leave
    expired  in  January  2010.   He  remained  in  the  UK  until  he  was
    encountered by Immigration Officers in 2013.  Even at that stage he did
    not claim asylum although it his case that  he  had  suffered  harm  in
    2009.  There is nothing contradictory between accepting that there  was
    medical evidence of trauma but concluding that the cause of that trauma
    was not as now  described.   The  appellant's  immigration  history  is
    plainly relevant to that assessment.

15. It was open to the judge to hold it against the appellant that  he  did
    not disclose the arrest and ill-treatment he experienced he says at the
    hands of Turkish Police in 2016 and 2017 when asked  at  his  screening
    interview why he could not return to his home country.  The  judge  was
    entitled  to  highlight  the  discrepant  nature  of  the   appellant's
    explanations for failing to mention the central part of his claim, both
    that he feared doing so in case it would lead to his removal  and  that
    he just  did  not  think  about  it.   Whilst  it  could  be  that  the
    contradictions  in  the  appellant's  evidence  could  be  ascribed  to
    posttraumatic stress the judge was entitled, bearing in mind all of the
    other factors in this case,  to  conclude  that  the  real  reason  was
    because the account had been fabricated.

16. The judge properly asked himself why the appellant had decided  not  to
    give direct evidence of the events which he said led to his  claim  for
    asylum.  He acknowledged that it might  have  been  difficult  for  the
    appellant do so through a female  interpreter.   However,  an  advanced
    request for a male interpreter would readily have been granted.  In any
    event, he could have given a detailed account of the  sexual  abuse  he
    claims to have suffered in a witness statement, which could  have  been
    adopted at the hearing.  The  witness  statement  was  in  fact  wholly
    silent on the matter.

17. This is a well-structured, well-reasoned determination.   There  is  no
    error of law.

Notice of Decision

18. The original judge did not err in law and  his  decision  stands.   The
    appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


