
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/06521/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20 February 2019                     | On 13 March 2019                   |
|                                        |                                    |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                              Mrs Hien Thi Tran
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel, instructed by Thompson & Co
                    Solicitors (Wimbledon)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   In a decision posted on 26 November 2018 Judge  Talbot  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed the appeal of the appellant,  a  national
    of Vietnam, against the decision made  on  9  June  2016  refusing  her
    protection claim.  Her original appeal had been heard by Judge Paul  of
    the FtT on 9 March 2017 but that had been set aside for material  error
    of law.

2.   The  appellant's  written  grounds  levelled  five  criticisms  of  the
    judge's decision, but permission was granted only  on  ground  4  which
    contends that the judge erred in finding that the appellant  could  not
    meet the insurmountable obstacles test, even though her partner  was  a
    naturalised refugee.  At issue was what the judge said at paragraph 41:



    41.  With regard to Appendix FM (family life), the Appellant claims  to
         have a partner in the UK, namely Mr [DVN], a British  citizen,  who
         gave evidence before me. Mr Eton was not satisfied that they are in
         a relationship as claimed because of discrepancies in their answers
         to questions that he put to them such as the celebrating  of  their
         birthdays (although other answers given were consistent). There  is
         also a lack of supporting evidence  regarding  their  cohabitation.
         Having heard from them both in person, I nevertheless consider that
         it  is  more  likely  than  not  that  they  are  in  a  cohabiting
         relationship as claimed. However, the Appellant does not  meet  the
         'immigration status requirements' of Appendix FM, as she lacks  any
         leave to remain in the UK.  She has also failed to provide evidence
         of meeting the  financial  or  English  language  requirements.  In
         relation to paragraph EX.1, the Appellant would have  to  establish
         that there are insurmountable obstacles to  family  life  with  her
         partner continuing outside the UK.  Mr  Dong  states  that  he  was
         granted refugee status in the UK but he is now  a  British  citizen
         and there was no evidence before me  how they would meet  the  very
         high threshold of 'insurmountable obstacles' to them  returning  to
         Vietnam as a couple.  I conclude that the Appellant cannot  succeed
         under Appendix FM on the basis of 'family life'.

3.   I heard concise submissions from both representatives.

4.   If there had been significant evidence before the FtT  Judge  that  the
    appellant's partner was a national of  Vietnam  who  had  been  granted
    refugee status in relation to that country, I may  have  been  open  to
    persuasion that the judge erred in law, although even then I doubt  any
    error would have been material since there was no evidence  before  the
    judge to indicate that her partner, who stated that he had  arrived  in
    the UK as long ago as 1977, would still be at risk on return,  over  50
    years on.

5.   However, the twofold problem for the appellant is that:

    1)   the only evidence produced to support in any way this claim was  a
         statement by her partner (said in oral  evidence  to  be  true  and
         correct), and in the statement the claim made is simply that he  is
         a naturalised refugee.  Although he stated that  he  could  not  go
         "back" to Vietnam, he did not  state  that  he  is  a  national  of
         Vietnam.  His given nationality  is  Cambodian.   He  said  nothing
         regarding adverse experiences in Vietnam. He gave no indication  of
         how long  ago  he  was  recognised  as  a  refugee.   Further,  the
         statement referred to coming to the UK over 30 years ago;


    2)   Mr Tufan stated that the respondent had undertaken a check of Home
         Office records relating to this person and no record of  him  being
         granted refugee status was found.  The only entry held showed  that
         he was a  naturalised  British  citizen  whose  application  for  a
         certificate of approval of marriage to a  national  of  Taiwan  had
         been refused on 24 April 2009.

6.   Put another way, despite the respondent actively cooperating to  assist
    the appellant discharge the onus on her to substantiate her claim  that
    her partner could not accompany her to Vietnam, the claim made  by  her
    partner had not been substantiated.

7.   For the above reasons I conclude that the judge did not materially  err
    in law and accordingly his decision to dismiss the  appellant's  appeal
    must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date: 8 March 2019

              [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal








