

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06844/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 8 December 2020                           |On 19 January 2021            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     EQ
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:      Ms Mason, Broudie Jackson and Canter
For the respondent:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.



       1. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his international protection claim.

Background

       2. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq, has appealed against a  decision
          of First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') Judge AJ Parker sent on 29  October
          2019 dismissing his appeal on international protection  and  human
          rights grounds.  The appellant's asylum claim  can  be  summarised
          as follows: he is a Kurd who resided in Taba  Souz,  near  Tuz  in
          Iraq; in January 2019, Daesh ('ISIS') abducted  and  tortured  him
          until he agreed to work for them; one day  after  his  release  he
          fled his  village  for  Kirkuk  and  soon  after  that  left  Iran
          overland to Turkey.


       3. The FTT concluded that the appellant's account  of  his  abduction
          by ISIS was not credible on the basis  that  it  was  inconsistent
          and implausible, and he could in any event internally relocate.

Concession

       4. At the beginning of the hearing before me  Mr  Tan  conceded  that
          the grounds of appeal  contains  errors  of  law.   He  noted  the
          contents of a rule 24 response dated 15  May  2020  but  confirmed
          that he placed no reliance upon it.


       5. The respondent's concession was properly made for  the  reasons  I
          summarise below and it is appropriate to  allow  the  appeal,  set
          aside the FTT decision and remit the matter to  the  FTT  pursuant
          to rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.



Ground 1

       6. The first ground of appeal challenges  the  credibility  findings.
          The appellant has made a very serious claim that he  was  abducted
          and subjected to torture whilst in Iraq.  The  FTT's  decision  is
          not carefully drafted.  The decision reads as a first  draft  that
          has not  been  checked.   Sentences  have  been  left  incomplete.
          Punctuation is missing.  The structure is confused and  confusing.
           The appellant's account has not  been  carefully  scrutinised  by
          the FTT.  The findings of fact have not been  adequately  reasoned
          and the FTT failed to consider the plausibility of the account  in
          the context of  the  country  background  evidence.   I  summarise
          below the more significant issues of concern.


                   1) The finding at [29] is not adequately reasoned in the
                      light of  the  appellant's  clear  evidence  that  he
                      agreed to work for ISIS in order to stop the  torture
                      and secure his  release  -  see  Q83  of  the  asylum
                      interview.

                   2) The reasoning at [33]  is  difficult  to  follow  and
                      confusing - it is entirely difficult to see  why  the
                      FTT concluded that the appellant told  a  "completely
                      different story".

                   3) The FTT has made no effort to refer to  the  relevant
                      country background evidence in support of the finding
                      at [34] and has in any event  given  no  reasons  for
                      finding the appellant's claim to be implausible - see
                      also [38].

                   4) It is entirely unclear what the FTT is  referring  to
                      at [35] to [36] and [38].

                   5) The findings at [28], [37]  and  [42]  demonstrate  a
                      misunderstanding  of  the  lower  standard  of  proof
                      applicable in  asylum  appeals,  notwithstanding  the
                      correct  self-direction  at  [7].   It  is   entirely
                      unclear  whether  the  FTT  attached  weight  to  the
                      appellant's scars or not.



Ground 2



       7. The second ground of appeal  relates  to  the  FTT's  findings  on
          internal relocation.  As Mr Tan  acknowledged,  Judge  Parker  has
          not directed himself to the country guidance  case  applicable  at
          the time of the decision (AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-internal  relocation)
          Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC))  and  wrongly  applied  earlier  country
          guidance.  Although Judge Parker referred to Ms  Mason's  reliance
          upon AAH at [59], Mr Tan accepted he has not engaged  with  it  or
          made his factual findings in the light of it.


       8. In addition, the basic  errors  of  punctuation  continue  in  the
          section  headed  'internal  relocation'  and  the   appellant   is
          referred to as a 'she' twice  at  [57].   Internal  relocation  in
          Iraq is fact sensitive and turns  in  part  upon  the  appellant's
          past account and his general credibility regarding  documentation.
            Mr Tan invited me to find that there has been no appeal  against
          the finding that the appellant can obtain  his  CSID  from  family
          members at  [62]  and  this  might  be  a  preserved  finding.   I
          disagree.  The errors in the decision are so significant and wide-
          ranging that in my judgment no findings can be preserved.


Final points

       9. The FTT's decision is replete with  basic  errors  and  omissions.
          These errors are clear upon any reasonable first  reading  of  the
          decision, and ought to have been spotted  and  then  corrected  by
          Judge Parker, prior to promulgation.

Remittal

      10. The factual findings must be remade entirely.  I have  had  regard
          to para 7.2 of the relevant Senior President's Practice  Statement
          and the nature and extent of  the  factual  findings  required  in
          remaking the  decision,  and  I  have  decided  that  this  is  an
          appropriate case to remit to the  FTT  to  make  completely  fresh
          findings of fact.


Decision

      11. The decision of the FTT involved the making of  a  material  error
          of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      12. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT (a judge  other  than  Judge
          AJ Parker) de novo.



Signed:  Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 8 December 2020

