
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/06727/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |        Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 17th January 2018                   |        On 15th February 2018        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON

                                   Between

                                 mr As S D G
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramjorthy instructed by Loshana Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka of Sinhalese ethnicity born  on
    13th March 1981 and is married and has one child born in the UK on 14th
    September 2016.  He appealed a decision of the Secretary of State dated
    14th June 2016 refusing his claim for asylum.  His appeal was dismissed
    before the First-tier Tribunal on 6th July 2017 by First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Griffith.

 2. The appellant claimed he had worked in a bank in Sri Lanka and that  he
    had assisted the LTTE having opened more than 100 accounts.  He was  at
    risk of return, he claimed, from the authorities in Sri  Lanka  because
    of his connection with the LTTE.  The Secretary  of  State  refused  to
    accept that he had any issues with the Sri Lankan Authorities but  even
    so pointed out the appellant had left the country on his  own  passport
    rendering his account that he  left  Sri  Lanka  on  a  false  document
    implausible.  If he had been of any interest to the  authorities  there
    was ample opportunity for him to be apprehended on legal exit.

 3. The application for permission to appeal challenged the decision on two
    grounds:  (i) the credibility assessment and (ii)   the  assessment  of
    the evidence by the  judge.   It  was  also  asserted  that  the  judge
    materially erred in law by making a material mistake as  to  fact.   It
    was not the appellant's evidence that  he  opened  bank  accounts  with
    bogus ID cards and secondly the judge failed to engage  with  Counsel's
    submissions pertaining  to  the  reason  that  the  appellant  was  not
    arrested at the airport was due to the fact that he was not on the stop
    list though he  may  have  been  on  a  watch  list  which  is  why  he
    encountered  problems  later  on  with  the  Authorities.   The   judge
    materially erred in law by failing to give the appellant the benefit of
    the doubt in relation to  his  account  of  using  an  agent  to  avoid
    checkpoints and to leave Sri Lanka unhindered with the assistance of an
    agent.

 4. On ground (ii) in his assessment of the psychiatric evidence the  judge
    did not engage with any of the  clinical  findings  of  Dr  Dhumad  but
    further the judge failed to  make  any  findings  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's wife's evidence notwithstanding her being tendered to  give
    evidence and also being  cross-examined  and  asked  questions  by  the
    judge.

 5. At the hearing before  me  Mr  Paramjorthy  also  identified  that  the
    appellant had handed in a letter from his father written in English and
    this too had not been taken into account by the judge.

 6. At the hearing Mr Paramjorthy emphasised the importance of  the  wife's
    evidence because she had  returned  in  2014  to  Sri  Lanka  and  gave
    evidence of the appellant's father informing her of the arrest and  the
    methods used for his release together with the information with regards
    the agent by passing the checkpoints on departure from Sri Lanka.

 7. Ms Willocks-Briscoe conceded that the judge had nowhere  addressed  the
    evidence of either the wife or the letter.

Conclusions

 8. I am persuaded that there are indeed errors of  law  in  this  decision
    which are material.  There was specific evidence put before  the  judge
    which was not addressed.  The judge made findings  on  credibility  and
    yet failed to address the evidence of the wife which  was  relevant  to
    the  appellant's  his  exit  from  Sri  Lanka,  which  was  germane  to
    credibility, and failed to address the evidence of the father.  Where a
    witness account is corroborated by another witness'  account  this  can
    add to its credibility SA Iran [2012] EWHC 2575 and  thus  should  have
    been assessed.  In addition  AK Turkey [2004] UKIAT 00230 confirms that
    'save in those exceptional cases where the material facts  are  not  in
    issue between the parties, it is an essential part of an  adjudicator's
    responsibility to make clear findings of fact on  the  material  issues
    and to give proper intelligible and adequate reasons  for  arriving  at
    those findings'.

 9. The absence of the assessment of this evidence which was  relevant  and
    material is a fundamental error in the decision which goes to the heart
    of the adverse credibility finding.

10. The judge made adverse credibility findings against  the  appellant  on
    the basis of his activities in the bank and that  he  returned  to  Sri
    Lanka for a holiday  in  2014.   At  the  end  of  the  conclusions  on
    credibility the judge stated

    "I have read the report of the consultant psychiatrist dated 15th  June
    2017.  The narrative is based on what the  appellant  told  Dr  Dhumad,
    which I have found to be lacking in credibility".

11. This assessment appears to be an appendix as opposed  to  part  of  the
    overall findings on credibility.  Contrary to the guidance  in  Mibanga
    [2005] EWCA Civ 367  the judge appears to  have  merely  added  on  his
    findings in relation to  the  medical  report  following  on  from  the
    assessment in relation to credibility without  addressing  the  medical
    report itself.

12. The findings on the evidence  and  credibility  are  fundamental.   The
    Judge erred materially for the reasons  identified.  I  set  aside  the
    decision pursuant to Section  12(2)(a)  of  the  Tribunals  Courts  and
    Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent
    of the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007  and  further
    to 7.2 (b) of the Presidential Practice Statement.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed Helen Rimington                                   Date 12th  February
    2018


Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
