
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06505/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided Under Rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 16 May 2020                       |On 21 May 2020                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                  AHMED [M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This decision has been made on the papers, under Rule  34  of  The  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  further  to  directions  issued  by
Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce sent out on 9 April 2020.

The appellant is a national of Egypt whose date  of  birth  is  given  as  1
January 1977. He arrived in  the  United  Kingdom  on  25  August  2018  and
claimed asylum on 5 September 2018. His claim was refused on 21 June 2019.

The appellant clams to be  at  risk  on  return  to  Egypt  because  of  his
perceived support for the Muslim Brotherhood. He claims  that  his  problems
arose at a time when he was living  in  Saudi  Arabia,  following  arguments
with his nephew-in-law Mohamed who was a lawyer in Egypt over  the  transfer
of money from Saudi Arabia to Egypt for a widower who was living  in  Egypt.
The appellant agreed to assist the widower by  transferring  the  funds,  at
Mohamed's request, but paid the money directly to the  widower  rather  than
through Mohamed, resulting in  Mohamed  losing  out  on  commission  and  so
causing family arguments. The appellant later became Facebook  friends  with
Mohamed, in June 2018, but they argued about their  political  beliefs  when
he posted and liked  articles  in  favour  of  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  and
against  the  el-Sisi  regime,  contrary  to   Mohamed's   own   views.   He
subsequently received threats  from  Mohamed  that  he  would  make  a  case
against him as being  a  Muslim  Brotherhood  supporter  and  terrorist  and
Mohamed sent him photographs of documents on Messenger showing that  he  had
filed a case against him. He then came to the  UK  and  fears  returning  to
Egypt.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not  accept  that  he
was a supporter of the Muslim Brotherhood and did not accept his account  of
problems with Mohamed. The respondent accorded no weight to  the  supporting
documents relied upon by the appellant and considered that he would  not  be
at risk on return to Egypt.

The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was heard by  First
tier Tribunal Judge Parker on 20 November 2019. In a statement submitted  in
support of the appeal the appellant explained that he had  since  found  out
that the court documents for the  case  against  him,  as  sent  to  him  by
Mohamed, were not in fact genuine and that there was no  case  against  him.
That made him more fearful of Mohamed as it showed how far  he  was  willing
to go to ensure that he did not return to Egypt and would be willing  to  do
anything to get him into trouble. He feared  that  Mohamed  was  capable  of
getting him arrested and imprisoned due to his contacts in  the  government.
He also feared return to Egypt because of his activities in the  UK  helping
the Egyptian Revolutionary Council and  because  he  had  been  photographed
attending demonstrations in support of the Muslim Brotherhood.

Judge Parker did not  find  the  appellant's  account  to  be  credible  and
concluded that he was at no risk  on  return  to  Egypt.  He  dismissed  the
appeal on all grounds, in a decision promulgated on 18 December 2019.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on  the  grounds  that  the
judge had made key findings on an incorrect understanding of  the  evidence;
that he had failed to take account of relevant  documents  and  engage  with
the expert evidence; and  that  he  had  failed  to  make  findings  on  the
appellant's sur place activities in the UK.

Permission was granted on 11 February 2020.

In light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread  of  Covid-19,
the matter was not listed for a hearing and the  case  was  reviewed  by  an
Upper Tribunal Judge on 2 April 2020. In a Note and Directions sent  out  on
9 April 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce indicated that she had reached  the
provisional view that the question  of  whether  the  First-tier  Tribunal's
decision involved the making of  error  of  law  and,  if  so,  whether  the
decision should be set aside, could be made without a  hearing.  Submissions
were invited from the parties.

Written submissions have been received from the appellant's  representatives
which include an objection to the matter being  dealt  with  on  the  papers
under rule 34 in the event that the grounds of appeal are contested  by  the
respondent. The respondent has not filed any submissions  and  there  is  no
rule 24 response to the grant of permission. In the circumstances I  see  no
reason why the  error  of  law  question  cannot  be  determined  without  a
hearing, particularly as it seems to me  that  the  appellant's  grounds  of
appeal are made out  and  that  Judge  Parker's  decision  contains  various
errors of law.

Although the judge's findings appear under a heading "Findings and  Reasons"
it is somewhat difficult to ascertain which parts are  actual  findings  and
which are simply summaries of the evidence. By way of example,  I  refer  to
paragraph 18, from which it  is  not  clear  whether  the  judge  is  simply
repeating the appellant's evidence as to his nephew-in-law's position  as  a
lawyer, as referred to in the document at page 355, or whether he is  making
a finding on the matter. The grounds assert that the judge  failed  to  make
any findings in that regard and there is merit in such  an  assertion  given
that it is far from clear whether or not he did so. There  is,  furthermore,
merit in the assertion in the submissions from Ms Bayoumi  at  [8]  and  [9]
that the judge misunderstood the basis of the appellant's  claim,  believing
the claimed risk to have arisen from the events  in  2014  rather  than  the
Facebook arguments with  Mohamed  from  2018  and  thus  erroneously  making
adverse  credibility  findings  on  the  delay  in  claiming   asylum,   and
misunderstood the claim as to the significance of the  case-file  and  court
documents. The grounds also assert that the judge  failed  to  consider  the
expert evidence. Whilst the judge refers to the report from  Hugh  Miles  at
[51], I agree that there is no proper consideration of  the  report  in  the
context of an assessment of the appellant's credibility. Likewise, there  is
no proper assessment of the evidence produced by the appellant in regard  to
his sur place activities but simply cursory  observations  from  [59]  about
his Facebook activities.

Accordingly, I find merit in the challenge in the  grounds  to  the  judge's
engagement with the evidence  and  the  adequacy  of  his  findings  on  the
evidence. I agree with Ms Bayoumi's submissions at [16] as  to  the  judge's
failure to undertake a holistic assessment  of  the  evidence.  The  judge's
findings on the evidence were clearly directly relevant  to  his  assessment
of the credibility of the appellant's account  and,  in  the  circumstances,
the judge's credibility findings are simply unsustainable. I therefore  also
agree with Ms Bayoumi that the decision must be set aside in  its  entirety,
with no findings preserved. The appropriate course is for  the  case  to  be
remitted to the First-tier tribunal to be heard de novo before  a  different
judge.



DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to section 12(2)(b)(i)  of  the
Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and  Practice  Statement  7.2(b),
to be heard afresh before any judge aside from Judge Parker.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                                          Dated:
16 May 2020
