
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06125/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at City Centre Tower, Birmingham        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26th February 2018                         |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal JUDGE RENTON


                                   Between

                                     b k
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant is a male Kurdish citizen of Iraq born on [ ]  1990.   He
    entered the UK illegally on 1st December 2015 and  applied  for  asylum
    the following day.  That application was refused for the reasons  given
    in an Asylum Decision dated 9th June 2016.  The Appellant appealed, and
    his appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Perry  (the  Judge)
    sitting at Birmingham on 14th December 2016.  He decided to dismiss the
    appeal for the reasons given in his Decision dated  4th  January  2017.
    The Appellant sought leave to appeal that decision, and on 25th October
    2017 such permission was granted.

Error of Law

 2. I must first decide if the decision of the Judge contained an error  on
    a point of law so that it should be set aside.

 3. At the hearing before me there was no appearance by or on behalf of the
    Appellant.  I decided to hear the appeal in his absence  in  accordance
    with the provisions  of  Rule  38  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008.  I was satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    properly notified of the time, date, and place of the hearing, and  for
    reasons which will become  apparent  later,  I  considered  it  in  the
    interests of justice to proceed.

 4. At the hearing, Mrs  Aboni  confirmed  that  it  was  conceded  by  the
    Respondent as stated in the Rule 24 response that there was a  material
    error of law in the decision of the Judge which therefore should be set
    aside.  She further agreed that the decision in the  appeal  should  be
    remade in the First-tier Tribunal in accordance with  paragraph  7.2(b)
    of the Practice Statements as judicial fact-finding was necessary.

 5. I therefore find a material error of law in the decision of  the  Judge
    which I set aside.  The decision in the appeal will be  remade  in  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  I need  not  give  reasons  for  my  decision  in
    accordance with the provisions of Rule 40(3)(a) of the Procedure Rules.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I set aside that decision.

The decision in the appeal will be remade by the First-tier Tribunal.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity  which  I  continue  for
the reasons given by the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed                              Date  19th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Renton
