
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/06288/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                        | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 21st August 2017                      | On 29th August 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                            Sardar Mohsen Hassan
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Hussain of Counsel, instructed by Halliday
Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of Judge  Henderson
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 15th December 2016.

    Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on 4th May  1996.   He  entered
    the UK illegally on 21st December 2015 and claimed asylum.

 3. His story is as follows. Prior to his arrival in the UK he had  been  a
    member of the Peshmerga as a fighter in Iraq. He was captured  by  ISIS
    in 2015 and forced to tell the Peshmerga that he had joined them.  They
    killed two guards at the border where he was  posted.  His  family  was
    threatened by the families of the dead guards. He managed to escape and
    was able to leave the country travelling first to Istanbul and then  on
    through Europe to the UK. He believes that he will be persecuted by the
    Kurdish authorities on his return to Iraq and the authorities would not
    be willing or able to protect him.

 4. The judge concluded that there was no truth in the  appellant's  claim.
    She specifically rejected his account of fearing the Peshmerga, and did
    not accept that  he  genuinely  feared  persecution  from  the  Kurdish
    authorities in the IKR. Whilst the appellant came from a disputed area,
    he had travelled to the IKR and lived there without any difficulty. She
    concluded that he could safely relocate to IKR territory.  His  family,
    including his parents and his parents-in-law and his wife and child are
    all living in Erbil.  He could reasonably relocate.

 5. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

    The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application make no challenge to the judge's credibility
    findings, but argue that the judge's  conclusions  on  internal  flight
    were unlawful.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Page on 2nd May 2017.

 8. On 30th May 2017 the respondent served a reply opposing the appeal.

    Submissions

 9. Mr Hussain submitted that the judge had erred in  concluding  that  the
    appellant could reasonably relocate to the IKR  because  his  situation
    would always be precarious there.

10. He referred me to the head note in the case of AA (Article 15(c))  Iraq
    CG [2015] UKUT 00544, which states that, at paragraph 19:

         "A Kurd who does not originate from the IKR can  obtain  entry  for
         ten days as a visitor and then renew this entry  permission  for  a
         further ten days.  If he finds employment he can remain for  longer
         although he will need to register with the authorities and  provide
         details of the  employer.   There  is  no  evidence  that  the  IKR
         authorities proactively remove Kurds from  the  IKR  whose  permits
         have come to an end."

11. Mr Hussain also referred me to the UK Home Office  Country  Information
    and Guidance - Iraq: Return/Internal relocation at paragraphs 8.1.4 and
    8.1.5,  which  confirms  that  IDPs  entering  the  IKR   cannot   stay
    indefinitely and would have to register with  the  authorities  at  the
    airport.  They are only able to settle in the KRI temporarily.   Whilst
    Iraqi citizens who originate  from  the  KRI  will  not  face  problems
    returning, those who do not must travel onwards to the area he  or  she
    is originally from when  arriving  through  an  airport  in  KRI.   The
    Country Information and Guidance dated 24th December 2014 records  that
    since April 2012 68 Iraqi  nationals  were  returned  direct  to  Iraqi
    Kurdistan, and only persons who were pre-cleared would  be  liable  for
    removal under those procedures.

12. Mrs Pettersen defended the determination.  She  reminded  me  that  the
    appellant had family in Erbil and he went  in  and  out  on  a  regular
    basis.  In those circumstances the temporary grant of ten  days'  leave
    plus a further ten days was reasonable.

13. By way of reply Mr Hussain repeated that it  was  pure  speculation  to
    consider that the appellant could find work  within  twenty  days.   To
    return him to such a precarious position was itself unreasonable.

    Findings and Conclusions

14. The facts of this case are as follows.  The appellant has put forward a
    story which has been found to be false.  There is no challenge  to  the
    judge's conclusions that the appellant has not  told  the  truth  about
    fearing the families of Peshmerga guards  or  the  KDP  or  indeed  any
    Kurdish authority on return to Iraq.

15. All of his family are in Erbil including his parents  and  his  partner
    and child.  He therefore not only has cultural and linguistic  ties  to
    the IKR but strong family  connections  there.  He  will  initially  be
    granted a period of ten days' leave and then be able to renew his entry
    permission for a further ten days.  If employment is secured he will be
    given formal permission to remain.  His family links are such  that  he
    would be in a very good position to be able to establish himself  there
    during the currency of his temporary permit.

16. The Tribunal in AA made it clear that the issue of  relocation  to  the
    IKR will be fact-sensitive.  Although the appellant does not  originate
    from  the  IKR  his  ties  there  could  not  be  stronger.   In  these
    circumstances the  original  judge  did  not  err  in  concluding  that
    relocation would be unreasonable.

Decision

The original judge did not err in law.  Her decision stands.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed

[pic]

Deputy           Upper           Tribunal            Judge            Taylor
Date 28 August 2017





