
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/06575/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 21 June 2017                        |     On 4 July 2017                  |
|Determination prepared 21 June 2017    |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     HAA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr B Bundock, Counsel, instructed by J D Spicer Zeb
                    Solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The Secretary of State appeals, with permission, against a decision  of
    Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ruth,  who  in  a   determination
    promulgated on 20 April 2015  allowed  the  appeal  of  HAA  against  a
    decision to refuse him asylum.

2.   For ease of reference I will refer to the Secretary  of  State  as  the
    respondent as she was the respondent in the First-tier and similarly  I
    will refer to HAA as the appellant.

3.   The appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  born  on  9  February  1979.   He
    arrived in Britain on 30 December 2015 and claimed asylum.

4.   He asserted that in June 2009, while working  as  a  taxi  driver,  his
    route had been blocked by a demonstration.  He waited by  the  side  of
    his vehicle as the demonstration continued but  the  government  forces
    then arrived and began shooting at the demonstrators  and  although  he
    had not taken part in the demonstration he ran away from the firing and
    was shot in the shoulder.  He lost consciousness but awoke in detention
    and spent four months in detention  being  subjected  to  beatings  and
    torture.  He was never charged with an offence or questioned about  his
    activities.  Eventually after he had been transferred  to  hospital  he
    had been released with a reporting requirement.

5.   He was a member of the Qashqai  tribe  in  south-western  Iran  and  he
    worked in the mountains with members of his tribe as a shepherd for the
    next five years before deciding to leave  Iran  with  the  help  of  an
    agent.

6.   When interviewed on 15 February 2016 he  repeated  the  claim  which  I
    have set out above and was then asked if he  had  anything  further  to
    add.   He  said  he  had   not.    However,   one   month   later   his
    representatives,  Migrant  Legal  Project,  wrote  to  the   respondent
    stating:

         "Mr HA wishes to go on record that he  has  recently  converted  to
         Christianity.  He was evangelised in the UK and baptised  prior  to
         his Home Office interview on 10 February 2016.  Please find Mr  A's
         baptism certificate enclosed".


7.   The appellant was then interviewed for a second time on 1 June when  he
    was asked questions regarding his conversion and about Christianity.

8.   His application was refused on 9 June 2016.  They did not  accept  that
    his claim was credible.  The letter of refusal  dealt  first  with  his
    arrest and detention before turning to his claim that he had converted.
     It was pointed out that he had made no mention of  his  conversion  to
    Christianity from Islam at his first asylum interview despite the  fact
    that he had claimed  to  have  been  baptised  five  days  before  that
    interview, it was also pointed out that he could not name the church he
    had visited in Cardiff and that his replies had been vague and evasive,
    that he had been unable to name any passages of scripture in the  Bible
    that he related to, and when  asked about how God  gave  rules  to  his
    followers he had made no mention of Moses or the Ten Commandments,  did
    not know who had baptised Jesus and did  not  know  the  names  of  the
    twelve disciples.  It  was  not  accepted  that  he  had  converted  to
    Christianity.

9.   The appellant appealed.  His appeal came before Judge Ruth on  3  April
    2017.  Judge Ruth summarised the appellant's claim and the refusal  and
    noted that it had been accepted by the Presenting Officer  that  should
    he be found to be credible on either ground of his asylum claim  -  his
    experiences in Iran or his conversion of Christianity  -  he  would  be
    entitled to asylum.  The determination stated that the full  record  of
    the evidence was to be found on the Record  of  Proceedings.   However,
    that is illegible.

10.  The judge noted the submissions made by  the  Presenting  Officer,  who
    had asked him to find the appellant was not  credible  and  had  stated
    that the fact that he attended church  did  not  mean  that  he  was  a
    genuine Christian.

11.   In  paragraph  31  onwards  the  judge  set  out  his   findings   and
    conclusions.  He said that  he  would  first  consider  the  sur  place
    element of the appellant's claim relating to his alleged conversion  to
    Christianity.  He stated at paragraph 35:

         "35. In this case I take the view that without the clearly credible
             evidence of Pastor Hawthorne, this appellant  could  not  have
             been regarded as a genuine convert.  I  consider  his  account
             both to the respondent and to me of his  alleged  decision  to
             abandon Islam for Christianity while  in  the  UK  was  indeed
             vague as suggested by the respondent, particularly in relation
             to what seems to me to be the most important question."


12.  He added:

         "36. It is fundamental in the case of alleged conversion  not  that
             the  individual  be  able  to  give  a  detailed  account   of
             theological or practical matters in relation to  the  practice
             of the new religion, since such matters can be learnt in  good
             or bad faith, but that a detailed and  convincing  account  be
             given of the journey and commitment that has led a  person  to
             take  the  momentous  decision  of  abandoning   a   life-long
             religion, particularly in  a  country  such  as  Iran,  for  a
             different religion.  In my view, this appellant was unable  to
             give a convincing account of why he took such steps in the UK.


         37.  Furthermore, it is correct to say that in the  interview  with
             the respondent the appellant was unable to provide a  coherent
             account of his alleged contact with churches and Christians in
             the UK or to explain  whom  he  had  approached,  why  he  had
             approached them or what he was doing in various  churches.   I
             was struck by this vagueness in the context of  a  person  who
             claims now to have decided to abandon the religion into  which
             he was born and to adopt a different one.


         38.  Had I had only the evidence of the appellant I would have  had
             no doubt whatsoever that his claimed conversion was false.


         39.  In this case,  however,  I  had  the  evidence  of  Pastor  H,
             supported also by  the  similarly  credible  evidence  of  his
             church volunteer Mr O.  I have absolutely no doubt that  their
             evidence was credible and that they believe the appellant is a
             genuine Christian convert.  Nothing they said  was  undermined
             in cross-examination and both gave detailed evidence about the
             appellant's involvement not only  in  Bible  study  and  other
             'religious' activities, but also in other church activities.


         40.  It is not necessary in these  matters  to  reach  any  certain
             conclusions about credibility. I have significant doubts about
             the genuine nature of the appellant's  claimed  conversion  in
             the United Kingdom, but those doubts are sufficiently  allayed
             by the firm and convincing opinion of the other two witnesses.
              Their views were not only that he is a Christian convert, but
             that his involvement in wider church activities in  their  own
             personal experience convincingly demonstrates to them that  he
             is now a practising Christian.


         41.  I therefore conclude  it  would  not  be  safe  to  reach  the
             opposite conclusion in the light of the background information
             and I accept that at least some credence can  be  attached  to
             the appellant's claim.


         42.   In  the  light  of  the  guidance  in  Karanakaran,  that  is
             sufficient to establish the credibility of the claim in  terms
             of the profile to be assessed when considering any  risk  upon
             return.


         43.  Having reached this conclusion, and given my findings below, I
             do not consider it necessary to make  any  assessment  of  the
             remaining aspects of the appellant's asylum claim."


13.  The judge then referred to relevant country guidance  and  stated  that
    it was accepted by the Presenting Officer that if the appellant  was  a
    genuine convert then he would face persecution.  He therefore  went  on
    to allow the appeal.

14.  The grounds of appeal argue that  the  judge  had  not  made  a  proper
    assessment of the initial part of the appellant's claim or  any  reason
    he advanced for having to flee his own country and that the  judge  had
    failed to make a finding on whether or not  his  true  intentions  were
    economically motivated or whether he was in genuine need of  protection
    under the Refugee Convention.  Moreover it was stated  that  the  judge
    having stated that the appellant "could not have  been  regarded  as  a
    genuine convert" and having found that his responses to questions about
    his conversion were "vague" and that he had  been  "unable  to  give  a
    convincing account of why he took such steps in the UK"  was  wrong  to
    base his assessment solely on the evidence of the  two  witnesses.   It
    was asserted that the judge had erred in finding the appellant credible
    on the basis of credibility of others as it was the appellant's account
    that required assessment and not that of the witnesses.  It was  argued
    that it was a misdirection to discount the failings of the  appellant's
    evidence on the basis that he had  managed  to  provide  witnesses  who
    believed his account.

15.  It was argued that the  judge  had  failed  to  look  at  the  evidence
    holistically by artificially separating the two aspects of his claim to
    be a refugee and  also  in  the  separation  of  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and that of his witnesses.

16.  At the hearing before me Mr Deller relied on  the  grounds  of  appeal.
    He stated that the appellant's evidence had clearly not  impressed  the
    judge and the judge had erred by not giving full attention to  the  way
    in which the appellant had presented himself  or  to  ask  himself  the
    question of whether or not the appellant was telling the truth.  If  he
    considered that the appellant was not telling the truth, then he should
    have found that the appellant did not  qualify  for  asylum.   He  also
    stated that it was clearly an error that the judge had  not  considered
    the claim holistically and, having looked at  all  the  evidence,  then
    reached a conclusion on the appellant's credibility.

17.  In reply Mr Bundock having referred to  a  claimed  concession  by  the
    Presenting Officer stated that the issue before  the  judge  then  came
    down to whether the appellant was  a  converted  Christian.   Moreover,
    there were issues relating to his illegal exit from Iran on  which  the
    judge could  have  made  findings  in  favour  of  the  appellant.   He
    referred,  in  his  Rule  24  statement,  to  the  appellant's  witness
    statement and evidence that  he  had  had  a  gunshot  injury  and  the
    evidence of the pastor of
          [                            ] , C H and M O, the  leader  of  the
    Bible study group there.

18.  He stated  that  the  judge  had  properly  summarised  the  procedural
    history, properly directed himself with regards to the  correct  burden
    and standard of proof and having summarised  the  appellant's  account,
    the Secretary of State's reasons  for  refusal  and  the  evidence  and
    submissions had properly directed himself with regard to  the  judgment
    in Karanakaran.  He argued that the judge was entitled  to  state  that
    had he only had the evidence of the claimant before him he  would  have
    rejected the claim but that he was entitled to  place  weight  on  "the
    clearly credible evidence of Pastor  H"  and  the  "similarly  credible
    evidence of his church volunteer M O".  The judge was entitled to state
    that he had absolutely no doubt that their evidence  was  credible  and
    that they believed that the appellant was a genuine Christian and  that
    his doubts about the appellant's conversion was sufficiently allayed by
    the firm and convincing opinion of the other two witnesses.  He  argued
    that in the light of the judgment in Karanakaran the judge was entitled
    to reach the conclusion which he had reached that the appellant  was  a
    genuine Christian.

19.  He argued that the judge had not failed to give  adequate  reasons  and
    that it was not correct for the Secretary of State to  argue  that  the
    appellant's credibility was based on the credibility of others.

20.  He argued that the judge had  considered  the  appellant's  account  of
    events before leaving Iran and stated that it was  not  incumbent  upon
    him  to  decide  whether  or  not  the  appellant's   intentions   were
    economically motivated.  He argued that it was not a material error  of
    law to find that the claimant had a well-founded  fear  of  persecution
    absent findings of fact about events pre-departure.

Discussion

21.  While I consider that it would have been appropriate for the  judge  to
    have considered all the appellant's claim it has not been argued before
    me or in the grounds of appeal that the concession to which he referred
    was not made by the Presenting Officer  and  therefore  the  judge  was
    entitled to make a finding on the issue of the appellant's conversation
    to  Christianity  and,    having  accepted  that  the   appellant   had
    converted, then to allow the appeal.

22.   It was incumbent upon the judge to state what he believed and what  he
    did not and he did that having properly referred  to  the  judgment  in
    Karanakaran.    While it  is  unfortunate  that  the  judge  completely
    ignored the appellant's evidence about his  motivation  for  coming  to
    Britain, he was entitled to focus on the issue of the question  of  the
    likelihood that the appellant would face  persecution  on  return.   He
    found  that  the  appellant  was  a  genuine  convert,  reaching   that
    conclusion  because  he  accepted  the  evidence  of   the   supporting
    witnesses. He clearly had no concerns about their motivation.  While it
    would not be difficult to be  cynical, in the light of the  appellant's
    lack of knowledge of Christianity and   the  lack  of   an  explanation
    from him of  why  he   decided  to  become  a  Christian,  about  their
    motivation, the judge, who correctly   stated that he was not  required
    to be certain  about  his   findings  and   conclusions,  did  reach  a
    decision which  took into account all  the  evidence   and   cannot  be
    considered to be perverse. I can only, in these circumstances, conclude
    that there is no material error of law in the determination.

23.  I would add that I am concerned about  the  claim  that  the  video  of
    appellant's baptism has been placed on YouTube: if that is the case  it
    shows extreme irresponsibility by whoever placed the video there.

Notice of Decision

The appeal of the secretary of State is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed        [pic]                     Date 3 July 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy

