
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06131/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 July 2020 remotely              |On 21 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     CG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Caskie, instructed by Rutherford Sheridan Ltd,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/2698) I make an anonymity order.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or
court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify the appellant.  This direction applies to both the
appellant and to the respondent and a failure to comply with this direction
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Introduction

The appellant is a citizen of China who was born on 22 April 1989.  She
first arrived in the United Kingdom on 3 September 2009 at Heathrow Airport
with a student visa valid until 31 October 2012.  When that visa expired,
the appellant overstayed.

On 13 June 2019, the appellant claimed asylum.  The basis of her claim was
that she feared the Chinese authorities if she returned to China.  She
claimed that in August 2008 2she had been involved in, and had helped
organise, a demonstration which had arisen out of a land dispute over the
use of land in her village.  She claimed that, at the demonstration, a
number of demonstrators were arrested by the police.  She was not arrested.
 She left the demonstration and subsequently discovered, from her mother,
that the police had visited their home with an arrest warrant seeking to
arrest her.  She discovered later that a number of the other organisers of
the demonstration had been imprisoned for five years.  After she learnt of
their arrest, she left her village and travelled to her father's home
(which was elsewhere) where she remained for one year.  After that, she
came to the UK as a student.

On 13 June 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claims for
asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.  The Secretary
of State did not accept her account.  She did not accept that the appellant
had been involved in a demonstration in August 2008 and that she was wanted
by the Chinese authorities.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a determination sent
on 6 June 2019, Judge S P J Buchanan dismissed the appellant's appeal on
all grounds.  In relation to the appellant's asylum claim, the judge made
an adverse credibility finding, rejected her account which she claimed
would put her at risk on return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal challenging
the judge's adverse credibility finding.

On 18 October 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane) granted the
appellant permission to appeal.

Initially, the Upper Tribunal in the light of the COVID-19 crisis, issued
directions dated 23 March 2020 indicating a provisional view that the error
of law issue could be determined by the Upper Tribunal without a hearing.
The parties were invited to make submissions both as regards that issue and
also the substantive error of law issues.

Written submissions were received from both the appellant and respondent in
response to the Directions.  Having considered the submissions and the
issues raised in the appeal, I concluded in directions dated 12 May 2020
that, despite the UT's provisional view, it would not be appropriate for
the error of law issue to be determined without a hearing.  Consequently,
as a face-to-face hearing was not currently practical and given that the
hearing was limited to legal submissions, I directed that the error of law
hearing should be listed as a remote hearing by Skype for Business.

That hearing took place on 2 July 2020 without objection from either party.
 For the hearing, I sat in the Cardiff Civil Justice Centre and the
appellant's representative Mr Caskie and the respondent's representative Mr
Howells took part in the hearing remotely via Skype for Business.

The Appellant's Submissions

On behalf of the appellant, Mr Caskie adopted the grounds of appeal and the
two sets of written submissions made on behalf of the appellant which he
developed in his oral argument.

First, Mr Caskie submitted that the judge had unfairly counted against the
appellant, in assessing her credibility, that the appellant had failed to
provide evidence or documents from, for example, friends, classmates or had
related discussions with her teachers whilst she was studying or healthcare
professionals whilst she was undergoing treatment in the UK about her
experiences in China which led her to leave China and gave rise to her fear
on return.  Mr Caskie drew my attention to paras 9.1 - 9.7 of the judge's
decision in which he took the absence of that evidence into account
adversely to the appellant's credibility.

Mr Caskie submitted that the respondent's decision letter formed the
"agenda" for the live issues in an appeal.  He accepted that a judge could
go beyond that "agenda" but could only do so on giving the parties notice
and giving them a fair opportunity to deal with the additional issues.  Mr
Caskie submitted that in this appeal, the appellant did not know that the
judge considered that the absence of evidence, of the sort he referred to
in paras 9.1 - 9.7, was an issue which the appellant had to address until
the determination was read.

Mr Caskie accepted that the Secretary of State had, in the decision letter,
taken into account the appellant's delay in claiming asylum under s.8 of
the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.  She
had done so, however, only in relation to the appellant's failure to claim
asylum on arrival at Heathrow Airport and, Mr Caskie again accepted, the
judge had properly directed himself when he stated that that behaviour was
"potentially damaging" of the appellant's credibility.  However, the
appellant was not on notice, because the matter was not raised by the
respondent or the judge, that the absence of documentation supporting her
claim that she did not know how to claim asylum was relevant to her
credibility and a matter which the judge considered significant.

In support of his submissions on this issue, Mr Caskie relied upon two
decisions of the Outer House of the Court of Session.  First, Oke,
Petitioner [2012] SCOH 50 at [59] where Lord Glennie said this:

"When he appeals to the FTT, the appellant has had a decision and knows
what points have been taken against him.  He therefore ought to be in a
position to present his appeal in confidence that it is those points that
he has to meet.  If further points are to be taken, he should have notice
of them.  That is only fair."

Secondly, Mr Caskie relied upon the decision of Lord Jones in YHY (China),
Petitioner [2014] SCOH 11 at [21] where, adopting the earlier view of Lord
Glennie in Oke, Lord Jones said:

"I am of the opinion, ... that there was such procedural irregularity that
[the petitioner] did not have a fair hearing before that Tribunal.  The
question of L's paternity was not a live issue.  In the SSHD's Decision
Notice, ... the decision maker proceeded on the basis that the petitioner
had a relationship with his wife 'and two sons, L ... and A ...' .... I do
not understand the respondent to dispute the petitioner's assertion that
the matter of L's paternity was not raised at any time during the hearing
before the FTT.  Nonetheless, the FTT reconsidered the decision maker's
determination on that issue, without giving the petitioner an opportunity
to make representations on the matter.  It impugned the credibility of both
the petitioner and his wife on the basis that it was not explained why the
petitioner had never been registered as L's father, when, so far as the
petitioner was concerned, the matter of his paternity was not contentious,
and without asking him for an explanation."

Mr Caskie essentially adopted the same reasoning in relation to other
matters relied upon by the judge which, he submitted, had not been in issue
before the judge.  In summary, Mr Caskie submitted that the judge had been
wrong at para 9.16 to take into account that the appellant had not provided
any details as to how she had left China.  Mr Caskie submitted that this
was not a matter relied upon by the respondent in the decision letter or
raised at the hearing.

Thirdly, Mr Caskie relied upon what the judge had said at para 9.30, where
the judge had taken into account that the appellant had not undertaken any
research in the UK into the process of claiming asylum by talking to people
who could assist her.  This again was not a matter raised by the respondent
either in the decision letter or at the hearing.

Fourthly, in relation to para 9.31, Mr Caskie submitted that the judge had
taken into account in reaching an adverse conclusion on the appellant's
evidence, that she had not been able to research asylum policy, that she
had nevertheless been able to "navigate through the healthcare facilities"
as a pregnant woman in the UK.  Again, Mr Caskie submitted these matters
were not raised at the hearing by the respondent or, indeed by the judge.

Finally, in response to the respondent's reliance upon the case of TK
(Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40, Mr Caskie submitted that it was only
proper for a judge to take into account the absence of evidence if it were
reasonable to expect the appellant to produce such evidence.  That was not
the case here, Mr Caskie submitted, as the appellant was unaware that the
matters relied upon by the judge (in the form of an absence of evidence)
were live issues which the appellant needed to deal with.

In all the circumstances, Mr Caskie submitted that the judge's adverse
credibility finding was necessarily flawed by the unfairness in taking the
points without the appellant having notice and that the decision should be
set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.

The Respondent's Submissions

On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells adopted the written submissions
filed with the UT which he developed in his oral submissions.

First, he submitted that the judge was entitled to take into account the
absence of the documents following TK (Burundi).  He agreed that the
respondent's decision letter did set the agenda for the hearing.  However,
he submitted that that "agenda" included the nine-year delay in the
appellant claiming asylum.  He submitted that the judge had not gone beyond
the Reasons for Refusal Letter.  He submitted that the appellant's "delay"
was indeed a live issue.

Secondly, as regards the two decisions of the Outer House, Mr Howells
submitted they were distinguishable on their facts.  In Oke, the appellant
had no notice that the accountancy evidence might be considered not to be
authentic.  That had not been raised by the respondent and was only taken
for the first time by the judge in his decision.  Likewise, in relation to
YHY, the judge had gone behind the refusal letter by questioning the
"father's" paternity when that had not previously been an issue.

Here, Mr Howells submitted that the absence of documents and other matters
relied upon by the judge in paras 9.1-9.7 and the points made about the
absence of explanation in paras 9.12, 9.3 or 9.31 were related to the
appellant's case that her claim was genuine and that any delay in claiming
asylum after arriving in the UK was explicable.  The delay was, Mr Howells
reiterated, a live issue raised in the refusal letter.

Discussion

I accept Mr Caskie's submission, with which Mr Howells agreed, that a
decision letter sets the "agenda" for the issues which the parties (in
particular the appellant) must address at an appeal hearing before the
First-tier Tribunal.  I also accept that a judge is entitled to raise other
issues but, he must do so fairly, which means that the parties must be put
on notice that a particular issue concerns the judge and the parties must
then be given a fair opportunity to deal with it, whether by evidence
(which may potentially require an adjournment) or by submissions.

I respectfully agree with the judicial statements of Lord Glennie and Lord
Jones in Oke and YHY (China).

In Oke it was unfair for the judge to question, and reach an adverse
decision upon, the authenticity of the accountant's document relied upon by
the petitioner in Oke.  That had not been an issue in the case until the
judge made it an issue in his decision.  Of course, the judge could have
raised the matter at the hearing and, subject to giving the parties a fair
opportunity to deal with it, could have reached a finding - potentially
adverse to the appellant if the evidence led in that direction - having
given the appellant an opportunity to deal with the judge's concerns about
the authenticity of the document.

Likewise, in YHY (China) the petitioner's paternity was not an issue in the
case until the judge made it so in her determination.  As a consequence,
the petitioner was denied a fair opportunity to deal with a relevant and
significant issue for the judge in reaching her decision.  Again, there
would have been no objection, in principle, in the judge addressing the
question of the petitioner's paternity but only if she had raised the
matter at the hearing and had given the parties (particularly the
appellant) an opportunity to deal with that issue by way of evidence and/or
submissions.

The central issue in this appeal is whether the judge did, in fact, depart
unfairly from the "agenda" set by the respondent's decision letter without
giving the parties, in particular the appellant, an opportunity to deal
with those matters.

The point is not as clear-cut as it was in Oke or YHY (China).  In one
sense, the judge's points relate directly to an issue which was live in the
appeal, namely the appellant's credibility.  However, simply because that
underlying general issue was a live one does not mean that the appellant
had a fair opportunity to deal with specific issues relevant to her
credibility.

The judge dealt with the absence of evidence, whether documentary or
otherwise, at a number of points in his determination.  At paras 9.1-9.4,
9.6-9.7 and 9.16 the judge said this:

"9.1 It is notable the appellant arranged for her son to be taken to China
by a 'friend'; but she does not produce any witness statement from that
source.

9.2  It is notable that at WS8, the appellant states that she knew someone
who lived in Manchester 'through my school.  She helped me to arrange my
studies and accommodation ... I live with one of my classmates'.  There is
no evidence from the person whom the appellant knew or with whom the
appellant lived (if different).

9.3  The appellant states at WS8 that she studied English in [] College at
[], and despite saying that she 'fled to the UK' to escape from persecution
at the hands of the Chinese authorities, she makes no mention of any
discussion that she might have had with course tutors, or lecturers or
student bodies about events in China which had brought her to the UK.  She
states at WS9 that she moved to [] College, but again she makes no mention
of any discussion about her circumstances with course tutors, or lecturers
or student bodies about her life in China.

9.4  At WS10, the appellant explains that her child was born in the UK.
The appellant has had contact with health professionals in the UK but she
makes no mention of any discussions with them about her plight in having to
flee China; or any fear arising from the child being born out of wed-lock.

....

9.6  I note that at WS13, the appellant explains that a friend asked her to
'come and stay with her in Glasgow'; but there is no evidence from the
friend about those events."

Then, at para 9.7 the judge said this:

"9.7 At WS2, the appellant states that she did not work after leaving
school.  She states: 'I was preparing to the United Kingdom to study'.
Although stating that she was preparing to come to the UK to study, the
appellant does not give any substance to her evidence about steps taken in
preparation.  For example, the appellant does not say what research she
undertook at the time to see what courses might be available to her; nor
does she explain how she anticipated meeting the financial demands of
travelling to the UK to study at the time."

At para 9.16, the judge dealt with the absence of supporting document
concerning how the appellant left China:

"9.16    Although the appellant states at WS7 that she 'then made
arrangements to leave China as soon as I could and left on 2 September
2019', the appellant does not give any substance to what those arrangements
amounted to.  The appellant does not say whether she herself booked a
flight to leave the country or how she managed to pay for any travel
arrangements.  If the appellant was truly of interest to the authorities in
China, then such activities might have been monitored by them for the
purpose of tracing the appellant; but there is no detail given about the
practicalities in making arrangements to leave the country."

The judge's conclusion in relation to the evidence is set out at paras 9.29-
9.31 as follows:

"9.29    Although there is no requirement to provide corroboration of an
appellant's account in making her claim for international protection or in
bringing this appeal before the Tribunal; where there is a failure to
produce evidence, which might reasonably be expected, then that might
affect the weight which can be attributed to the claim.  I note that there
are a number of sources of evidence which might reasonably be introduced to
support the appellant's account but which have not been produced nor
absence of evidence reasonably explained.  In my judgment, the appellant's
account is rendered of less weight in those chapters of evidence where
other sources of evidence which might reasonably have been expected have
not been produced.

9.30 In my judgment, I am not persuaded that after arriving in the UK in
September 2009 the appellant 'didn't apply for asylum straight away after
my visa expired because I didn't know the proper procedure'.  Having regard
to the series of people with whom the appellant has had contact since her
arrival in the United Kingdom I am far from persuaded that someone
genuinely in fear of persecution from China would not have made anxious
enquiry from lecturers or tutors or student bodies or healthcare
professionals about how to go about claiming asylum.  The appellant was
aware that her visa was only for a limited time and she had the where
withal to secure a change of course during her time in the UK; so, I infer
that the appellant had the means and the inclination to undertake research
for the purposes of securing a course of studies which she might undertake
in the UK.  In my judgment, the failure of the appellant to undertake any
research into the process for claiming asylum even by talking to the series
of people who could have assisted her if she had raised the matter with
them, gives rise to my conclusion that the appellant did not perceive
herself to be at risk of persecution on return to China during the time she
was studying there.

9.31 The appellant has been able to navigate through the healthcare
facilities which would have been made available to her in the UK as a
pregnant mother on both pregnancies.  There is nothing in evidence to
explain how she managed to undertake that course of navigation, but was
unable to navigate around the asylum process in the UK before making her
claim some nine years or so after first arriving in the UK.  In my
judgment, the fact that the appellant was able to understand and take
advantage of the healthcare facilities when she was pregnant and after the
birth of her children in the UK, is evidence from which I infer that had
the appellant had the inclination, she would have had the wherewithal to
research the UK's policy and procedure about claiming asylum.  I do not
consider it reasonable for the appellant to maintain an ignorance of
matters relating to asylum; in circumstances in which she had had the
chance to research the policy and procedure for making her claim; but did
not elect to do so.  I conclude that the appellant did not perceive herself
to be at real risk of persecution on return to China; otherwise she would
have researched and investigated and discovered the position about claiming
asylum much sooner than ultimately claimed."

The Secretary of State's contention is that para 9.29 contains a proper
direction in accordance with TK (Burundi) and that the absence of documents
or evidence did relate to an issue raised in the appeal namely whether the
period of nine years' delay in claiming asylum after coming to the UK was
behaviour that fell within s.8(2) of the 2004 Act.

Reading the refusal letter, it is clear that it does raise the issue of
delay in claiming asylum.  At para 43 the respondent relied on this:

"You have delayed your claim for asylum for [a] period.  You have stated in
your Witness Statement and Asylum Interview that you did not claim asylum
sooner because you could not afford a lawyer nor were you aware of how the
asylum process worked.  It is therefore concluded that your behaviour is
one to which s.8(2) of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants,
etc.) Act 2004 applies."

I agree with Mr Caskie's submissions that para 42, when dealing with the
appellant's failure to claim asylum at Heathrow Airport, is concerned with
the other behaviour "potentially damaging of the appellant's credibility".
That is also true of paras 44 and 45 dealing respectively with the
appellant's failure to produce a passport and her stated intention was to
come to the UK, contrary to her now claim, to study.  They are not related
to any inference that might be drawn from the nine-year delay in her
claiming asylum whilst in the UK.  But that, in my judgment, cannot be said
about para 43.  Clearly, the issue of delay in claiming asylum was raised
in the refusal letter and the Secretary of State rejected her explanation
that it was because she could not afford a lawyer or was unaware of the
asylum process.

To that extent, I do not accept Mr Caskie's submission that the issue of
delay in claiming asylum whilst in the UK as an aspect of the appellant's
credibility was not, at least, a part of the "agenda" set out in the
refusal letter.

It is plain from the passages of Judge Buchanan's determination that he
took into account the absence of supporting evidence not only to doubt her
explanation for the delay in claiming asylum, namely that she did not know
how to claim asylum, but also more generally in doubting aspects of her
claim such as how she came to leave China.  Nevertheless, delay (and the
absence of supporting evidence to explain it) was a significant feature of
the judge's reasoning.

Although the issue of delay in claiming asylum for 9 years was raised in
the refusal letter, it does not appear that it was a focus of the hearing.
I accept Mr Caskie's submissions that the judge relied upon a number of
very specific instances of lack of supporting evidence which, in my
judgment, it could not be expected to produce as being "readily available"
to the appellant.  As Mr Caskie pointed out in his submissions, the
evidence, for example, from her school would have dated back some years.
Mr Caskie contended, and Mr Howells did not dispute this, that the specific
parts of the evidence which the judge found significantly lacking were
never part of the case before the judge.  The appellant was neither asked
questions about the evidential gaps by the representatives nor by the
judge.

The judge, in my view, alighted upon a number of pieces of evidence which,
in his view, should have been produced but were not.  The difficulty is
that it is hard to understand why the appellant or her legal
representatives would, without notice, have considered this range of
evidence, which (in some instances) dated back some years, would have been
important to her case and which she should either have produced or, at
least, have offered some explanation for their absence.

To that extent, I have concluded that the judge fell into error by taking
into account the absence of this evidence even though, at least in general
terms, para 43 of the refusal letter raised the issue of the appellant's
delay in claiming asylum whilst in the UK.  This is not, in my judgment, a
situation where the appellant could reasonably, absent notice, be expected
to produce this range of historical material relating to an issue which was
not a focus of the hearing.  In my judgment, this was not a case where the
rationale in TK (Burundi) (set out at [20] and [21] of Thomas LJ's
judgment) applied.  Put another way, I am satisfied that the appellant was,
in effect, 'taken by surprise' on the evidential issues relied upon by the
judge in paras 9.1 - 9.7, 9.16 and 9.30.   The proceedings were, in my
judgment, unfair as a result.

As regards para 9.31 where the judge took into account that the appellant
had been able to navigate healthcare facilities in the UK while she was
pregnant such that he did not accept that she would be unable to navigate
the asylum process in the UK, this reasoning is, of course, not based upon
the absence of evidence but rather an inference drawn from her ability to
navigate the healthcare system in the UK.  It generates a somewhat
different objection.   In my judgment, that was pure speculation and was
not a reasonable inference that could properly be drawn from the evidence.
The judge's reasoning was not properly open to him.

For these reasons, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law in reaching
his adverse credibility finding.

In the respondent's written submissions, though the point was not pressed
by Mr Howells in his oral submissions, it is contended that any errors by
the judge identified in the grounds of appeal are not material to his
decision as he gave a number of other reasons why he did not accept the
appellant's account, in particular that the Chinese authorities had shown
no interest in pursuing the appellant before she left China (see paras 9.13
and 9.36).

In my judgment, however, the judge's approach to the evidence that led to
his conclusions in paras 9.29-9.31 was material to his decision.  His
reasoning is expressed in a way which demonstrates that it led the judge to
disbelieve the appellant's claim.  I am, therefore, persuaded that the
errors which I have identified above were material to the judge's decision.

For those reasons, I am satisfied that the judge materially erred in law in
dismissing the appellant's appeal.

Decision

For the above reasons, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss
the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error of law.  That
decision cannot stand and is set aside.

As the judge's central finding on credibility cannot stand, the remaking of
the decision requires a rehearing de novo.

Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding required, and having regard
to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement, the appropriate
disposal of this appeal is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Buchanan.

                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 7 July 2020

        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email

