
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06591/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 5 February 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     OR
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms S Khan, instructed by Broudie Jackson & Canter
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd promulgated 226.18, dismissing on all grounds  his
    appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 9.5.18, to
    refuse his claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Pedro granted permission to appeal on 7.8.18.

 3. From the grounds it is clear that the  only  issue  challenged  is  the
    Tribunal's assessment of  the  article  15(c)  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence and, allied to that, return to Baghdad before travelling on to
    either Kirkuk or the IKR.   In  essence,  the  grounds  challenged  the
    judge's conclusion that the appellant can return to live in  Kirkuk,  a
    contested area, and the alternative conclusion that he will be able  to
    relocate to the IKR. It was asserted that the judge failed  to  provide
    sufficient reasoning to depart from the country guidance  case  law  on
    the basis of a change in country conditions superseding that prevailing
    at the date of the country  guidance  case  law.  In  the  alternative,
    reliance was made on the recent decision in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT  00212  (IAC),  promulgated  after  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal, and the considerations  that  need
    to be made before deciding that relocation to the IKR is feasible.

 4. The matter first came before  me  on  17.10.18.  In  my  error  of  law
    decision, promulgated 22.10.18, I found such error in the  decision  of
    the First-tier Tribunal as to require the decision to be set aside  and
    remade.

 5. In essence, I found the  judge's  article  15(c)  assessment  that  the
    appellant could return to Kirkuk at [68] was inadequately reasoned  and
    failed to identify the clear and  cogent  country  background  evidence
    justifying departing from the country guidance  that  Kirkuk  is  in  a
    contested area. Whilst IS control of Kirkuk may no longer be an  issue,
    that  conflict  may  have  been  replaced  by  another,  between  Iraqi
    government forces allied  to  militia  and  Peshmerga  Kurdish  forces.
    Representing the respondent, Mr Bates indicated that he was  unable  to
    defend that part of the decision of the Tribunal. In the circumstances,
    I found that part of the decision to be in error of law.

 6. I also found insufficient reasoning for the alternative  conclusion  at
    [68-69] that the appellant will be able to relocate to the  IKR.  There
    needed to be clarification as to how the appellant would be  returnable
    to Iraq and on what basis he will be able to obtain a  CSID  to  enable
    him to do so.

 7. Whilst AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00212 (IAC) had not been promulgated  at  the  date  of  Judge  Lloyd's
    decision and could not have been taken into account, it  is  now  clear
    that there needed to be reasoning as to how the appellant would be able
    to manage on arriving in Baghdad and making his way to the and  survive
    in the IKR.

 8. For those reasons, I found the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  on
    the issue of return inadequately reasoned and thus  in  error  of  law.
    However, only that part of the decision needed to be  revisited.  Given
    that there has been no challenge to the First-tier Tribunal's rejection
    of the factual basis of the appellant's protection claim, and there was
    no application to amend the grounds of appeal, there  is  no  basis  to
    disturb that part of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  I
    uphold that part of the decision.

 9. Following submissions, I was satisfied that this could  be  done  in  a
    continuation hearing in the Upper Tribunal at which the appellant  will
    have the benefit of an interpreter so  that  he  could  understand  the
    proceedings.

10. I also specifically preserved the following findings of the  First-tier
    Tribunal:

      a) The appellant is not at risk of on return of an honour killing;

      b) He was not in a relationship with Ms M ;

      c) He did not elope with or marry Ms M (or any other person)  and  was
         single;

      d) He did not experience any opposition from Ms M's family;

      e) Mr M is not a powerful or influential  figure  in  the  appellant's
         home area;

      f) Ms M was not killed by her family;

      g) Ms M's father has no adverse interest in the appellant;

      h) He will be at no risk from Ms M's family on return;

      i) There is no blood feud or honour dispute involving the appellant;

      j) The appellant is not a credible witness in his own cause.

11. Other relevant findings of the First-tier Tribunal were not  challenged
    and must stand as made, including:

      a) The appellant has not been disowned by his own family;

      b) He has no problems with any member of his family;

      c) He remains in contact with his family;

      d) The family home in Kirkuk has not been destroyed;

      e) He legally exited Iraq using his own passport and identity;

      f) He has a brother in Iraq whom he will be able to contact on  return
         and who would be willing to assist him;

      g) He remains in contact with friends and  neighbours  in  Kirkuk  who
         will be willing to assist him on return to Iraq;

      h) He has contacts within the IKR, including the tribe chief with whom
         he lived in 2015 and his brother's friend with whom he also  lived.
         These contacts will be able to assist him in the IKR;

      i) The appellant speaks some Arabic;

      j) He has previously been in possession of a CSID card;

      k) He is a young and healthy male with no dependents;

      l) He has  not  attempted  to  obtain  documentation  from  the  Iraqi
         Consulate in Manchester;

      m) With the assistance of his brother and other contacts  he  will  be
         able to obtain ID documents before returning to Iraq.

12. In light of the limited scope  of  the  continuation  hearing  and  the
    preserved findings of the First-tier Tribunal, it was not clear  to  me
    that any further oral  or  documentary  evidence  would  be  necessary.
    However, I indicated that I would consider any  application  to  adduce
    further evidence at the resumed hearing and issued directions  in  that
    regard as to the service of any proposed additional evidence.

13. Outside the time limit I directed for the service of  proposed  further
    evidence, the appellant's representatives submitted a  further  bundle,
    received by the tribunal on 14.1.19, together with  an  application  to
    admit the evidence under Rule 15(2A) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008. I note that the application does not comply  with
    the requirements of Rule 15(2A) in that it does  not  explain  why  the
    evidence had not been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The proposed evidence comprised a short additional witness statement of
    the appellant, together with Internet articles addressing ISIS invasion
    of Kirkuk and generally its safety. The bundle also included a copy  of
    AAH.

15. Following preliminary  discussion  with  the  two  representatives,  Mr
    Diwnycz did not pursue return to  Kirkuk  and  did  not  object  to  me
    proceeding on the basis that to  expect  the  appellant  to  return  to
    Kirkuk would be unduly harsh. Neither did he pursue any suggestion that
    the  appellant  could  relocate  to  Baghdad,  as  opposed  to   merely
    transiting Baghdad Airport on his way to the IKR. It follows  that  the
    sole issue was the feasibility of return to Iraq and relocation to  the
    IKR. I also indicated that I intended to follow  the  country  guidance
    that as he does not come from the IKR, the appellant will not  be  able
    to be returned there directly through pre-clearance processes but  will
    have to be returned to Baghdad and make his way to the IKR from  there.
    Mr Diwnycz and Ms Khan agreed with  my  proposal  to  proceed  on  that
    limited basis.

16. It follows that the bulk  of  the  additional  evidence  sought  to  be
    adduced was not relevant to the outstanding issue in the appeal. I also
    raised concern about admitting the  appellant's  additional  statement,
    dated 7.1.19, when  in  large  part  it  purported  to  contradict  the
    preserved findings. However, Ms Khan indicated that  she  would  do  no
    more than have the appellant adopt the statement  and  tender  him  for
    cross-examination.  In  the  circumstances,  I  admitted  the   witness
    statement only, on the clear understanding that I could not accept  any
    part of the  appellant's  statement  that  contradicted  the  preserved
    findings. The only question asked of the appellant in cross-examination
    was as to whether he acknowledged that the IKR was part of Iraq and not
    an independent country.

Feasibility of Return to Iraq

17. Applying the country guidance set out in  AAH  and  AA  (Iraq)  v  SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ  944,  considering  the  current  Home  Office  Country
    Guidance on return to Iraq, dated October and November 2018 and in  the
    public domain, and adopting the preserved findings, I am satisfied that
    the appellant will be able to obtain sufficient documentation to enable
    his return to Iraq and onward journey to the IKR,  which  is  virtually
    violence free and where there will be no article 15(c) risk.

18. The relevant circumstances are that he was previously in possession  of
    both a passport and a CSID, having  legally  exited  Iraq  in  his  own
    identity and passport. Whilst he cannot be expected to return to Kirkuk
    himself, his family home in  Kirkuk  has  not  been  destroyed  and  he
    remains in contact and on good terms with his family there, who will be
    willing to assist him on  return.  He  also  remains  in  contact  with
    friends and neighbours in Kirkuk who would also be  willing  to  assist
    him. He also has contacts within the IKR who would be willing to assist
    him.

19. Given he is in contact with family, he  will  be  able  to  obtain  the
    relevant information relating to his CSID to enable  him  to  obtain  a
    CSID and indeed a passport to make his return feasible. It is also open
    to him to use a proxy family member with power of attorney to obtain  a
    renewal of his CSID in Kirkuk. Significantly, even now, he has not made
    any attempt to obtain documentation from the Iraqi Consulate in the UK,
    when the country guidance is that with basic information as to the book
    and volume number that I am satisfied will be able to  be  provided  by
    his family or friends in Iraq, a replacement CSID can  be  obtained  in
    the UK. Given that he has previously had a passport, he should also  be
    able to use this information to enable the Iraqi authorities to confirm
    his identity. I note  the  appellant's  general  lack  of  credibility,
    preserved from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  and  find  his
    recent statement inconsistent with the preserved findings, so  that  do
    not accept any part of his claim to have no one to assist him in  Iraq.
    I specifically preserved the finding that with the  assistance  of  his
    brother and other contacts, the appellant will be  able  to  obtain  ID
    documentation before returning to Iraq. The onus was on the  appellant,
    to the lower standard of proof, to demonstrate that he  does  not  have
    and cannot obtain documentation. For the reasons set out above, I  find
    he fails to discharge this.

Entry into and Conditions in the IKR

20. For the reasons set out below, after applying  AAH,  I  find  that  the
    appellant will be able obtain entry into the IKR from Baghdad,  without
    the necessity of making overland travel, and will be able to  establish
    himself there without risk of destitution.

21. The background evidence is that flights from Baghdad to the IKR resumed
    in March 2018, post-dating AAH. Following the country guidance, with  a
    CSID, he will have  no  difficulty  making  the  internal  transfer  at
    Baghdad Airport to a flight to Erbil or Sulaymaniyah  within  the  IKR.
    The authorities in the IKR will permit temporary entry and he is at  no
    risk of being refused or removed from the IKR.  I  also  note  that  he
    previously had no difficulty entering the IKR before leaving  Iraq.  He
    will need but I am satisfied he will have his CSID  to  enable  him  to
    access state support, as well as obtain accommodation  and  employment.
    He will be able to demonstrate that he comes via the UK and thus  there
    is no risk of him being considered as associated  with  ISIS  or  other
    groups opposed to Kurdish authority.

22. Even if he did not have a CSID on entry to the IKR, I am satisfied that
    with the assistance of family and/or others in both Kirkuk and the  IKR
    the appellant will be able to obtain one within a short and  reasonable
    time of arrival.

23. I reject the appellant's claim that he will have no one to  assist  him
    in the IKR. In addition to  having  family  members  not  far  away  in
    Kirkuk, I have preserved the findings that he has contacts  within  the
    IKR who will be willing to assist him,  including  the  tribunal  chief
    with whom he lived in 2015 and his brother's friend with whom  he  also
    lived. These contacts will be able to assist him find accommodation and
    make contact with his family members in Kirkuk.

24. I take fully into account the difficult economic conditions within  the
    IKR, including high unemployment, as  set  out  in  AAH.  However,  the
    appellant is young, fit and healthy and has demonstrated his resilience
    in making the difficult journey to the UK. He will be  able  to  employ
    those skills and resources to help establish himself  in  the  IKR  and
    seek employment. In addition, I am satisfied that he will  be  able  to
    call on the assistance of friends and contacts within the IKR and  will
    also be able to make contact with his family in Kirkuk who may also  be
    able to provide  assistance  and  further  contacts  to  help  him.  In
    addition, I take into account the  assisted  voluntary  return  payment
    that he can apply for to smooth his transition  and  finance  at  least
    temporary  accommodation  for  several  months  whilst  he  establishes
    himself more securely. He will not need to access critical shelter or a
    displaced persons camp. Even if he  cannot  find  employment  within  a
    reasonable period, he has family and friend connections to  assist  him
    to survive adequately. In all the circumstances, I am satisfied that he
    will ultimately and within a reasonable period  be  able  to  establish
    himself in the IKR, so that there is no real  risk  of  destitution  on
    return to Iraq and relocation to the IKR.

25. It follows that applying the lower standard of proof,  the  appellant's
    claim must fail on all grounds. His return to Iraq is  feasible.  There
    is no article 15(c) risk  for  the  appellant  in  the  IKR  and  I  am
    satisfied that he will reasonably be able to relocate there  in  safely
    without any real risk of undue hardship.

Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision, preserving those findings set out above;

                    I remake the decision by dismissing the  appeal  on  all
                    grounds.


     Signed DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. However, given the circumstances, I make an  anonymity
order.
Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him. This direction applies both to  the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.


     Signed DMW Pickup

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated

