
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06843/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Determination & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                       |
|On 1 November 2018                     |On 28 November 2018               |
|                                       |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                             Bashir Roble SALAD
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Bond, instructed by Freemans Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals to the Upper  Tribunal  with  permission  against
    the decision of the First-tier Judge who dismissed his  appeal  against
    the  respondent's  decision  of  16  May  2018,  refusing  asylum   and
    humanitarian protection.

2.   The appellant has been  in  the  United  Kingdom  since  January  2014,
    having applied for a family reunion visa from Uganda.  On 16 June  2017
    he applied for indefinite leave to remain in the United Kingdom as  the
    dependent spouse of Sahara Ali  Said.   That  application  having  been
    refused in November 2017, he made his asylum claim on 6 December  2017.



3.   The essence of the appellant's claim is that he  is  a  member  of  the
    Sheekhaal clan.  In 2008 Al-Shabaab had raided the farm he worked on in
    order to take some livestock and when  he  refused  they  detained  his
    father which forced him to pay a ransom to secure his freedom.  In 2009
    the military returned to the family farm in order to kidnap his sister.
     The appellant tried to defend her but he was beaten and his sister was
    kidnapped.  Al-Shabaab returned in 2009 and took the livestock by force
    and in 2010 they again raided the family farm and  he  was  beaten  and
    detained for three weeks, though he managed  to  escape.   He  fled  to
    Uganda, from there he made contact with his wife who had  come  to  the
    United Kingdom and he joined her here as set out above.

4.   The judge noted  the  background  evidence  concerning  the  degree  of
    control that Al-Shabaab has over rural areas in Somalia.  He noted  the
    guidance set out in MOJ and Others [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC).  The  judge
    considered that the appellant's case bore some limited consistency with
    the objective country material to the extent that his case was that  he
    was targeted in a rural setting and the position  was  that  Al-Shabaab
    retained a degree of influence in rural settings which  could  in  some
    cases  extend  to  control  over  those  areas.   However,  noting  the
    background evidence as to the nature of Al-Shabaab and its  activities,
    the judge considered that the treatment meted out to the appellant  was
    at variance with the practice of Al-Shabaab to favour extreme violence,
    brutality and death.  The judge considered that the  appellant's  claim
    conflicted with the country background material in  that  regard.   The
    judge therefore did not accept the credibility of the appellant's claim
    as to what he said  happened  to  him  in  2008,  2009  and  2010.   He
    considered it to be inconsistent  that  the  appellant  claimed  to  be
    attached to his sister but did not claim to have  taken  any  steps  in
    order to secure her return.

5.   The judge also considered that  the  appellant's  account  of  being  a
    member of a minority clan bore little examination.  If  that  were  the
    case, then in the judge's view he  would  have  had  much  greater  and
    deeper power of recall about the nature of the clan set-up in  Somalia,
    including being more familiar with the precise role and identity of his
    own clan within that wider framework and  would  have  been  much  more
    aware of the names, background details and the history of the clans  in
    question.  The judge considered he was evasive in the asylum  interview
    and sought to deflect questions by reference to  what  his  father  had
    told him or his wider family situation about  the  affiliation  of  his
    clan with other clans and the details about the sub-clans to which  the
    Sheekhaal clan was affiliated.  The judge concluded that his  knowledge
    of the clan situation in Somalia was minimal, to say  the  least.   The
    judge agreed with the respondent's view that he had sought to establish
    his status as a member of a minority  clan  for  the  sole  purpose  of
    demonstrating that he would be without  support,  assistance  or  wider
    protection from his clan or the wider network of clans in the  face  of
    any threat he faced from Al-Shabaab.

6.   The judge went  on  then  to  conclude  that  he  did  not  accept  the
    credibility of the claim, bearing in mind also the delay in making  the
    claim and the appellant's conduct in remaining in  the  United  Kingdom
    when the circumstances which permitted him to stay no longer  continued
    to obtain (the marriage broke down about a year after  his  arrival  in
    2014 but his application for asylum was not made until 2017).

7.   The judge ascribed no significance to the  fact  that  the  appellant's
    wife had been granted asylum.  He did not have the details of her claim
    and the appellant had not provided any basis for the judge to  conclude
    that his situation corresponded to hers in any way.  There  was  but  a
    minimal temporal overlap in that they had only spent some five weeks of
    normal married life together in Somalia.

8.   The judge went on to consider that, taking the appellant's case at  its
    highest, he did not fall into a risk profile which would mean he  would
    be at risk of harm.  The judge noted the country guidance that it would
    only be those of no clan or family support who would not be in  receipt
    of remittances from abroad and who had no  real  prospect  of  securing
    access to a livelihood on return who would face the prospect of  living
    in  circumstances  falling  below  that   which   was   acceptable   in
    humanitarian protection terms.

9.   The judge noted that the appellant was a man of  working  age  who  had
    demonstrated his ability to flee unprepared to Uganda where he remained
    for some two years.  On his account he was a member of a minority  clan
    and access materials had been produced by  the  respondent  which  said
    that the Sheekhaal clan had privileged to all parts of Somalia  due  to
    their religious status.  The judge considered that even  if  that  were
    not the case, in his  view  there  was  nothing  to  suggest  that  the
    appellant would not be able to be part of the  community  of  returnees
    from the West who were more likely to secure employment in Mogadishu at
    the expense of those who had never been away.  He was  of  working  age
    and there were no reasons to suggest he would not be able to work.  The
    judge also dismissed the appeal under Article 8.

10.  The appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal on the  basis
    that the judge had erred in  finding  discrepancies  between  what  the
    appellant said Al-Shabaab had done to him and his family and background
    evidence about their activities.  It was also  argued  that  the  judge
    erred in considering that the appellant should have undertaken more  of
    an effort in order  to  rescue/relocate  his  sister.   Permission  was
    granted on all grounds.

11.  In her submissions Ms Bond first expressed concern about the fact  that
    the decision of the judge in the wife's case had not been looked at  to
    see what she had said about matters such as the  clan  origin  and  her
    husband's experiences.  She was also concerned that  as  early  as  the
    second paragraph in the decision the judge said  that  the  appeal  was
    dismissed.

12.  Ms Bond accepted that the  wife's  determination  was  not  before  the
    Tribunal and hence could not go to show an error of law in the  judge's
    decision, and also that the expression of  the  judge's  conclusion  at
    paragraph 2 did not represent a prejudgment but was more  a  matter  of
    style, although she considered that it was unhelpful  for  the  judge's
    decision to be structured in that way.

13.   She  went  on  to  argue  that  the  appellant's  evidence   was   not
    inconsistent with the objective evidence.  She referred for example  to
    an information sheet from Refworld concerning the Sheekhaal clan  which
    was quoted by the Secretary of State.  It was to be noted that  it  was
    said there that whereas the Sheekhaal was  spread  throughout  Somalian
    territory most were affiliated with the Hawiye clan but some members of
    the clan were nomadic and some lived in the coastal area  and  a  third
    segment of the clan lived in eastern  Ethiopia.   This  was  consistent
    with what the appellant had said in answers at  interview  about  where
    his father was from.   He  had  said  he  was  from  Ethiopia  or  near
    Ethiopia.  It was relevant to note the reference to "most" rather  than
    the entire clan all being affiliated with the Hawiye clan.

14.  The respondent also referred to the  Home  Office  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note of July 2017 on Somalia (South and Central):  fear  of
    Al-Shabaab, at paragraph 5.1.7 which included  a  reference  to  Muduq,
    where the appellant in interview had said he was from, as  an  area  or
    town where Al-Shabaab had some presence and control.  Again,  therefore
    there was a  consistency  between  the  appellant's  evidence  and  the
    background evidence.  As regards the "Clans  in  Somalia"  report  from
    2009, and the reference to clans emanating from the south central parts
    of Somalia such as the Sheekhaal having privileged access to all  parts
    of Somalia on account of their religious status,  it  might  have  been
    true in 2009 but that it did  not  necessarily  follow  that  the  same
    privileged access existed to all of Somalia in 2018.  The  use  of  the
    word "usually" was of relevance.  The judge had been misled by a nuance
    in the evidence.  There should also be noted the caution at page 14  of
    that document about the need to treat all asylum cases individually and
    note that generalised knowledge and information on clans and minorities
    was of very limited use when it came to assessing an individual's  risk
    and  that  that  was  particularly  true  in  asylum  procedures  where
    decisions made on the basis of generalisations as to the conditions  of
    certain groups could lead to  asylum  decisions  being  made  on  false
    premises.  It was relevant to note  that  the  appellant  came  from  a
    nomadic tribe and was a shepherd and he would be unlikely to know  much
    about the reaches of the clans.  The judge had  gone  off  in  a  wrong
    direction and had drawn conclusions he was not  entitled  to  draw  and
    there were material errors of law in his decision.

15.  With regard  to  the  point  we  put  to  Ms  Bond  about  the  judge's
    alternative finding, even taking the claim at its highest,  she  argued
    that the entirety of the findings on the background evidence  had  been
    challenged so that must include this matter within the grounds.  If the
    Hawiye still protected the appellant's clan that was one thing, but  if
    they did not then it was something different and the  totality  of  the
    findings on the background evidence had been challenged.

16.   In  her  submissions  Ms  Kenny  argued  that  the  point  about   not
    considering the wider circumstances that had not  been  raised  in  the
    grounds, but any event the judge  had  been  aware  of  the  point  and
    addressed it at paragraph 39 of his decision.  It was for the appellant
    to make out his case.

17.  Ms Kenny relied on the Rule 24 response.   The  judge  had  found  many
    reasons for a lack of credibility.  He had taken the  evidence  in  the
    round.  Paragraph 17 concerning the Clans in Somalia document was  part
    of the Presenting Officer's submissions and not a part of  the  judge's
    decision.  The judge had noted the points in  the  appellant's  favour.
    He did not have a profile such as to put him  at  risk  on  return,  in
    light of the treatment he had received,  in  the  background  evidence.
    His conclusion at paragraph 23 was based on the evidence, and  also  at
    24 and 25.  The judge had not been misguided as argued at  paragraph  3
    in the grounds with respect to paragraph 26 of the  decision,  but  was
    entitled to find a lack of consistency.  The same point could  be  made
    with regard to paragraph 29.  The judge had taken a broad  approach  to
    the evidence and there was no material error of law  in  the  decision.
    It was relevant to note such matters as the delay in  applying  and  to
    attach weight to that.

18.  Ms Bond had no points to make by way of reply.

19.  We reserved our determination.

20.  The challenge in the grounds is essentially with regard to the  judge's
    adverse findings on credibility concerning the difference between  what
    the appellant said happened to him and the actual conduct of Al-Shabaab
    members towards those opposing them,  as  set  out  in  the  background
    evidence.  In the grounds it is argued that the  judge  had  failed  to
    consider that repressive regimes or state or non-state actors might act
    in a way that was  unpredictable  and   not  entirely  consistent  with
    documented accounts of persecution and therefore  his  account  of  his
    escape and treatment by Al-Shabaab might well  be  entirely  consistent
    and credible.

21.  However, the judge quoted from the background evidence  concerning  Al-
    Shabaab's activities in considering the  three  incidents  in  question
    where the appellant came to the adverse attention  of  Al-Shabaab.   In
    our view it was open to him to conclude that the difference between the
    treatment meted out to  the  appellant  and  the  treatment  habitually
    metered out by Al-Shabaab members to those opposing them was  a  matter
    which justified  the  judge's  concern  and  the  adverse  findings  of
    credibility made in that regard.  As Ms Kenny pointed out, there were a
    number of bases for finding the appellant lacked credibility, and those
    include the section 8 point, where again  we  consider  the  judge  was
    entitled to be concerned about the delay in making the claim after  his
    situation in the United Kingdom changed  when  he  separated  from  his
    wife.

22.  As regards the appellant's clan membership,  the  judge  was  concerned
    about the appellant's evidence in this regard since he considered  that
    if the appellant were a member of a minority clan he would have had the
    ability to provide much more information than he was able to  do.   The
    judge was concerned about such matters, for example the  appellant  not
    knowing whether the clan of which he claimed to be a member,  could  be
    found in other countries and could  not  highlight  any  distinguishing
    features between his clan on the one hand and the many other  clans  in
    Somalia on the other, save for the names of those clans.   He  did  not
    know about any of the traditions that the clan of which he  claimed  to
    be a member engaged in nor whether it had a leader and said his  father
    had never discussed it with him.  We note Ms Bond's  point  that  as  a
    shepherd from a semi-nomadic tribe it  is  unrealistic  to  expect  the
    degree of consistency that the judge had required.  We consider however
    that the judge's findings  in  this  regard  were  open  to  him.   His
    concerns in this regard were properly reasoned.  We note also Ms Bond's
    points about the fact that Muduq exists, the point that she made  about
    the Refworld report and the location  of  the  Sheekhaal  clan.   These
    points however do not in our view detract from the force of the judge's
    reasoning.  We consider that it was properly open to the judge to doubt
    the appellant's credibility and not to accept that what he claimed  had
    happened to him had indeed occurred,  for  the  reasons  given  by  the
    judge.

23.  Nor do we agree with Ms Bond that the grounds can be said  properly  to
    incorporate a challenge to the alternative findings  at  paragraphs  40
    and 41 of the judge's decision, taking the claim at its  highest.   The
    fact that there was a challenge to the decision cannot be said properly
    to import a  challenge  to  alternative  findings  where  that  is  not
    specified in the grounds of appeal, and indeed Ms Bond herself did  not
    articulate any challenge to those two paragraphs, except to the  extent
    that she took issue with the judge's interpretation of what was said in
    the "Clans in Somalia" document about  the  privileged  access  of  the
    Sheekhaal clan to all parts of Somalia due to their  religious  status.
    We note of course the caveat expressed in that report and as emphasised
    at paragraph 14 the need to exercise care with  regard  to  generalised
    knowledge and  information  and  its  limited  use  when  it  comes  to
    assessing an individual's risk, but on the other hand  it  is  in  that
    same report that it is said that because of the religious status of the
    Sheekhaal they usually have privileged access to all parts of  Somalia.
    The judge was entitled to rely on that provision in the report, and  it
    has not been shown despite the fact that the report is some nine  years
    old that it is does not still hold good.  This was a finding the  judge
    came to in relation to the alternative consideration of risk, which the
    judge reached as a consequence of assessment of relevant provisions  of
    the country guidance in MOJ, which we have set out  above.   The  judge
    noted the point of privileged access but said that even  if  that  were
    not the case there was nothing to suggest that the appellant would  not
    be able to be part of the community of returnees from the West who were
    more likely to secure employment in Mogadishu at the expense  of  those
    who had never been away.  Again, we consider the judge's  findings  are
    firmly grounded in the evidence and were proper findings to come to  as
    a consequence of the careful assessment he made of that evidence.

Notice of Decision

24.  Bringing these matters together, we do not consider that  it  has  been
    shown that the judge erred in law in any respect in his  decision,  and
    the decision dismissing the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds,  humanitarian
    protection grounds and human rights grounds accordingly stands.

25.  No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Allen              22nd November 2018

