
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/06738/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 18 February 2019                       |On 13 March 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     SN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:       Ms R Kotak, Counsel, instructed by South West
                    London Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


By my decision promulgated on 29 August 2018 I set aside the decision of
the First-tier Tribunal.  I now remake that decision.

Background

The appellant, who is a citizen of Ethiopia born on 14 December 1990 of
Oromo ethnicity, applied for asylum on the basis of her involvement with
and support of the Oromo Liberation Front (OLF) in Ethiopia.  Amongst other
things, she claimed that she was arrested and tortured and that she escaped
imprisonment when a group of male prisoners broke out of their prison
cells.

The appellant's account of being persecuted in Ethiopia was not accepted by
the First-tier Tribunal and that aspect of the decision was upheld in my
decision promulgated on 29 August 2018.

The appellant also claims that she has been active in, and would face risk
on return to Ethiopia because of her activities on behalf of, the Oromo
Community in the UK.  In my decision promulgated on 29 August 2018 I
directed that the only issue to be determined at the resumed hearing is the
appellant's claim to be at risk because of her sur place activities since
entering the UK in 2008.

In addition to her own witness statements and oral evidence, the appellant
relied on witness statements and letters from several individuals involved
in the Oromo community in the UK.  This included Thomas Banta, chair of the
Oromo Youth Association UK (OYA - UK), who gave oral evidence at the
hearing.

The appellant also relied on photographs and YouTube video screenshots
showing her participating in what appear to be protests or demonstrations
against the Ethiopian Government.

The appellant submitted a considerable amount of evidence concerning the
situation faced by those of Oromo ethnicity (as well as others) in
Ethiopia.  This included a Danish Immigration Service report dated 9
October 2018, a Human Rights Watch Report dated 4 July 2018, a UK Home
Office Country Information and Guidance Note concerning Oromos and the
Oromo protests dated 27 November 2017 and the UK Home Office Country Policy
and Information Note on Ethiopia Opposition to Government dated October
2017.  In addition, the appellant relied on a report by Professor Charles
Schaefer, Professor of International Studies and African History at
Valparaiso University in Indiana, USA, who has a special interest and
expertise in Ethiopia and Eritrea, dated 14 February 2019.

In this decision I have only referred to the evidence I consider most
relevant.  However I have read and taken into consideration all of the
evidence that was adduced.

Evidence of the Appellant

The evidence of the appellant, as set out in her four witness statements
and given orally, is that she is, and has been for most of her time in the
UK, politically active in support of Oromos in Ethiopia.  She claims to
have participated in a number of demonstrations and protests and to be a
member of several Oromo organisations in the UK that support and are linked
to the OLF, including OLF - UK.  She also claims to be a member of the
management committee of the OYA - UK which she characterised as being very
sympathetic to the OLF.

The appellant claims to be an active user of Facebook under the pseudonym [
          ] and to have over 7,000 followers, with whom she shares posts
concerning the circumstances of the Oromo people in Ethiopia.

In cross-examination the appellant stated that she could not recall the
last time she attended an OLF UK meeting but that it was in 2018.  She said
the topic of discussion was how to stop the atrocities faced by the Oromo
people in Ethiopia.  She asserted that the Oromo people in Ethiopia are
stifled and the community in the UK (including her) are able to be a voice
for them and expose the atrocities they face to the world.  She described
OYA -UK as an organisation that works to keep the heritage and culture of
the Oromo people alive in the Diaspora and her role as to organise events
and programmes.

I raised at the hearing that although the appellant asserted in her
statement to be very active on Facebook no corroborating evidence (such as
a copy of her Facebook page and posts) had been adduced.  It was agreed by
the parties that the appellant would access her Facebook account and show
this to the Tribunal.  This step was duly undertaken but proved to be of
limited assistance (other than to confirm that the appellant is able to
access a Facebook page under the name of [                ]) due to the
absence of an internet connection.

In response to being asked if she planned to attend demonstrations in the
future, the appellant stated that she would go to any if needed but that at
present they are observing and closely following the upcoming election.
She said that the last demonstration she attended was in 2017.

Evidence of Mr Banta

The evidence of Mr Banta, both orally and in his two written statements,
was that the appellant is highly active in the Oromo community in the UK.
He described her as one of the initiators of OYA - UK and said that she has
an important role mobilising youth and organising events. He said that the
appellant has courageously spoken out about the atrocities perpetrated by
the Ethiopian authorities and is devoted to the Oromo people and speaking
out about their suffering.

Mr Banta claimed that the activities of OYA - UK are monitored by the
Ethiopian authorities, who send people to attend their open meetings.  He
was firm in his view that the appellant is genuinely motivated by her
commitment to the Oromo people and to mobilising the youth within the
community in the UK.

Photographic Evidence

Photographic evidence submitted by the appellant includes images (taken
from YouTube) of her at a demonstration holding a sign saying that the
Ethiopian authorities kill Oromos and that they should stop the atrocities
and killings.  One of the banners reads: "Say no to Ethiopian government
dictatorship.  Say no to TPLF rule.  Enough is enough", and another states:
"Stop killing Oromo students".  The appellant contends that these images
are accessible on-line.

A witness statement from the appellant's solicitor dated 23 November 2018
was submitted in which the solicitor stated that video links mentioned in
the appellant's statement were available when she viewed them on 23
November 2018.  In the light of the assertion by Ms Pal that she had been
unable to locate the YouTube videos, I asked Ms Kotak if she agreed to the
YouTube videos being viewed by the Tribunal.  She objected to this,
asserting that it is sufficient that a solicitor attested to the continued
accessibility of the videos.

Country Information and Expert Evidence

The country information evidence submitted by the appellant gives an
inconsistent and difficult to interpret analysis of the current situation
in Ethiopia.  Several of the reports from 2018 describe a situation which
is improving for the Oromo Community.

The appellant relies on the report of Professor Schaefer dated 14 February
2019.  The report notes that Dr Abiy Ahmed who was elected Prime Minister
of Ethiopia by the Council of the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary
Democratic Front (EPRDF) in March 2018, is Oromo and that in his
inauguration address spoke of peace and reconciliation.

However, despite acknowledging various improvements for the Oromo,
Professor Schaefer is of the view that Oromos continue to face a hostile
environment in Ethiopia.  He also stated that the Ethiopian authorities
actively monitor political activities of Ethiopians in the diaspora.
Professor Schaefer expressed the opinion that it is plausible that the
appellant's activities in the UK have been monitored.   Moreover, he also
expressed the view that it is lower level OLF sympathisers such as the
appellant who are most at risk.

At paragraph 85 Professor Schaefer stated:

"The appellant's sur place activities in the UK in support of the OLF and
other Oromo grassroots organisations greatly increase the likelihood of
persecution if she were to return to Ethiopia.  As explained in paragraphs
79 and 81, Ethiopia's surveillance capabilities have improved light years.
Moreover, Prime Minister Abiy Ahmed was the founder and first director of
the country's information network and security agency, which was tasked
with spying on Ethiopians in Ethiopia and abroad.  He, perhaps more than
any world leader, knows the operational capabilities and political value of
surveillance on his own citizens.  The appellant's OLF activities in the UK
have certainly been noted.  As mentioned in paragraph 80, Abiy's reforms
and clemency for opposition leaders really extends only to the leaders.  It
is a matter of perception for the international community.  The optics say
that Abiy's Ethiopia is embarking on reforms whereas the reality is that
opposition members at the lower ranks remain suspect.  The current
firefights between the EPRDF/ADP and OLF sympathisers out in the provinces
demonstrated a huge gap between the government and the OLF leadership on
the one hand and the rank and file of Oromo nationalists on the other.  The
last thing Abiy Ahmed's government want to see is lower rank OLF
sympathisers who have proven their organisation skills to come back to
Ethiopia.  It is precisely these grassroots activists the EPRDF most fears.
 In my opinion, as a country expert for Ethiopia, the appellant's sur place
activities in the UK do increase the likelihood of persecution if she were
to return to Ethiopia."





Submissions

Ms Pal, on behalf of the respondent, argued that the appellant had not
demonstrated that the images (taken from YouTube) showing her holding
placards critical of the Ethiopian regime would come to the attention of
the authorities.  She argued that they do not appear to be available for
viewing at the present time and noted that the appellant did not access
them at the hearing despite being given an opportunity to do so.  She
acknowledged that a solicitor had written a statement on 23 November 2018
stating that she had viewed the videos on that date but argued that little
weight should be given to this as screenshots of the images were not
appended to the statement.

Ms Pal also argued that the appellant had failed to put any evidence from
her claimed Facebook profile into evidence and that in any event the
profile which she claimed was hers is not in her name and therefore would
not lead to her being identified.  She maintained that even if everything
the appellant said regarding her social media presence is true there is no
reason to believe that the authorities would link this to her or identify
her based on the social media presence.

Ms Pal also argued that the appellant, even on her own account, is not
presently active in demonstrations, having last attended one in 2017, which
undermines her claim to be at risk.  She argued that the appellant's
political profile, taken at its highest, would not be sufficient to trigger
the interest of the authorities in Ethiopia.

Ms Kotak argued that there is a wealth of evidence demonstrating that the
appellant is highly active within organisations that are closely linked to
the OLF and that she actively promotes and organises activities where the
Ethiopian authorities are criticised in very strong terms.  She argued that
the evidence of the appellant's solicitor is clear that the YouTube images
are still online and she highlighted the extent to which the screenshots
show the appellant demonstrating against the authorities.

With regard to the objective evidence concerning the circumstances of the
Oromo in Ethiopia, Ms Kotak accepted that there had been some degree of
change in 2018 with the appointment of Dr Ahmed, who is himself Oromo, but
argued that the expert evidence of Professor Schaefer shows that the
authorities continue to be concerned by the activities of OLF supporters
outside of Ethiopia.  She noted that Professor Schaefer believes that it is
probable that a file exists for the appellant already and that the
authorities have an interest in clamping down on activists abroad.  She
highlighted that the appellant has been active for over ten years and
maintained that, applying the lower standard of proof, it should be found
that the appellant would be already known to the authorities.

Ms Kotak also argued that the evidence shows that the appellant has strong,
genuinely held political beliefs that if revealed and acted upon in
Ethiopia would lead to her suffering persecution.

 Ms Kotak submitted that the overall conclusion from reviewing the recent
objective country information, including in particular the report of Dr
Schaefer, should be that there is no reason to depart from the country
guidance case MB (Ethiopia) [2007] UKAIT 00030, where it was concluded
that:

"OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically perceived by the
authorities to be such members or sympathisers will in general be at real
risk if they have been previously arrested or detained on suspicion of OLF
involvement.  So too will those who have a significant history, known to
the authorities, of OLF membership or sympathy."

She maintained that as the appellant has a decade-long history, which is
likely to be known to the authorities, of OLF membership and sympathy in
the UK, it would be inconsistent with MB to refuse her asylum claim.

Findings of Fact

I find as a fact that:

    (a)  The appellant has been actively involved in the UK with
         organisations that are sympathetic to the OLF for over ten years
         and has participated in several demonstrations that were highly
         critical of the Ethiopian Government.  I found Mr Banta a
         convincing witness and his evidence as to the appellant's extensive
         involvement with OLF supporting organisations was clear and
         consistent.  Taking his evidence together with the appellant's own
         evidence and the photographic evidence showing her attending
         demonstrations, I am satisfied that the appellant's level of
         involvement with OLF supporting organisations in the UK is as she
         claims.

    (b)  The appellant's involvement with various OLF sympathising
         organisations will be known to the authorities in Ethiopia and they
         have a file on her.  Mr Banta, in evidence that was clear and
         persuasive, explained that the Ethiopian authorities infiltrate and
         monitor OYA-UK.  This is consistent with the objective evidence.
         For example, the Danish Immigration Services Country of Origin
         Report of 9 October 2018 referred to the authorities monitoring
         activities of the diaspora.  Given the duration of the appellant's
         involvement (as well as her leadership position in OYA-UK) it is
         reasonably likely the appellant is known to the Ethiopian
         authorities and that, as suggested by Professor Schaefer, they have
         a file on her.

    (c)  The appellant's support for the OLF is genuinely held.  The
         appellant has spent a decade involved with OLF supporting groups in
         the UK and Mr Banta seemed amazed that it was being said that the
         appellant was not genuine in her beliefs.  There was nothing in
         either Mr Banta's or in the appellant's evidence that lead me to
         believe that the appellant is not genuine in her support for the
         OLF.  Applying the lower standard of proof, I am satisfied the
         appellant's support of the OLF, and opposition to the Ethiopian
         authorities, is genuinely held.

    (d)  The authorities have a file on the appellant which contains
         photographs of her attending demonstrations.  In the light of the
         objective evidence indicating that demonstrations are monitored,
         and the evidence of Mr Banta that OYA-UK is actively monitored, I
         find, applying the lower standard of proof, that the Ethiopian
         authorities have monitored demonstrations attended by the appellant
         and photographed her at them.  It is reasonably likely that these
         photographs are now held in a file that would be reviewed if she
         were to return to Ethiopia.

I do not, however, accept the appellant's claim that her Facebook page
(under the pseudonym [                  ]) would put her at risk.  Her
claim to have a significant Facebook presence could easily have been
corroborated by submitting copies of pages from the site, but this was not
done and the attempt by Ms Kotak at the hearing to show me the site proved
to be of limited value.   Similarly, I do not accept the appellant's claim
that YouTube videos of her at demonstrations are accessible online, given
the failure to take the opportunity given to her at the hearing to
demonstrate this.

Conclusion

The applicable country guidance case, MB (OLF and MTA - risk) Ethiopia CG
[2007] UKAIT 00030, states that:


         (1) As at February 2007, the situation in Ethiopia is such that, in
         general:-

         (a) Oromo Liberation Front members and sympathisers;

         (b) persons perceived to be OLF members or sympathisers; and

         (c) members of the Maccaa Tulema Association;

         will, on return, be at real risk if they fall within the scope of
         paragraph (2) or (3) below.

         (2) OLF members and sympathisers and those specifically perceived
         by the authorities to be such members or sympathisers will in
         general be at real risk if they have been previously arrested or
         detained on suspicion of OLF involvement. So too will those who
         have a significant history, known to the authorities, of OLF
         membership or sympathy. Whether any such persons are to be excluded
         from recognition as refugees or from the grant of humanitarian
         protection by reason of armed activities may need to be addressed
         in particular cases.

         (3) Given the proscription of the MTA and the current state of
         tension on the part of the Ethiopian authorities, the Tribunal
         considers that MTA members will also be at real risk on return if
         they have previously been arrested or detained on suspicion of MTA
         membership and/or of OLF membership or are known or suspected of
         membership of the MTA. Despite the banning of the MTA, the Tribunal
         does not consider that the evidence is such as to show a real risk
         where the extent of the authorities' knowledge or suspicion about
         an individual relates to something less than membership of the
         MTA.

Even though MB was decided over 11 years ago (and there have been huge
changes in Ethiopia during the intervening period) neither Ms Kotak nor Ms
Pal argued that I should depart from it. The evidence of Professor Schaefer
is that it continues to be the case that a person with a significant
history of OLF membership or sympathy who is known to the authorities could
be at risk of persecution if returned.  In the light of his evidence, I am
not satisfied that there are cogent or clear reasons to depart from MB.

I have found that the appellant:

      a) is a genuine supporter of the OLF;

      b) has been active in several OLF supporting organisations (and has a
         leadership position in one of them);

      c) has attended and been photographed at several demonstrations
         against the Ethiopian authorities; and

      d) has attracted the attention of the Ethiopian authorities who have a
         file on her and have retained photographs of her at demonstrations.

Applying MB to this factual matrix, I am satisfied that the appellant would
be at real risk of persecution if returned to Ethiopian because of her
activities in the UK. I reach this conclusion even though I have not
accepted that images of her at demonstrations are currently available
online or that her Facebook profile would put her at risk. The appeal is
therefore allowed.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal having been set aside, I now remake
the decision by allowing appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify her or any member of her family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed


|                                            |                             |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan        |Dated: 11 March 2019         |
|                                            |                             |
|                                            |                             |

