
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06613/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 June 2019                      |On 01 July 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     MD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Behbahani, Solicitor from Behbahani & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Gaskell promulgated on 31 January 2019 in which  he
    dismissed the appellant's  appeal  against  his  protection  and  human
    rights claims.

 2. The appellant is a national  of  Iran  whose  claim  is  founded  on  a
    conversion to Christianity and a  risk  on  return  to  Iran  for  that
    reason.  The respondent refused the application on the  basis  that  it
    was not accepted that the appellant  would  continue  to  practise  his
    religion on return, that he had not kept this  up  as  much  since  his
    baptism and that there was no evidence of him evangelising or therefore
    coming to the attention of the authorities in Iran.

 3. The appeal was dismissed largely on the basis that it was not  accepted
    that the appellant  was  a  credible  witness,  with  the  reasons  for
    dismissing the appeal being given  in  relatively  short  form  in  the
    context of an asylum appeal from paragraphs 49 to 52 of  the  decision.
    The First-tier Tribunal found that there was no doubt as to the honesty
    and sincerity of the member of the clergy who gave evidence in  support
    of the appellant, but that he could only give evidence as to his belief
    of the genuineness of the appellant's faith, which essentially did  not
    take matters much further.  The Judge states that the lower standard of
    proof  has  been  applied  but  the  findings,  which  are  essentially
    contained only in paragraph 51 as follows:

         "I do not find the appellant to be a credible witness: my judgement
         is that this is a confected conversion to Christianity in a further
         attempt to secure a legal basis for the appellant to remain in  the
         UK.

         (a)  The explanation of mysteriously  being  drawn  into  the  East
             Barnet Baptist Church is, in my judgement highly  implausible.



         (b)  The timing of the conversion is  extremely  convenient  coming
             after the appellant had  exhausted  other  means  of  securing
             asylum or leave to remain.

         (c)  It is clear to me that the appellant is seeking to manufacture
             some evidence of evangelisation when the reality is that there
             is none."

 4. The primary basis of appeal in this case by the appellant is  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to give sufficient reasons for rejecting the
    claim and the evidence before it.  In  particular,  there  was  also  a
    failure to consider the plausibility of the appellant's account  and  a
    suggestion that the reference to highly implausible indicated the wrong
    standard of proof being applied where it should be,  as  expressly  set
    out in the decision, the lower standard of proof.

 5. I find that there is clearly an error of law  in  this  case.   In  the
    context of the detailed evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  where
    issues of credibility have been taken against the appellant but not the
    other witness it is wholly insufficient for the First-tier Tribunal  to
    reject the claim on the basis of one credibility assessment and in only
    one short paragraph.  No proper reasons are given and it is in my  view
    impossible for the appellant to understand  why  the  appeal  has  been
    dismissed on that basis.   There  are  clear  errors  of  law  in  that
    paragraph and in the lack of further detail in that paragraph which are
    material to the outcome of the appeal.

 6. The further ground of appeal is that the First-tier Tribunal failed  to
    apply the correct test  in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2011] 1 AC 596 and in R v Secretary of State for  Education
    [2005] UKHL 15 and further failed to apply the apparent  concession  by
    the respondent in the case of TF and MA v Secretary of  State  for  the
    Home Department [2018] CSIH 58 in which it was recorded that it was not
    disputed by the respondent that  individuals  who  had  converted  from
    Islam to Christianity did face a risk of persecution  if  compelled  to
    return to Iran.  There is more recent guidance from  the  Secretary  of
    State about the position in Iran which suggested that it  has  somewhat
    changed, although does  not  go  so  far  as  what  is  recorded  as  a
    concession in TF and MA.  In any event this casts doubt  on  the  final
    conclusion in paragraph 52 of the First-tier Tribunal's decision that:

         "Even if I am wrong in my judgment as to  the  genuineness  of  the
         appellant's conversion to Christianity, he is not a pastor;  church
         leader; proselytiser; or evangelist.  The appellant is not a person
         of interest to the Iranian authorities for any other reason.  In my
         judgment therefore, he  is  not  in  any  of  the  risk  categories
         identified in FS. The appellant's case at its height is that he  is
         an "ordinary convert" to Christianity he may be at some  risk,  but
         not sufficient risk for the UK's international  obligations  to  be
         engaged.  This is especially eh case  in  circumstances  where  the
         appellant can return to his family and enjoy their support."

 7. That again is too short and simplistic a view of the current case  law,
    and fails to engage with the arguments made on behalf of the  appellant
    as to the correct position as to whether he would be at risk on return.
     That is a further error of law necessitating the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal to be set aside.

 8. In the circumstances of this case, where much more detailed findings of
    fact are required; where there is likely to be a need for  the  parties
    to submit further up-to-date country information and where I am mindful
    that there is a pending country guidance  case  on  risk  to  Christian
    converts on return to Iran; this is a case which must be remitted  back
    to the First-tier Tribunal rather than  being  retained  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal.  The further findings of fact required are so extensive  that
    that is the appropriate course.

Notice of decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remit  the  appeal
for a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal (Taylor  House  hearing
centre) before any Judge except Judge Gaskell.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
Signed   [pic]             Date     27th June 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
