

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06837/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 9 January 2018                             |                             |
|                                              |On 18 January 2018           |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE A M BLACK

                                   Between

                                     R F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr N Stevens of Fadiga & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen  of  Iraq  born  on  9  September  1998.  He
    appealed against a decision of the respondent on 16 June 2016 to refuse
    his asylum claim. His  appeal  came  before  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Herlihy ("the FTTJ") who, in a decision promulgated on 13 July
    2017, dismissed his appeal.

 2. The appellant sought permission to appeal. This was granted by Judge of
    the First-tier Tribunal Shimmin in the following terms:

        "...

        2.  It is arguable that the judge has erred materially when applying
        the facts he [sic] has found in this appeal to the country guidance.

     3. Furthermore, it is  arguable  that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
        consider  the  undue  harshness  of  internal  relocation   in   the
        particular circumstances of the appellant.

     4. It is arguable that the judge failed to properly give the  appellant
        credit and the benefit of the doubt as an unaccompanied minor.

     5. I grant permission on all grounds."

 3. Hence the matter came before me.

Submissions

 4. I indicated at the outset of the hearing that I had noted there was  no
    reference, in the FTTJ's assessment of the evidence, to the application
    of the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010: Child, vulnerable
    adult and sensitive appellant guidance.  This is despite the  appellant
    being a minor at the date of the claimed events in Iraq  which  led  to
    his flight, his arrival in the UK and at the date  of  his  substantive
    asylum interview. Both Mr Stevens, for the appellant, and Mr Tufan, for
    the respondent, agreed this was the case.

 5. For the appellant, Mr Stevens adopted his grounds  of  appeal  to  this
    tribunal.  He submitted the FTTJ had failed to consider properly and to
    take into account, in assessing risk on return, the  country  guidance,
    BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 00018 (IAC). The  FTTJ  had
    failed to consider the general risk the appellant would face on  return
    to  Baghdad,  his  city  of  origin;  the  FTTJ  merely  repeated   the
    respondent's claims in her  refusal  letter.  Contrary  to  the  FTTJ's
    findings, effective protection was not available for the appellant  (BA
    (Returns  to  Baghdad)  referred).  The  FTTJ  did  not   address   the
    appellant's specific case that he was at risk of kidnapping, given  the
    risk factors identified in BA (Returns to  Baghdad).  Mr  Stevens  also
    submitted the FTTJ had failed to consider properly the undue  harshness
    of internal relocation to the Iraqi  Kurdish  Regions  ("IKR")  in  the
    light of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544  (IAC):  she  did
    not consider the practicality of travel to the IKR or  the  appellant's
    circumstances, including his age and lack of experience. The failure of
    the FTTJ to take the appellant's age into account in her assessment  of
    his evidence undermined her assessment  of  his  credibility.  It  also
    tainted  her  adverse  findings  on  risk  on  return,  including   the
    reliability of  the  appellant's  claim  to  fear  militia  groups  and
    kidnapping. The FTTJ had failed to appreciate  the  appellant  was  not
    from the IKR; he was from Baghdad. He would have to relocate  from  his
    home area where he was at risk yet no findings were made as to  how  he
    could do this.

 6. For the respondent, Mr Tufan accepted that, even if the  assessment  of
    credibility were tainted by the  failure  of  the  FTTJ  to  take  into
    account the appellant's age at relevant times, there was  an  issue  as
    regards the assessment of risk on return: the country guidance had been
    modified by AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944. While  this  judgment
    had been published only days before the decision of the FTTJ  had  been
    promulgated,  it  had  been  applicable  nonetheless.   A  finding  was
    required, in accordance  with  that  latest  country  guidance,  as  to
    whether the appellant  could  access  a  Iraqi  Civil  Status  Identity
    Document ("CSID").   That said, he submitted that, notwithstanding  the
    failure of the  FTTJ  to  take  into  account  the  vulnerable  witness
    guidance, her findings of fact were such that they could stand  in  any
    event. In any event, mere failure to refer  to  the  guidance  did  not
    infer the FTTJ had not had it in mind.  The  documentary  evidence  was
    considered in accordance with Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT  00439*.   The
    FTTJ's criticisms about "discrepant" evidence were valid and applied in
    any event, irrespective of the appellant's age.  It was accepted  there
    was no analysis regarding internal relocation  and  there  should  have
    been.  Insofar as the FTTJ's adoption  of  the  respondent's  case  was
    concerned, Mr Tufan referred me to paragraph  14  of  Gheisari  v  SSHD
    [2004] EWCA Civ 1854.

Discussion

 7. It is not in dispute before me that the appellant was a minor when  the
    events which allegedly caused him to flee from Iraq  occurred.  He  was
    also a minor when he travelled to the UK, when he arrived here and when
    he was interviewed by the respondent.  Nor is it in  dispute  that  the
    FTTJ made no specific reference to  the  Joint  Presidential  Guidance.
    The guidance in AM (Afghanistan)  v  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123  was
    published after the FTTJ's decision was promulgated and she  cannot  be
    criticised for failing to refer to it. Nonetheless it provides  helpful
    guidance on "the general approach to be adopted in law and practice  by
    the First-tier Tribunal ... and the Upper  Tribunal  ...  to  the  fair
    determination of claims for asylum  from  children,  young  people  and
    other incapacitated or vulnerable persons whose ability to  effectively
    participate in proceedings may be limited" [1].

 8. AM  (Afghanistan)  reinforced  at  [33]  the  relevance  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance thus:

      "Given the emphasis on the determination of credibility on  the  facts
      of this appeal, there is particular force in the Guidance at  [13]  to
      [15]:

           "13. The weight to be placed upon factors of  vulnerability  may
           differ depending on the matter  under  appeal,  the  burden  and
           standard of proof and whether the individual is a witness or  an
           appellant.

           14. Consider  the  evidence,  allowing  for  possible  different
           degrees of understanding by witnesses and appellant compared  to
           those [who] are not vulnerable, in the context of evidence  from
           others associated with the appellant and the background evidence
           before you. Where there were clear  discrepancies  in  the  oral
           evidence, consider the extent to which the age, vulnerability or
           sensitivity of the witness was an element of that discrepancy or
           lack of clarity.

           15. The decision should record whether the Tribunal has
           concluded the appellant (or a witness) is a child, vulnerable or
           sensitive, the effect the Tribunal considered the identified
           vulnerability had in assessing the evidence before it and this
           whether the Tribunal was satisfied whether the appellant had
           established his or her case to the relevant standard of proof.
           In asylum appeals, weight should be given to objective
           indications of risk rather than necessarily to a state of mind."

 9. The asylum interview  record  shows  that  the  responsible  adult  who
    accompanied the appellant to that interview stated that "questions were
    sometimes hard to understand, such as can you explain what  the  people
    who attacked you looked like,  it  seems  like  a  big  question".  The
    appellant's legal representative, who also attended that interview,  is
    then noted to have said "I think it could be his age  as  well".   Thus
    even at the interview stage, there were  apparent  concerns  about  the
    impact of the appellant's  age  on  his  ability  to  give  a  coherent
    account.

10. The FTTJ identified  various  discrepancies  in  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant; she described at [31] his evidence as "vague and lacking  in
    detail; he was only able to name Shia groups that he says kidnapped his
    father after talking to his mother or former neighbour from the  United
    Kingdom".  No account is taken of the fact that  the  appellant  was  a
    minor, aged about 16 or 17, when his father was allegedly kidnapped  in
    2015, or the impact of his minority on his ability to give  a  detailed
    account. The FTTJ concludes "I find it likely  this  information  would
    have been known to his mother and  the  Appellant  at  a  much  earlier
    stage". Again, no account is taken of the appellant's minority at  that
    time in  drawing  that  conclusion.  The  FTTJ  notes  the  appellant's
    "account of his [father's] role is very vague and he  is  contradictory
    in claiming that his father did not speak about his activities but also
    claiming that his father's role was  well  known".    No  consideration
    appears to have been given to the impact  of  the  appellant's  age  in
    drawing that adverse conclusion.

11. I bear in mind Mr Tufan's submission that there  are  sufficient  other
    adverse findings on  credibility  such  as  to  render  immaterial  any
    failure to take into account the  appellant's  age;  he  submitted  the
    appellant's account would not have been found credible in any event.  I
    do not accept that submission: the appellant's account should have been
    assessed in the context of his age, development  and  maturity  at  the
    time he experienced the events central to his appeal and in  the  light
    of his age and maturity at the time he told the respondent about  them.
    In both situations he was a minor (albeit no longer a minor at the date
    of hearing). It may be that some of the criticisms of  the  appellant's
    evidence are validly made and would withstand scrutiny in  the  context
    of the appellant's age and maturity at relevant times, but that is  not
    an assessment which has yet taken place.

12. Mr Tufan further submitted that  the  FTTJ  had  rightly  assessed  the
    documentary evidence in the round in the light  of  Tanveer  Ahmed.   I
    cannot accept this submission when the assessment  of  the  documentary
    evidence took place against the backdrop of a failure to  take  account
    of the impact of the appellant's minority and maturity.  Had  the  FTTJ
    taken into account, for example, the appellant's immaturity  in  noting
    the late receipt of documents from Iran  (paragraph  34  refers),  this
    might have impacted on her assessment of his credibility overall.   The
    FTTJ questions  why  the  appellant  only  produced  documents  to  the
    respondent "just prior to the hearing" yet failed to take into  account
    that when he arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2015 he was aged
    17.

13. The FTTJ did not take into account, in assessing the credibility of the
    appellant's account of his father's  kidnapping,  the  guidance  in  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) (which, to  that  extent,
    has not been overturned) that  kidnapping  has  been,  and  remains,  a
    significant and persistent problem which is likely to be underreported.
    Kidnappings are said to be linked  inter  alia  to  political  motives.
    Thus,  to  that  extent,  the  appellant's  account  of  his   father's
    kidnapping could be said to be consistent with the country guidance.

14. The appellant's credibility is relevant to risk on return: the FTTJ did
    not accept he had lost contact with his mother  (see  [37]).  She  drew
    adverse inference from the failure of the appellant  to  have  provided
    evidence that he had sought the protection of the authorities  in  Iraq
    yet failed to take into account he was a minor  when  living  in  Iraq.
    Whether or not the appellant has family support in Iraq is an issue  of
    relevance to the assessment of risk on return (AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]
    EWCA Civ 944).

15. Similarly, as was conceded rightly  by  Mr  Tufan,  regardless  of  the
    feasibility of the appellant's return, it was necessary for the FTTJ to
    decide whether the appellant had a CSID, or would be able to obtain one
    reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq (AA (Iraq)).  The  FTTJ  made  no
    such finding: her findings on risk on return are based primarily on her
    adverse credibility finding as regards the appellant's  claim  to  have
    lost contact with his mother (at [37]).

16. Given the above, it was not appropriate for the FTTJ  merely  to  adopt
    the position of the respondent regarding risk on return (see [37]).

17. Taking these factors into account, I am satisfied that they,  together,
    render  unsustainable  the  adverse  findings  of  the  FTTJ   on   the
    appellant's credibility.

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of law in the
    assessment of the evidence and the FTTJ's decision must be set aside in
    its entirety.  No findings are preserved.   Both  parties  were  agreed
    that, in such circumstances, it was appropriate for the  appeal  to  be
    decided afresh in the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

19. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law.  The decision is set aside.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be dealt with afresh,
    pursuant to Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunal Courts and  Enforcement
    Act 2007 and Practice Statement 7.2(v), before  any  judge  aside  from
    FTTJ Herlihy.

20. The anonymity direction made in the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
    Dated: 6 February 2018




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


A M Black
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
  Dated: 6 February 2018
