
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06211/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2019                   |On 02nd December 2019                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


                                   Between

                                     A I
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E King, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen  of  Nigeria.   His  date  of  birth  is  24
    February 1980.

 2. On 24 January 2018 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's claim
    for asylum and humanitarian protection. The Appellant appealed  against
    the decision.  His appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge  A
    Khawar, in a decision that was dated and promulgated on 14 August  2019
    (following a hearing at Taylor House on 22 May 2019).

 3. The Appellant was granted permission by First-tier Tribunal Judge Povey
    on 27 September 2019. Thus, the matter came before me to decide whether
    the First-tier Tribunal made an error of law.

 4. The Appellant's immigration history is set out at paragraph 3 of  Judge
    Khawar's decision.  The Appellant and his wife, LI, have five children.
    Their dates of birth range from 30 December 2007 to 12 June 2018.

 5. The judge heard evidence from the Appellant and LI.  The  substance  of
    the claim was that the Appellant on return to Nigeria would be at  risk
    from the Ogbu cult because he had refused to become a member.  He  gave
    evidence of mistreatment at the hands of  members  of  the  cult  which
    involved being branded with the use of a heated metal rod.

 6. In support of the claim  the  Appellant  relied  on  a  medical  report
    prepared by Dr Alick Munro.  Dr  Munro  had  examined  the  Appellant's
    scars and considered his account of the  circumstances  in  which  they
    were inflicted.  There was no suggestion by  the  Respondent  that  the
    report was not compliant with the Istanbul Protocol.  There is no  need
    for me to set out the findings of Dr Munro in full. Suffice to say that
    he concluded that the Appellant's injuries were highly consistent  with
    his account of how they were caused.

 7. In respect of the evidence of Dr Munro the judge stated as  follows  at
    paragraph 31:-

         "Similarly, in my judgment, the Scarring Report (Dr. Alick  Munro),
         does not assist the Appellant's case in view of the fact  that  the
         Medical Expert cannot possibly comment on the claimed circumstances
         of the cause of such scars".

 8. Ground 1 asserts that the judge materially erred when considering  this
    evidence because it was not open to the judge to dismiss the report  on
    the basis that the doctor could not comment on the circumstances of the
    cause of the scars.

 9. The Appellant in the grounds relies on the case of  KV  (Sri  Lanka)  v
    SSHD [2019] UKSC 10 at [20]:-

         "In their supremely difficult and important  task,  exemplified  by
         the present case, of analysing whether scars have been  established
         to be the  result  of  torture,  decision-makers  can  legitimately
         receive assistance, often valuable, from medical experts  who  feel
         able, within  their  expertise,  to  offer  an  opinion  about  the
         consistency of their findings with the asylum-seeker's  account  of
         the circumstances in which the scarring was sustained, not  limited
         to the mechanism by which it was sustained".

10. I heard submissions from  the  parties  relating  to  this  issue  only
    because it was not necessary for me to determine the other  grounds  of
    appeal.  Mr Lindsay relied on the Rule 24 response to  submit  that  on
    the face of it paragraph 31 appears problematic, however reading it  in
    the context of the decision as  a  whole,  he  said  that  the  judge's
    conclusion was open to him. Mr  Lindsay  in  oral  submissions  drew  a
    distinction between cause and consistency,  saying  in  this  case  the
    judge accepted consistency but did not accept causation and it was this
    that he referred to at [31].  He argued that this conclusion  was  open
    to the judge on the evidence. The findings should be considered in  the
    context of the judge having rejected the existence of the cult.



Error of law

11. The only conclusion that can be drawn from what the judge says at  [31]
    is that he did not attach any weight to the report of Dr Munro  because
    he  formed  the  view  that  it  was  not  capable  of  supporting  the
    Appellant's evidence. This conclusion is irrational because, whilst  it
    was open to the judge to reject the evidence of causation,  the  report
    is unarguably  capable  of  supporting  the  Appellant's  account.  The
    assessment of the medical evidence is flawed, and the error infects the
    credibility findings as a whole.

12. In the Rule 24 response the approach that  is  advocated  to  assessing
    evidence is one that would properly be characterised as a Mibanga error
    (Mibanga v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2005]  EWCA  Civ
    367).

13. I did not engage with the other grounds of appeal. There  was  no  need
    to. The Appellant has raised an issue  of  fairness  arising  from  the
    judge's questioning of LI.  I did not hear submissions on  this  issue.
    My understanding is that it is the  Appellant's  case  that  the  judge
    asked  questions  during  cross-examination.   I  make  the   following
    observations. When considering whether or not  a  hearing  is  fair  or
    whether there is any apparent bias resulting from the intervention of a
    judge, the test is whether the  circumstances  when  ascertained  would
    lead to a fair-minded and informed observer concluding that there was a
    real possibility or real danger that the adjudicator was biased; Porter
    and Magill [2002] 2 WLR 37. In  K v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2004] UKIAT 00061 the Immigration Appeal Tribunal said  the
    following:-

         "42. There is a danger that the comments relied on  in  Oyono  have
             been misunderstood. An Adjudicator or any judge is  of  course
             entitled during evidence-in-chief to seek clarification of  an
             answer, whether because it has  not  been  heard  properly  or
             understood or interpreted properly. He is  entitled  to  check
             that he has recorded the answer correctly. But that is not the
             limit on his powers or indeed his obligations of  intervention
             during  the  giving  of  evidence.  An  Adjudicator  also  has
             obligations in relation to the general control of a  case.  It
             is proper for an Adjudicator to intervene during  examination-
             in-chief and cross-examination for the purposes of moving  the
             proceedings along, so long as that is done in a  fair  manner.
             It is necessary and proper for an  Adjudicator  to  point  out
             that a line of  questioning  is  irrelevant  or  valueless  or
             repetitious or is  going  nowhere.  It  will,  of  course,  be
             necessary to consider any response made by a representative to
             such an approach. But what was said by the Deputy President in
             Oyono assumes that the questions being put  are  relevant  and
             are not being pursued at undue length. Even where the  parties
             are both represented, it is still relevant for questions to be
             put by the Adjudicator to a  witness  if  they  raise  matters
             which trouble the Adjudicator if they have not been raised  or
             dealt with by the opposing advocate. This is especially so  if
             the Adjudicator is concerned by the point and it is  something
             which may affect the decision  or  indeed  should  affect  the
             decision, but cannot fairly do so without the relevant witness
             being given the opportunity to deal with it. The comments made
             in this  respect  by  the  Adjudicator  in  paragraph  60  are
             entirely right.

         43.  Of course, what is said in Oyono in relation to the timing  at
             which an Adjudicator should put questions for that purpose  is
             right. An Adjudicator ought not to  interrupt  examination-in-
             chief or cross-examination  except  in  the  circumstances  to
             which we have referred or for other  reasons  associated  with
             the general control of the case and the court room.  If  there
             are inconsistencies between documents  and  oral  evidence  or
             between answers which have been given already,  it  is  nearly
             always best to wait  until  after  cross-examination  and  re-
             examination to see what matters are put. However, it is wholly
             legitimate for the Adjudicator to ask his or her own questions
             on issues of  inconsistency,  points  raised  in  the  refusal
             letter or matters which trouble the Adjudicator whether or not
             they are  raised  by  the  other  party.  What  is  important,
             however, in relation to those matters is that the  Adjudicator
             should not develop a different case from that being  presented
             by the other party or pursue his or  her  own  theory  of  the
             case."

14. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  Appellant's
    appeal is set aside.  I agreed with the parties, with reference to  the
    Practice Statement of the Senior President of Tribunals of 25 September
    2012, that considering the nature and extent of  judicial  fact-finding
    which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be remade
    is such that, having regard to the overriding objective in Rule  2,  it
    is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal  where  the
    matter will be reheard de novo.




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Joanna McWilliam  Date 13 November 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam


