
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06378/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|On 1 June 2017                            |On 10 October 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                      Upper Tribunal Judge John FREEMAN

                                   Between

                                    N R a

                                                                   appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Saeed, solicitor, Aman Solicitors Advocates
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Avery


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    This is an appeal from Judge Sureta Chana, sitting at Hatton Cross on 8
    December 2016, by someone who was born in Iraq in 1981.  The appellant,
    after arriving in this country on a false passport for which she served
    a prison sentence, claimed asylum, and a crucial  question  in  dealing
    with that claim was whether she would be returning to Iraq  as  a  lone
    woman, in terms of the country guidance.

2.   The grounds refer to the judge's findings at  paragraph  48  where  the
    judge says "however, the appellant is married with a child".  When  the
    judge recorded the evidence at paragraph 20 the appellant's evidence on
    the point is recorded in these terms, "she has an  intention  to  marry
    him".  The slightly unidiomatic phrase suggests a possible mistake, and
    that can be verified from the judge's very careful  note,  which  shows
    this exchange in the course of cross-examination:

         Q:   What are your plans?
         A:   So far I have no intention of marrying him.  He has  not  been
             married before.

3.   It follows that what the judge actually wrote at paragraph 20 is a,  no
    doubt unintentional, misrecording of that evidence, and may  have  been
    the basis for what she said at paragraph 48, which does  not  represent
    the evidence before her.   In  those  circumstances  both  parties  are
    agreed that there will have to be a fresh hearing before another first-
    tier judge, who will be able to make a clear finding on this point  and
    decide, in terms of the current country guidance, whether the applicant
    does face any real risk on return as a result.

Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing in First-tier Tribunal, not before Judge Chana

                               [pic]


                                          Date: 05/06/2017




                                         (a judge of the Upper Tribunal)

