
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06135/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 20 December 2019                  |On 28 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                     I A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Wood, instructed by Immigration Advice Service

For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
    court directs otherwise no report of these proceedings or any  form  of
    publication  thereof  shall  directly  or   indirectly   identify   the
    appellant.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Herwald promulgated on 20 August 2019 dismissing on  all
    grounds his appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State dated
    14 June 2019 to refuse his protection claim made on 22  December  2018.
    On 24 September Designated First-tier Tribunal Judge Woodcraft  refused
    permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.  However,  when   the
    application was renewed to the Upper  Tribunal,  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Grubb granted permission on 31 October 2019.

Error of Law

 3. In the first instance I have to determine whether or not there  was  an
    error of law in the making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    sufficient to require it to be set aside and remade.

 4. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from the IKR born in Sulaymaniyah.   The
    protection claim asserts that he is at risk on return to  Iraq  on  the
    basis of a family land dispute between  his  mother  and  his  maternal
    uncle, alleged to be either a high ranking regional government official
    and/or a captain in the Peshmerga force acting as  a  bodyguard  for  a
    Mahmoud Sangawi said to be a high ranking  official  in  the  Patriotic
    Union of Kurdistan Party (PUK).  In addition, his family  rejected  the
    suggestion of his uncle to resolve the dispute between the families  on
    the basis that his sister marry the uncle's son the appellant's  cousin
    Abdullah.

 5. There was no issue of feasibility of return or documentation  necessary
    to enable the appellant to return to Iraq.

 6. Judge Herwald found inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account  and
    ultimately rejected the account of  a  land  dispute  with  a  powerful
    uncle.  Neither was the judge persuaded as to the veracity of the claim
    of a potential forced marriage between the appellant's sister  and  his
    cousin allegedly giving rise to a further strand of risk on return.  In
    the alternative, the judge also found internal relocation would not  be
    unduly harsh.  In summary, the grounds assert:

      a) that the judge made a material misdirection  in  law  in  asserting
         that there  was  no  evidence  to  support  various  parts  of  the
         appellant's factual claim and  implicitly  required  corroboration.
         It is pointed out the appellant gave evidence  himself  as  to  the
         matters in dispute which obviously is 'evidence' and that there was
         also a letter from  a  consultant  advocate  in  Iraq  setting  out
         details of the land dispute;

      b) that the judge failed to resolve a conflict of fact or opinion on a
         material matter in relation to who had  signed  the  land  transfer
         document between May and August of 2018, whether his grandmother or
         himself using a power of attorney.  It is  also  suggested  in  the
         grounds that  the  judge  at  14(q)  has  completed  two  different
         documents within the decision;

      c) that the judge made a mistake of fact on  a  material  matter  with
         regard to the appellant's uncle's employment, suggesting  that  the
         claims that the uncle is both a high  ranking  regional  government
         official and a captain in the Peshmerga acting as a  bodyguard  are
         irreconcilable, when  the  fact  is  that  the  background  country
         information indicates  that  the  PUK  has  both  a  political  and
         military role.

 7. In relation to the first ground, given the comments made in  the  grant
    of permission, Mr Wood does  not  pursue  the  issue  about  the  judge
    requiring corroboration and I am satisfied in any event the  judge  was
    not requiring such corroboration and was  entitled  to  point  out  the
    absence of supporting evidence in relation to various  aspects  of  the
    appellant's claim.   Obviously  the  judge  would  be  aware  that  the
    appellant's claim rested in part on  the  appellant's  own  account  in
    evidence, in  the  interview  and  in  his  witness  statement.   I  am
    satisfied that in making those observations the judge  did  not  ignore
    the appellant's evidence.  In relation to the  judge  failing  to  take
    account of the letter from the consultant advocate which in theory  was
    a letter supporting the account, the judge has addressed this at  14(u)
    of the decision, where the document from the advocate is noted  and  in
    fact the judge set out the whole of that letter at paragraph  39(k)  of
    the decision.  The judge stated it was consistent with the  appellant's
    account but can be said to be self-serving. The judge also  noted  that
    the area of land referred to in  the  letter  was  different  from  the
    documents submitted to the estates registry  office.   In  relation  to
    that last point about the size of the land,  it  is  not  clear  to  me
    whether there was a discrepancy in the size.   Certainly  some  of  the
    documents, including that on page 62, as  translated  referred  to  the
    square meterage as 150.  It is not entirely clear  which  document  the
    judge is referring to.  He referred to  a  document  submitted  to  the
    estate registry office.

 8. Part of the difficulty for this Tribunal is it  transpired  during  the
    course of submissions to me that one of the two bundles supplied to the
    First-tier Tribunal, including land documents between pages 59  to  79,
    is different to the bundle both in pagination and  in  content  to  the
    bundle that Mr Wood was referring me to.  In  particular,  one  of  the
    documents he wanted me to look at does not appear at all in the  bundle
    supplied to the judge and it appears that the pagination may also  have
    gone awry.  Whilst simply saying  a  document  is  self-serving  it  is
    insufficient to dismiss or give little weight to such  a  document,  an
    examination of the letter from the consultant advocate does not suggest
    that that person has had any role whatsoever in the  land  transfer  or
    any part of the appellant's history.  He appears to be  simply  stating
    what he must have been told by others and does not suggest in  any  way
    that he has any direct or personal knowledge.  It follows  that  whilst
    it is obviously self-serving, the letter even taken at its highest  can
    have little material weight in the overall assessment of the  evidence.
    The fact that it comes from a consultant advocate is a  mere  cloak  of
    respectability and an attempt to give the contents some greater  weight
    than the facts justify. With no disrespect to the consultant  advocate,
    he is simply stating what he has been told.  In those circumstances  it
    is in that sense self-serving and does not improve the appellant's case
    to any material extent.

 9. The second ground complaining the judge failed to resolve the  conflict
    about who signed the land transfer  documents  is  again  difficult  to
    resolve because of the discrepancy between the documents Mr Wood relied
    on and those actually submitted to the judge.   It  is  not  clear  why
    there are so  many  different  documents,  submitted  in  a  peculiarly
    confusing order, but I am satisfied having considered the  matter  that
    the judge did resolve the conflict as to who transferred  the  land  in
    the sense that he found the appellant's claim about the dispute arising
    from the land transfer  to  be  incredible.  In  reality,  whether  his
    grandmother did it herself or whether he had  done  so  acting  on  her
    power of attorney is not necessarily material.  The  judge  found  that
    whoever had been involved in the land transfer the documents themselves
    did not actually support the claim of there being a land dispute.

10. I accept that, in a general sense  only,  the  documents  support  the
    appellant's account in confirming that there was a  transfer  of  land.
    But  equally,  and  perhaps  more  significantly,  the  documents   are
    inconsistent with the appellant's account, including in  interview.  At
    question 12 he said that using a power of attorney he  transferred  the
    land to his mother.  At question 17 he said when asked  about  what  he
    feared on return to Iraq he said, the problem is because I switched the
    name of the land owner from my grandmother  to  my  mother  legally  my
    uncle was not happy about it.  We do not need to go into why he did so,
    but at question 19 he was asked to explain how the fear of  return  was
    linked to the land dispute and said, I switched the land to my mother's
    name and my uncle and cousins came to my house on 20 July 2017 and beat
    me up.  That is impossible to sensibly reconcile because the  documents
    themselves relating to the land transfer appear to be dated between May
    and August of 2018; which the judge pointed out. It is difficult to see
    how the appellant could be under attack for having made  this  transfer
    when it did not take place for almost a year later. His account in  the
    interview was that the first attack on  him  was  in  2017.  The  judge
    rightly pointed out that there are photographs of  the  grandmother  on
    some of the documents, but the judge was also entitled to conclude that
    the documents disclose nothing more than a simple transfer of land,  in
    fact a sale of land, between his grandmother and mother. It was open to
    the judge to conclude that on the evidence, considering the appellant's
    account and these documents,  as  well  as  the  consultant  advocate's
    document, that there was no credible evidence of the land dispute.

11. Mr Bates raised the  point  that  the  appellant's  representative  had
    submitted a letter purporting to  make  amendments  to  the  record  of
    interview, stating on the appellant's instructions that  there  was  an
    error of translation. However, although the record was audio  recorded,
    the appellant has produced no verified record or  any  record  in  fact
    suggesting that there was any inaccuracy.  Mr Wood suggests that it was
    for the respondent to prove that document.  I entirely disagree.  It is
    the appellant who is asserting that there was an error.  He either  had
    access to the audio recording, or could have had done so if he  wanted,
    and he could have demonstrated beyond doubt that there was an error, if
    there was an error.  He has failed to do that and  a  simple  assertion
    there was an error takes his case nowhere.

12. Turning to  the  third  substantive  ground  of  appeal,  I  was  fully
    satisfied the judge was  entitled  to  find  an  inconsistency  in  the
    appellant's descriptions of the role of his uncle.  Even if PUK is both
    a political and a military organisation, it is difficult to  understand
    how the uncle could be himself a high-ranking government official and a
    bodyguard to a high-ranking official.  There is an obvious  discrepancy
    between those two descriptions which is not resolved  or  satisfied  by
    the background material referred to by Mr Wood.  In the  circumstances,
    it was entirely open to the judge to point out an  inconsistency  which
    undermined the appellant's credibility.

13. In all of the circumstances whilst there may  have  been  some  factual
    errors on the part of the judge, I am not satisfied that any or all  of
    them, either individually  or  taken  together,  are  material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal.  I am satisfied that on the  difficult  task  to
    assess documents that were and  remain  difficult  to  understand,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that they did  not  demonstrate  a  land
    dispute, merely a sale of land.  I note the appellant has said at  some
    stage that the actual sale was a ruse to justify the transfer but  that
    no money actually had changed hands, but that is  immaterial.   Whether
    he did made the transfer, or whether his grandmother  was  present  and
    did it herself, matters not and is not material.

14. In all the circumstances and for the reasons outlined above, I find  no
    material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal.  It
    follows that the appeal to the Upper Tribunal must be dismissed.

Decision

15. The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a  point  of  law  such  as  to  require  the
    decision to be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision in the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.

     [pic]
                  Signed


                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 20 December 2019



To the Respondent
Fee Award

I make no fee award as the appeal has been dismissed.




                  Signed

                  Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

                       Dated                 20 December 2019

