
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06747/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre|   Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20th July 2018                       |On 1st October 2018                     |
|                                        |                                        |
|                                        |                                        |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                                     BS
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by WTB solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  BS.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


         1. BS  arrived  in  the  UK  aged  17  and  claimed  international
            protection. His claim was refused for  reasons  set  out  in  a
            letter dated 6th July 2017 and his  appeal  to  the  First-tier
            Tribunal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge A J  Parker
            in a decision promulgated on 13th April 2018.


         2. It was accepted that the appellant, who was a minor,  had  been
            detained and raped by a man called H.

         3. The grounds upon which permission to appeal was granted  submit
            the judge  failed  to  consider  relevant  matters  namely  the
            appellant's age and oral  evidence  prior  to  making  findings
            under s8; failed to  give  adequate  reasons,  failed  to  make
            adequate  findings.  These  grounds  were  amplified   in   the
            application.

         4. The First-tier Tribunal decision does not make clear structured
            findings supported by adequate reasons. Although the judge pays
            lip service to the appellant's age, he makes  no  reference  to
            having considered the appellant's evidence as evidence  from  a
            young person who  has  plainly  sustained  considerable  trauma
            including being raped and detained. The judge does not seem  to
            know  whether  he  is  sitting  alone  or   with   some   other
            unidentified person. Under the heading  "findings",  the  judge
            makes comments rather than findings. The judge  criticises  the
            expert for failing to support  the  appellant's  account  "with
            conviction" yet that is not the role of an expert.

         5. This decision cannot stand. The judge has failed to  carry  out
            his task with  care  and  precision;  he  has  failed  to  have
            adequate regard to the  appellant's  vulnerability,  failed  to
            make adequately reasoned findings and  failed  to  have  proper
            regard to the expert report.

         6. I set aside the decision to be remade, the finding that he  was
            raped and detained being preserved.

         7. The scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does
            not assign the function of primary fact finding  to  the  Upper
            Tribunal. This is a case where further detailed factual finding
            will have  to  take  place,  after  oral  evidence  and  proper
            consideration  of  the  expert  report.  I  conclude  that  the
            decision should be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
            determine the appeal.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision to be re-made in the First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)
    of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I make an anonymity order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

         [pic]
         Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
Date 23rd July 2018

