
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06825/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at HMCTS Employment Tribunals           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Liverpool                                     |                              |
|On 12th September 2018                        |On 25th October 2018          |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                          Mr SYED FAIZAN ALI NAQVI
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Warren (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bradshaw, promulgated on 24th April 2018, following a hearing  at
    Manchester on  12th  April  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was  born  on  19th
    September 1993.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 5th July 2017, refusing his claim  for  refugee  status  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant entered the UK in February 2014 with a visa as a  Tier  4
    Student.  He had various extensions of stay.  Some three  years  later,
    on 11th January 2017, he made a claim for asylum.  The essence  of  his
    claim is that he fears religious opponents in Pakistan, his uncles, and
    his ex-girlfriend's family because of his religious beliefs and alleges
    that there is no protection for him from the authorities there.

 4. The Appellant is a Shia Muslim.  He had  an  affair  with  a  girl  who
    belonged to a family of Wahabi Muslims.  Her name was [AK].  The affair
    was from 2011 to 2013.  In 2012, when  he  was  19,  he  gave  lectures
    criticising Salafi (Sunni) ideology.  In October 2013 a  jirga  meeting
    was held.  The jirga decided he should be killed  for  blasphemy.   His
    father disagreed with the jirga.  The  Appellant  did  not  go  to  the
    police to complain about the threats or the jirga decision against him.
     His father and his maternal grandfather were powerful and so  no  harm
    came to him during the lifetime of his father and  grandfather  out  of
    deference and respect to them.  The Appellant returned to  Pakistan  in
    December 2016, and on 22nd December 2016 he alleges he gave  a  lecture
    that he had been preparing for two years in a local mixed faith mosque.
     Subsequently he was attacked by unknown men who  attempted  to  kidnap
    and kill him.  He was taken to hospital.  It is against this background
    that he claimed asylum.

The Judge's Decision

 5. Judge Bradshaw dismissed the appeal on the basis that,  although  there
    was no requirement that the Appellant corroborate his evidence, it  was
    significant that he had produced no written evidence at all to  support
    his claim that there was a jirga meeting or  about  its  outcome.   The
    judge held that, "most  importantly  he  has  produced  no  documentary
    evidence at all of any of his lectures merely telling me  that  he  had
    these at home so he clearly could have" (paragraph 56).  The judge also
    held that the Appellant was, "inconsistent and vague about  the  attack
    in December 2016 and he speculates about who attacked  him"  (paragraph
    57).  The judge  was  not  satisfied  about  the  truthfulness  of  the
    Appellant's claim or the risk that he complained about.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state  that  the  judge  failed  to  make  a
    finding on the  gunshot  wound  that  the  Appellant  had  despite  the
    evidence.  She also failed to make a finding on whether the Appellant's
    injuries were in fact sustained.  Moreover, the judge  failed  to  make
    findings  on  other  issues  which  were  relatively  central  to   the
    Appellant's claim, and also unlawfully  required  corroboration,  which
    was not necessary in a protection claim.

 7. On 26th June 2018, permission to appeal was  granted  by  the  Tribunal
    with the observation that, "in an otherwise careful and  well  reasoned
    decision and reasons it is nonetheless arguable that the judge, despite
    finding much of the Appellant's evidence vague, failed to make specific
    findings on the core aspects of the Appellant's case" paragraph 3.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 12th September 2018, Ms  Warren,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, carefully and methodically took me  through
    the grounds of application.  She submitted that there were no clear-cut
    findings made by the judge on core  matters  raised  before  her.   For
    example, there is a heading towards the end of  the  determination  of,
    "My Findings".  However, the judge does not make findings here to begin
    with.  What she does is to set  out  the  evidence,  referring  to  the
    submissions made before  her  by  the  representatives.   This  section
    includes submissions of the representatives, assertions by  the  judge,
    and then a few conclusions.  It is not clear what the  judge  concluded
    upon.

 9. The Appellant's claim consisted of giving a controversial lecture which
    was critical of Wahabist teachings;  being  attacked  two  days  later;
    sustained trauma to the head and a gunshot wound to  the  leg;  and  in
    addition, he had produced a FIR dated 26th December 2016, together with
    two newspaper reports detailing the nature of the attack, as well as an
    injury report signed and dated by Ahmad Barr.  However, the judge  made
    no findings with respect to the Appellant's injuries (at paragraph  26)
    and went on to criticise the injury report (at  paragraph  65)  without
    making any findings about the injuries themselves.

10. This is despite the judge stating (at paragraph 69) that  "the  medical
    report from the hospital merely confirms a wound  to  the  head  and  a
    wound to the left calf ...".  Indeed, the  judge  failed  to  make  any
    finding as to whether the two injuries were in fact sustained and as to
    the causation behind those injuries.  The judge  also  failed  to  make
    findings on whether the Appellant was subject to a jirga decision as he
    claimed in October 2013, and whether he  was  an  anti-Salafist  as  he
    claimed.  Moreover, the judge wrongly went on to require  corroboration
    of the evidence (at paragraph 56).

11. The judge did not heed the strictures in TK (Burundi) [2009]  EWCA  Civ
    40.  Ms Warren submitted that the proposition in that  case  was  that,
    "where evidence to support an account given by a party is or should  be
    readily available, a judge is, in my view,  plainly  entitled  to  take
    into account the failure to produce that evidence" (see paragraph  16).
    However, submitted Ms Warren, the critical reference here  was  to  the
    evidence being "readily available", and there is no  reason  to  assume
    that either the jirga decision, or the lectures which the Appellant had
    been preparing, should be evidenced through documentation.

12. Finally, all of these matters assumed a greater importance when it  was
    recognised that the judge had concluded that,

         "I accept that the UNHCR Report does indeed  recount  criticism  of
         the Pakistani government for failing  to  protect  Shi'ite  Muslims
         from attacks and for allowing  militant  organisations  to  operate
         with  impunity  but  failing  to  investigate  and   punish   those
         responsible for violent attacks against Shi'ites" (paragraph 66).

    In these circumstances, it could not be said that the Appellant was not
    at risk of ill-treatment or persecution.

13. For his part, Mr Tan submitted that there was no error of  law  on  the
    part of the judge.  He submitted that  the  judge  had  made  it  quite
    clear, for example, that corroboration was not required  (at  paragraph
    56), but the fact  was  that  the  Appellant  had  been  preparing  his
    lectures for some two  years, and it was quite  improbable  that  there
    would not be any documentation of these lectures, which the  judge  had
    independently been sceptical of.  It was not the case  that  the  judge
    had not come to clear findings.  The judge had rejected the Appellant's
    claim in every fundamental respect and had concluded that the Appellant
    was "inconsistent and vague about the attack in December  2016  and  he
    speculates about who attacked him" (paragraph 57).  Finally, the  judge
    in any event, ended with the observation that if she  was  wrong  about
    her conclusions, that in any event there was sufficiency of  protection
    to the standard required in Pakistan which one can expect of the  state
    (see paragraph 69).

14. In reply, Ms Warren submitted that one  could  not  confidently  assert
    that the state  would  provide  protection  from  non-state  agents  of
    persecution given what had been said at paragraph 66, namely, that  the
    UNHCR itself had recognised that the Pakistani  state  was  failing  to
    provide protection to Shi'ites.

No Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  Notwithstanding Ms Warren's careful  and  well  structured
    submissions before me,  I  do  not  accept  that  anyone  reading  this
    determination can have any doubt  as  to  why  the  judge  refused  the
    Appellant's appeal.  I not that under the  heading  "My  Findings"  (at
    paragraph  34)  the  judge  does  set  out  what  both  representatives
    submitted before the Tribunal of fact at that time (see  paragraphs  36
    to 37).  However, what the judge is doing here is plainly  setting  out
    the central aspects of the appeal,  before  going  on  to  making  firm
    findings under a  paragraph,  which  is  clearly  signposted  with  the
    assertion that, "the Appellant's credibility is damaged by a number  of
    factors" (paragraph 38).  The judge then goes on to give her  findings.
    Practically every relevant matter  is  then  concluded  upon  with  the
    necessary clarity expected of a fact-finding Tribunal.

16. Thus, the judge concludes that the Appellant did not  claim  asylum  on
    first arriving in the UK, despite claiming to have had threats to  kill
    him.  The judge explains that the Appellant's account was inconsistent.
     He had come on a student visa and he had actually said that his father
    had agreed that he should have a foreign education.   This  is  despite
    also stating that the father opposed the jirga decision and that is why
    he sent him to the UK.  But even so, the judge  makes  it  quite  clear
    that  the  Appellant,  "then  returned  to  Pakistan  on  two  separate
    occasions" (paragraph 39).  The judge then addresses the issue  of  the
    lectures given by the Appellant at his local mosque  from  April  2012.
    The judge says nothing here about requiring  corroboration.   What  the
    judge makes clear is that the Appellant "provided no explanation why he
    began to receive threats until 2013" (paragraph 40).   The  judge  then
    goes on to deal with the jirga decision.  She notes that it was decided
    in October 2013 that the Appellant should  be  killed  because  he  had
    committed blasphemy.  However, the judge was entitled to conclude that,
    "yet nothing happened to him before he left Pakistan for the UK for the
    first time in February 2014, nothing happened to him when  he  returned
    in August 2015" (paragraph 41).  In the same way the judge  also  deals
    with the secret relationship with [AK], that the Appellant  claimed  to
    have had.  The judge is clear here that the Appellant "gives little  or
    no detail about the two year relationship.   He  speculates  about  how
    [AK]'s family knew him and that there had been any  relationship.   Her
    father saw them once,  but  they  were  schoolfriends  and  it  appears
    nothing was suspected" (paragraph 42).  Indeed, the Appellant  goes  on
    to confirm that after April 2013 "he had no further contact  with  [AK]
    and the last time he had contact with her family was in  October  2013"
    (paragraph 43).

17. However, ultimately, the reason why there was no risk to the  Appellant
    of ill-treatment or persecution, notwithstanding his Shi'ite  religious
    orientation, or any  past  problems  he  may  have  had,  is  that  the
    Appellant "was able to return to Pakistan in August  2015  without  any
    problem" (at paragraph 44);  and  even  managed  to  "return  again  in
    December  2016  ostensibly  to  deal  with  the  inheritance   dispute"
    (paragraph 45).  Any references to the Appellant's evidence not  having
    the advantage of additional  corroboration,  only  follows  after  that
    finding, and even then after Judge Bradshaw has made  it  categorically
    clear that "there is no requirement that the Appellant corroborate  his
    own evidence" (paragraph 56).  That, however, did not prevent the judge
    from assessing the value of that evidence, against  the  background  of
    her having found that evidence to be unreliable, and also to have  been
    unsupported by any documentary evidence (at paragraph 56).  All in all,
    therefore, the judge did not materially err in law and the challenge to
    her decision amounts to nothing more  than  a  disagreement  with  that
    decision.

Notice of Decision

18. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

19. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 22nd October 2018
