
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06683/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 October 2019                   |On 11th November 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN


                                   Between

                                  m B E A I
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Aziz, Lei Dat & Baig Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1    This is the Appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  of  the
      First-tier  Tribunal  Shergill  dated  6  July  2018  dismissing   the
      Appellant's appeal against the decision of the Respondent dated 13 May
      2018 refusing his protection and human rights claim.

2    It is not in dispute that the Appellant is a national of Sudan  and  is
      of non-Arab Darfuri origin.  Paragraph 24 of the Respondent's decision
      accepts that the Appellant is from Sudan and at  paragraph  28  it  is
      accepted that the Appellant is of the Berti tribe.

3    The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in  or  around  November  2017
      and claimed asylum, stating that he had left Sudan  in  2013  and  had
      travelled to various countries en route to the UK.  The Appellant gave
      an  account  that  he  had  come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the
      authorities in Sudan due to a perceived connection with a car that was
      found to contain weapons, and was at risk of further serious harm upon
      return for that reason. He also claimed to fear serious harm merely on
      the basis that he was of non-Arab Darfuri origin. In that  regard  the
      Appellant sought to rely upon country guidance cases of  AA  (Non-Arab
      Darfuris - relocation)  Sudan  CG  [2009]  UKAIT  00056  and  also  MM
      (Darfuris) Sudan (CG) [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC).

4    The Respondent considered the Appellant's  application  for  protection
      and disbelieved his account of having come to the adverse attention of
      the Sudanese authorities. The Respondent  also  relied  upon  a  joint
      report of the Danish Immigration Service and the UK Home Office  dated
      March 2016 entitled 'Sudan: Situation of Persons from Darfur, Southern
      Kordofan and Blue Nile in Khartoum', and took the  position  that  the
      situation for persons of non-Arab Darfuri origin in Khartoum  was  now
      such that they no longer faced a real risk of serious  harm  and  that
      the Appellant could safely relocate to  Khartoum  if  necessary.   The
      Respondent also pointed out that this particular Appellant was said to
      have family including an uncle resident in Khartoum.

5    The appeal came before the judge on 27  June  2018  and  the  Appellant
      gave evidence. The judge held,  due  to  certain  inconsistencies  and
      implausible  elements  within  the  Appellant's  evidence,  that   the
      Appellant had not come  to  the  adverse  attention  of  the  Sudanese
      authorities.

6    The judge then considered the continuing  application  of  the  country
      guidance cases of AA and  MM.   The  judge  also  had  regard  to  the
      decision in IM and AI (Risks - membership of Beja Tribe, Beja Congress
      and JEM) Sudan (CG) [2016] UKUT 188 (IAC).  In  a  detailed  decision,
      the judge addressed his  mind  to  the  application  of  the  existing
      country guidance  (at  paragraphs  19  to  23  of  the  decision)  and
      considered at paragraph 29 onwards, under the title of "Quality of the
      Departure Evidence". the evidence relied upon  by  the  Respondent  to
      support the proposition that internal relocation to Khartoum  was  now
      safe.  The judge considered the CPIN Report entitled 'Sudan - Non-Arab
      Darfuris'  published  in  August  2017  and  noted  that   it   relied
      significantly upon the fact-finding report mentioned above. The  judge
      also noted at [29] that the CPIN report contained  various  references
      to a document which the judge referred to as  'the  Australian  Report
      2016 (DFAT)'. This is a  reference  to  a  report  of  the  Australian
      Department  of  Foreign  Affairs  and  Trade   dated   'DFAT   Country
      Information Report: Sudan', dated 27 April 2016. The judge stated that
      he had read the whole of the DFAT report.

7    The judge considered a particular submission  made  on  behalf  of  the
      appellant regarding the weight to  be  attached  to  the  fact-finding
      report, as follows:

           "31.   Ms Patel criticised the anonymised sources in  the  CPIN.
                 However, broadly speaking the underlying  joint  report  is
                 well-sourced so that this is not a fundamental flaw.   Both
                 the joint report and DFAT rely on  a  number  of  different
                 sources which reassures me that there has  been  some  wide
                 consultation.   These   include   governmental   and   non-
                 governmental  sources;  some  of  them  based  in  or  with
                 connections to Sudan, others less directly  placed.   There
                 were also human rights activists and lawyers consulted.

           32.    I take no issue with the reliance on  diplomatic  sources
                 or the lack of an NGO presence going to weight in the joint
                 report.  I noted that there is a British Embassy letter  in
                 the CPIN.  Such issues have been comprehensively dealt with
                 in IM and AI  (Risks  -  Membership  of  Beja  Tribe,  Beja
                 Congress and JEM) Sudan CG [2016] UKUT 00188 (and the judge
                 then set out a quote from paragraph 199 of that  decision).



           33.    There is nothing  fundamentally  wrong  with  relying  on
                 either diplomatic sources  or  NGO's  who  do  not  have  a
                 presence in  Sudan,  particularly  given  the  difficulties
                 NGO's face there.  I  do  not  consider  these  issues  are
                 fundamental flaws or reduce weight.

           34.    I note the joint report starts off with a disclaimer:

                       'This report  was  written  in  accordance  with  the
                       European Asylum  Support  Office  (AESO)  Country  of
                       Origin Information (COI) reporting methodology.   The
                       report is based on approved notes from meetings  with
                       carefully selected  interlocutors.   Statements  from
                       all interlocutors are used  in  the  report  and  all
                       statements are referenced.   This  report  is  not  a
                       detailed or comprehensive survey of  all  aspects  of
                       the issues covered in  the  terms  of  reference  and
                       should  be  considered  alongside   other   available
                       Country of Origin Information  on  the  situation  of
                       persons from Darfur and the  two  areas  in  Khartoum
                       Sudan.  The information contained in this report  has
                       been gathered and presented with  utmost  care.   The
                       report does not include any policy recommendations or
                       analysis.  The information in  the  report  does  not
                       necessarily  reflect  the  opinion  of   the   Danish
                       Immigration  Service   or   the   UK   Home   Office.
                       Furthermore this report is not conclusive as  to  the
                       determination or merit of any  particular  claim  for
                       protection which will need to be  considered  on  its
                       individual facts.  Terminology  used  should  not  be
                       regarded  as  indicative  of   a   particular   legal
                       position.'

           35.    The introduction to the report sets out  the  methodology
           etc:

                       '... The terms of  reference  for  the  mission  were
                       drawn  up  by  DIS  and  the  UK   Home   Office   in
                       consultation with the Danish Refugee Appeals Board as
                       well as a Danish advisory group on COI.  The terms of
                       reference are included at Appendix C to this  report.



                 In the process  of  compiling  the  report  the  delegation
                 consulted with 29 sources comprising  representatives  from
                 international   organisations,   academics,    local    and
                 international,   non-governmental   organisations   (NGOs),
                 western embassies, journalists, an international consultant
                 and the Sudanese authorities.  The UK Embassy  in  Khartoum
                 provided  assistance  in  identifying  some   interlocutors
                 relevant  to  the  terms   of   reference.    The   sources
                 interviewed were selected by the delegation  based  on  the
                 expertise, merit and role relevant to the mission.   28  of
                 the sources were consulted during the missions to the three
                 countries.  One of the sources the  London  based  NGO  was
                 consulted in London.  The delegation also attempted to meet
                 Amnesty International and Human Rights  Watch  in  Nairobi.
                 However the HRW representative was  not  available  at  the
                 time of the delegation's visit whilst Amnesty International
                 declined the invitation to meet.'

           36.    I can only take the report at face value but what I  have
                 read satisfies me that the report has been based  on  sound
                 methodology using a wide range of appropriate sources.  The
                 various opinions generally both positive and  negative  are
                 set out in the joint report and a summary  which  had  been
                 agreed by the contributors appended to the report.  I  have
                 previously read the entire 122 page report carefully."

8    The judge thereafter at [37-38] sets  out  various  extracts  from  the
      CPIN Report. In particular, at [37], the judge quotes  from  paragraph
      2.3.10 of the CPIN:

           "25.3.10 Sources - primarily information  obtained  by  a  joint
           Danish-UK fact finding mission  of  early  2016,  an  Australian
           government  report  of  April  2016,   and   the   Foreign   and
           Commonwealth Office - indicate that there is a  significant  and
           established population of (non-Arab) Darfuris living in Khartoum
           and surrounding areas."

9    At [38] the judge quotes from paragraph  5.2.16  of  the  CPIN  report,
      which itself refers to  a  September  2016  letter  from  the  British
      Embassy Khartoum. At [39] the judge sets out certain passages from the
      DFAT report regarding its own methodology, and states at [40]:

           "I am satisfied that there were no obvious concerns  about  bias
           or methodology flaws  in  the  report.  Whilst  the  report  was
           commissioned in 2016, there is nothing to suggest  that  it  was
           not conducted independently by the  Australians  (i.e.  distinct
           from the joint report). I was  able  to  attach  weight  to  the
           conclusions in it; and it was another source of evidence tending
           to support the findings made in the joint report  and  commented
           by the British  Embassy.  There  were  therefore  three  broadly
           separate sources of information  underpinning  the  CPIN;  those
           sources themselves underpinned by different sources."

10   The judge then sets out at  [40-41]  certain  extracts  from  the  DFAT
      Report.  The judge's ultimate conclusion is that as set out at [43]:

           "43.   Looking at all of  this  evidence  in  the  round  it  is
           abundantly clear that the situation  in  Khartoum  has  markedly
           changed from that set out in the 2009 OGN which underpinned  AA.
           Whilst there may have been  some  updated  evidence  before  the
           Tribunal in MM clearly that 2009 OGN was a  key  constituent  to
           the decision making."

11   The judge ultimately found that there had been  a  material  change  of
      circumstances such that the guidance in AA  and  also  in  MM  was  no
      longer to be followed.  In the  absence  of  the  Appellant  having  a
      specific adverse profile in Sudan, the judge held  that  it  would  be
      reasonable for him to relocate to Khartoum and that he would not be at
      risk of serious harm there.

12   The Appellant appealed against  that  decision  in  grounds  of  appeal
      dated 16 August 2018, which argue that the  judge  erred  in  law,  in
      summary:

      (i) in failing  to  address  adequately  the  concern  that  the  CPIN
           repeatedly  referred  to   unnamed   sources,   supporting   its
           conclusions, in particular within the extract of  the  CPIN  set
           out in the judge's decision at  [37]  (Grounds,  para  8);   the
           primary  source  document  for  the  CPIN  (the   joint   Danish
           Immigration  Service  and  Home  Office  publication),  cited  a
           significant number of anonymous sources, as  was  apparent  from
           Appendix B of  the  Fact-Finding  Mission  report  (set  out  in
           slightly jumbled form in the Grounds of appeal at para  11,  but
           consideration of Appendix B of the report itself discloses  that
           16 of 29 sources were anonymous);

      (ii)    failing to direct himself in law in relation to  paragraph  40
           of the reported case of AAW (Expert evidence -  weight)  Somalia
           [2015] UKUT 00637 (IAC) which provided that:

                 " ... if the sources are not revealed,  and  not  even  the
                 notes kept of any  conversations  with  those  sources  are
                 produced, it is hard to see that very much  weight  can  be
                 afforded to views founded upon information provided by such
                 sources."

      (iii)   failing to have adequate regard  to  other  relevant  evidence
           within the CPIN report (Grounds, para 15); and

      (iv)    failing to have adequate regard to other  country  information
           contained within the appellant's  bundle  (Grounds,  incorrectly
           numbered paragraphs (1-3) following paragraph 24).

13   Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan  in  a
      decision dated 5 December 2018 finding at paragraph 3 that:

           "3.    It was at least arguable that the judge  failed  to  take
                 into account relevant  evidence  when  considering  whether
                 internal relocation to Khartoum would be unduly  harsh  and
                 law unreasonable [49 to 50].  The judge focused  solely  on
                 the Appellant's  personal  characteristics  without  taking
                 into account  the  background  evidence  showing  continued
                 discrimination and marginalisation of non-Arab Darfuris  in
                 Khartoum which is said to lead to  poor  living  conditions
                 with a lack of humanitarian support.  It is  arguable  that
                 the discrimination faced by non-Arab Darfuris  is  relevant
                 to a proper assessment of whether the  conditions  will  be
                 unduly harsh.

           4. Although it is not argued in the grounds a relevant point  of
                 international law might also be engaged  on  the  facts  of
                 this case.  It is arguable  that  a  proper  assessment  of
                 whether it is reasonable to  expect  non-Arab  Darfuris  to
                 relocate to Khartoum might include the fact that deliberate
                 forced displacement of large numbers of  non-Arab  Darfuris
                 has  been  a  key  feature  of  the  conflict  in   Darfur.
                 Paragraph 4.5.1 of the CPIN Sudan Non-Arab Darfuris (August
                 2017) notes that the International  Criminal  Court  issued
                 indictments  against  senior  officials   in   the   regime
                 including President Bashir.  Those indictments are  in  the
                 public domain and include charges  relating  to  the  crime
                 against  humanity  of  forcible  transfer   of   population
                 (Article 7(1)(d) Rome Statute).  In addition to  the  above
                 the question of whether internal relocation  is  reasonable
                 or in the particular context of Darfur is in itself an  act
                 of persecution might be sufficiently  relevant  to  justify
                 more detailed consideration by the Upper Tribunal."

14   A Rule 24 reply prepared by Senior  Presenting  Officer  Mr  Bates  was
      prepared, resisting the Appellant's appeal arguing that the judge  had
      adequately  directed  himself  in  law,   had   taken   all   material
      considerations into account and had arrived at a conclusion which  was
      open to him on the evidence available.

      Submissions

15   On behalf of the Appellant Mr Aziz relied upon the grounds  of  appeal,
      principally arguing the point that the judge failed to  have  adequate
      regard to the fact that much of the evidence quoted within  the  joint
      fact-finding report had been anonymous and that  the  judge  had  thus
      erred in law in attaching significant weight to it.  Mr Aziz  had  not
      in fact been aware of the point raised by Judge Canavan at paragraph 4
      of her grant of permission to appeal, not being in possession  of  the
      actual decision granting permission.  Mr Aziz argued  that  the  point
      raised by Judge Canavan was a Robinson obvious one but did not  expand
      his submissions in support of the issue.

16   Mr Tan acknowledged the recent promulgation  of  the  Upper  Tribunal's
      decision in the case of AAR & AA (Non-Arab Darfuris  -  return)  Sudan
      [2019] UKUT 282 (IAC), but argued that the present judge had not erred
      in law in making the decision at the time it was made. Mr  Tan  argued
      that Judge Canavan's point at paragraph 4 of her grant  of  permission
      to appeal  was  not  a  Robinson  obvious  point  and  should  not  be
      considered by the Tribunal.   In  relation  to  the  matters  actually
      contained within the application  for  permission  to  appeal  Mr  Tan
      argued that the judge had been  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
      content of the Home Office  CPIN  Report  and  the  joint  Danish  and
      British Fact-Finding Report and had come to a decision which was  open
      to him on that evidence.

17   No copy of AAW was presented to me but both parties  were  content  for
      me to have  regard  to  it  after  the  hearing.   Both  parties  also
      indicated that they  were  content  for  me  to  refer  to  any  other
      authority which spoke to the issue of the weight  to  be  attached  to
      anonymised evidence within a fact-finding report.

      Discussion

18   I  find,  notwithstanding  the  otherwise  conscientious  and  thorough
      manner in which  the  judge  prepared  his  decision,  the  judge  did
      materially err in law.

19   I have  set  out  above  the  passage  from  AAW  relied  upon  by  the
      Appellant, which advises caution  in  attaching  weight  to  anonymous
      evidence (although it is also to be recognised that within  the  joint
      fact-finding  report  there  are  notes  of  conversations  with   the
      interlocutors interviewed by the  fact-finding  mission,  set  out  at
      Annex A of the report).  I have  also  had  regard  to  the  following
      authorities relevant to this issue.

20   In the case of Sufi  and  Elmi  v  the  UK  8319/07  and  11449/07  the
      Strasbourg Court dealt as a preliminary issue  with  the  question  of
      what weight should be attached  to  country  reports  which  primarily
      relied on information provided by anonymous sources.  At paragraph 233
      the court held that:

           "233   ... where a  report  is  wholly  reliant  on  information
           provided by sources,  the  authority  and  reputation  of  those
           sources and the extent of their presence in  the  relevant  area
           will be relevant factors for the Court in assessing  the  weight
           to be attributed to their evidence.  The Court  recognises  that
           where there are legitimate security concerns, sources  may  wish
           to remain anonymous.  However, in the absence of any information
           about the nature of the  sources'  operations  in  the  relevant
           area, it will be virtually impossible for the  Court  to  assess
           their reliability.  Consequently,  the  approach  taken  by  the
           Court will depend on the consistency of the sources' conclusions
           with the remainder of  the  available  information.   Where  the
           sources'  conclusions  are   consistent   with   other   country
           information, their evidence  may  be  of  corroborative  weight.
           However,  the  Court  will  generally  exercise   caution   when
           considering   reports   from   anonymous   sources   which   are
           inconsistent with the remainder of the information before it."

21   Further in the case of CM  (Zimbabwe)  v  SSHD  [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1303
      [2014] Imm AR 326 Lord Justice Laws said  that  in  this  passage  the
      Strasbourg Court 'drew attention to what is with  respect  an  obvious
      truth, namely that anonymity of information is likely to  inhibit  the
      forensic possibility of challenging it' (paragraph 16)  but  that  was
      not a rule of evidence and that:


           "17.   There is no general rule at common law or inspired by the
           European  Convention  on  Human   Rights   that   uncorroborated
           anonymous material can never be relied on in a country  guidance
           case or any other case.  Sometimes that will  be  the  position.
           Whether or not it is so will depend on  all  the  circumstances.
           That is the approach taken by the Upper Tribunal in  this  case.
           Generally of course the effect  of  anonymity  will  go  to  the
           weight to be attached to the material in question and care  must
           always be taken in assessing the weight of such material."

22   Further in SSHD v MN and KY (Somalia) [2014] UKSC 30 the Supreme  Court
      considered a decision of the Tribunal to  receive  a  language  expert
      report  from  an  organisation  that  was  identified  but  where  the
      individuals who  had  written  the  report  were  not.  Lord  Carnwath
      described certain arguments advanced on behalf of the  respondents  to
      the  appeal  (Somali  nationals  making  protection  claims)  as  '...
      statements of high authority referring to the 'fundamental  principle'
      of judicial process that  other  than  in  exceptional  circumstances,
      witnesses are identified whether in  criminal  or  civil  proceedings'
      (paragraph 41).  Lord Carnwath also referred to rule 14 of  the   then
      applicable Asylum and Immigration  Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules  2005,
      which then gave the Upper Tribunal power to  make  orders  prohibiting
      disclosure of information (1) likely to lead to identification of "any
      person whom the Upper Tribunal considers should not be identified", or
      (2) likely to cause "serious  harm"  to  the  person  to  whom  it  is
      disclosed or "some other  person",  and  stated  that  this  rule  was
      'helpful as emphasising that, in  the  tribunals  as  in  the  courts,
      openness is the norm, and that there needs to be  special  reason  for
      departing from it, risk of serious  personal  harm  being  an  obvious
      example'.

23   I  find  that,  summarising  the  principles  derived  from  the  above
      authorities, that it  remains  appropriate  for  any  decision  maker,
      including  the  Tribunal,  to  consciously  consider,  when  assessing
      anonymous evidence:

      (i) any reasons given for its anonymity; and

      (ii)    that less weight should, potentially, be  given  to  anonymous
      evidence.

24   I find that the judge  erred  in  law  in  failing  to  consider  those
      matters adequately.

25   At page 8  of  the  fact  finding  report,  under  'Introduction',  and
      regarding the use of anonymous evidence, is the following:

           "The sources were asked how they wished  to  be  introduced  and
           quoted, and all sources are introduced and quoted  according  to
           their own wishes.  13 sources are  referred  to  by  their  name
           and/or the name of their organisation; in accordance with  their
           own request on this matter. 16 sources requested varying degrees
           of anonymity given sensitivities in their working environments."

26   I find that little information is  given  within  the  report  for  the
      reason that 16 out of  the  29  sources  quoted  were  anonymous,  and
      permitted to be so. It is questionable as  to  whether  the  assertion
      within the report that such sources  were  given  varying  degrees  of
      anonymity  on  the  basis   of   'sensitivities   in   their   working
      environment', demonstrates sufficiently, as per Sufi  and  Elmi,  that
      there were 'legitimate security concerns'. Further, again, as per Sufi
      and Elmi, in the absence of any information about the  nature  of  the
      sources' operations in  the  relevant  area,  'it  will  be  virtually
      impossible for the Court to assess their reliability'. The  judge  did
      not consider in any or adequate detail the reasons advanced within the
      report for more than half of the sources being given anonymity, or the
      overall effect on the weight to be given to the  report  that  such  a
      large proportion of interviewees were anonymous. This would have  been
      relevant to the judge's assessment of the weight to be attached to the
      conclusions within the CPIN report.

27   It is not suggested  that  no  weight  ought  to  be  attached  to  the
      evidence of such anonymous sources, and it may well be  that  had  the
      judge directed himself in law, in accordance with  the  principles  as
      set out in the above authorities, that he might have reached the  same
      opinion as to the weight to be attached overall to the contents of the
      CPIN and the joint fact-finding report. I am aware that the judge also
      referred to other evidence within the CPIN report originating from the
      British Embassy and from the DFAT report. However, I am satisfied that
      the judge's error of approach to the weight  to  be  attached  to  the
      joint fact finding report was material to the outcome of the appeal.

28   I find as a result of the failure by the judge  consider  properly  the
      reasons for anonymity, and to direct himself in law that caution ought
      to be applied to the giving  of  weight  to  such  evidence,  that  he
      materially misdirected himself in law.  I cannot be satisfied that the
      judge would inevitably have reached the  same  conclusion  as  to  the
      weight to be attached to that evidence, had he directed himself in law
      appropriately. I therefore find that the judge's error was material to
      the outcome  of  the  appeal.   I  therefore  set  aside  the  judge's
      decision.  It is not necessary, in those  circumstances,  to  consider
      the point raised by Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan.

      Remaking

29   I am invited by Mr Aziz to immediately  remake  the  decision  applying
      the guidance now provided in the reported case of AAR and AA.  In that
      decision it is clear that the Upper Tribunal had intended to treat the
      appeals of AAR and AA as a suitable vehicle for new  country  guidance
      on the issue of the safety of return to non-Arab  Darfuris  to  Sudan.
      However, for the reasons that are set out  within  the  decision,  the
      Upper Tribunal noted that from the early part of 2019 the human rights
      situation in Sudan had been volatile and  at  times  had  deteriorated
      (paragraph 24).  The Tribunal ultimately decided at  paragraph  29  as
      follows:

           "29.   After some discussion, in light of the volatility of  the
                 situation in Sudan, the  absence  of  the  cogent  evidence
                 needed to set aside existing Country Guidance and in  light
                 of AAR and AA having waited for an extensive period of time
                 for a final determination of their protection  claims,  the
                 Respondent  conceded  that  a   further   delay   was   not
                 appropriate and that the appeals should  be  determined  on
                 the basis of the  existing  Country  Guidance  cases.   The
                 Respondent accepted that this meant that the appeals had to
                 be allowed  where  the  Appellant's  profiles  as  Darfuris
                 brought them within the ratio of AA(Sudan)  and  MM(Sudan).
                 The Tribunal allows the asylum appeals of  AAR  and  AA  on
                 that basis.


           30.    The answer to the  Country  Guidance  question  that  was
                 originally asked in  these  appeals  is  as  follows.   The
                 situation in Sudan remains volatile  after  civil  protests
                 started in late  2018  and  the  future  is  unpredictable.
                 There is insufficient evidence currently available to  show
                 that  the  guidance  given  in   AA(Non-Arab   Darfuris   -
                 relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT  00056  and  MM(Darfuris)
                 Sudan CG [2015] UKUT 00010 (IAC) requires revision.   These
                 cases should still be followed."

30   Therefore in applying paragraph 30 of the decision  in  AAR  and  AA  I
      find that the Appellant, being a Sudanese national of non-Arab Darfuri
      (Berti) origin, falls within the ratio of AA (Sudan) and  MM  (Sudan).
      His appeal therefore falls to be allowed.

31   Notwithstanding the findings of the Tribunal within AAR and AA, it  has
      been necessary in the present appeal to determine whether or not Judge
      Shergill materially erred in law at the time that he made his decision
      in July 2018. This is because the Tribunal in  AAR  and  AA  does  not
      explicitly state that AA and MM were  to  have  been  applied  at  all
      material times since their promulgation.  Rather, the Tribunal  states
      that those country guidance cases continue to  apply  at  the  present
      time.  However, for reasons  given  above,  I  have  set  the  judge's
      decision aside and I have remade the  decision,  and  the  Appellant's
      appeal falls to be allowed.

      Decision

      The judge's decision involved the making of a material error of law.

      I set aside the judge's decision.

      I remake the decision, allowing the appellant's appeal.


Signed                     Date 6.11.19
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                     Date 6.11.19
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan

