
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06661/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17th April 2019                   |On 26 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     YT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. J Greer, Counsel instructed by Citizens Advice
                    Bureau (Bolton)
For the Respondent:    Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT"), and no application is made before me, as this a
      protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
      and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him. This direction applies amongst others to all
      parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
      of court proceedings.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Hillis promulgated on 23rd January 2019.  The underlying
      decision that was the subject of the appeal before FtT was the
      decision of the respondent dated 10th May 2018 to refuse the
      appellant's claim for international protection.


   3. The appellant is a national of Cameroon.  On 1st September 2017, the
      appellant was granted a business visa permitting him to enter the UK.
      He claims to have arrived in the UK on 8th October 2017, and on 24th
      November 2017 he claimed asylum. He claims to be at risk of being
      persecuted or ill-treated on removal to Cameroon as a homosexual man,
      who has come to the adverse attention of the authorities as a
      homosexual man.


   4. The FtT Judge refers at paragraph [6] of the decision to the evidence
      that was before him.  There was before the FtT, an appellant's bundle
      running to some 197 pages, that included a report from Dr John McNulty
      dated 29th November 2018.  At paragraphs [28] to [42], the FtT Judge
      sets out the evidence given by the appellant at the hearing of the
      appeal.  The Judge's findings and conclusions are set out at
      paragraphs [43] to [60] of the decision.  The FtT Judge found that the
      appellant is not credible and reliable in his account to be a gay man
      who has no interest whatsoever in women.  Furthermore, the FtT Judge
      concluded that the appellant has not come to the adverse attention of
      the Cameroon authorities as a gay man.


   5. The FtT Judge addressed the report of Dr McNulty at paragraph [52] of
      the decision.  The Judge stated that he accepts the contents of Dr
      McNulty's report that some marks of violence to the appellant's body,
      are consistent with torture and others are typical of the torture
      described by the appellant.  The Judge concluded that the report does
      not show, even to the lower standard, that the appellant was tortured
      due to being suspected to be a gay man.  The Judge concluded, at [53],
      that "... it is highly likely that the appellant was tortured due to
      his criminal activity which he initially sought to conceal in his
      account in Cameroon, and not as a suspected gay man.".


   6. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Haria on 12th February
      2019.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
      the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


   7. Before me, Mr McVeety confirmed that having had the opportunity of
      considering the decision of the FtT Judge, it is accepted by the
      respondent that the FtT Judge erred in his approach to the medical
      evidence.


   8. Having carefully considered the decision of the FtT Judge, I am
      satisfied that the FtT Judge fell into a legal error in the appraisal
      of the evidence.  I note in particular, the FtT Judge addressed the
      appellant's claim and reached his findings as to the credibility of
      the appellant's account concluding that his account was not credible,
      before he went on to examine the report of Dr McNulty.  That report
      noted that some marks of violence to the appellant's body, are
      consistent with his account of torture.  The medical report was
      therefore capable of lending some support to the appellant's claim,
      and the claim should have been considered in that light.  Adopting the
      correct approach, it may nevertheless have been open to the FtT Judge
      to find that the appellant is not a credible witness and to dismiss
      his appeal, but I cannot be satisfied that the Judge would have
      reached at the same conclusion, adopting the proper approach.  I
      cannot therefore conclude that the error is immaterial.


   9. Mr McVeety concedes, rightly in my judgment, that in the
      circumstances, the decision of the FtT cannot stand.  He concedes that
      the decision of the FtT contains a material error of law and should be
      set aside.


  10. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the First-tier
      Tribunal, or to re-make the decision myself.  As the Judge failed to
      adequately address the core of the appellant's claim, the matter will
      need to be heard afresh with no findings preserved.   I have decided
      that it is appropriate to remit this appeal back to the First-tier
      Tribunal, having taken into account paragraph 7.2 of the Senior
      President's Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.  In my view, in
      determining the appeal, the nature and extent of any judicial fact-
      finding necessary will be extensive.


  11. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


  12. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted to the FtT for a
      fresh hearing of the appeal with no findings preserved.


  13. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date          19th May 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia







TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                dated 19th May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

