
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06633/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 10 May 2017                            |On 16 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN

                                   Between

                                  miss z m
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Behbahani, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of Miss Z  M  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge who  dismissed  her  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision refusing asylum on 14 June  2016.   The  issue  as  Mr
    Tarlow says is a narrow one.  It is common  ground  I  think  that  she
    would be at real risk on return to Iran as is noted  by  the  judge  at
    paragraph 22 of her decision.  It is accepted by  the  respondent  that
    the appellant cannot return to Iran as she would  face  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution in that country.  The only  issue  is  whether  the
    appellant can seek protection in Canada, a country  in  which  she  has
    permanent residence.

2.   The judge considered the evidence on this.  He noted an email  exchange
    between the respondent and the Canadian Border Services and noted  from
    the Canadian  Government's  immigration  website  that  the  status  of
    permanent resident is not lost simply because the permanent  resident's
    care expires or the individual lives outside Canada  for  a  period  of
    time.  There was no evidence that this had  been  lost  and  the  judge
    agreed with the Secretary of State that the appellant had  a  right  of
    permanent residence and  could  be  returned  to  Canada  provided  the
    respondent could  issue  her  with  travel  documents.   That  was  the
    responsibility of the respondent and the judge went on to say:

         "If the handicap of an expired Iranian passport cannot be  overcome
         through discussion with the relevant Canadian and Iranian Embassies
         then the respondent will not be able to  remove  the  appellant  to
         Canada and will have to consider granting her some form of  refugee
         status."


     The judge then went on  to  consider  living  in  Canada  and  was  not
    satisfied that  the  appellant  could  not  return  to  Canada  on  the
    information before the judge and  as  she  had  a  right  of  permanent
    residence in that country, she cannot be a refugee.

3.   Permission to appeal was sought and  granted  on  the  basis  that  the
    judge had failed to adhere to the principle of finality in reaching her
    decision, failed to consider case law referred  to  such  as  Taylor  v
    Lawrence [2002] 2 AER 353 and had failed to consider key evidence which
    was in particular a  copy  of  an  email  enquiry  by  the  appellant's
    solicitors to the Canadian Embassy in London and the response that  she
    was required to have a valid passport in order to be able to travel  to
    Canada and give effect to the right of permanent  residence.   One  can
    see this from the bundle.  If you are a permanent  resident  of  Canada
    currently travelling outside Canada but not in possession  of  a  valid
    permanent residence card you must apply for a travel document permanent
    resident abroad before  returning  to  Canada.   However,  before  this
    application can be made you must have a valid passport and that is  the
    problem that the appellant faces in this case.

4.   Following an earlier adjournment after a hearing in February this  year
    the Secretary of State was directed  to  use  her  best  endeavours  to
    conclude enquiries with the Iranian Embassy as to the provision  of  an
    Iranian  passport  to  the  appellant.   That  has   proved   fruitless
    unfortunately and today Mr Tarlow argues that there is no error of  law
    in the judge's decision because the appellant is a  permanent  resident
    of Canada and as a consequence, as he says,  she  can  be  returned  to
    Canada if the issue  of  documentation  is  still  an  open  one.   The
    difficulty I think with this submission is that it  seems  sufficiently
    clear from the response of the Canadian authorities that the  appellant
    is required to have a valid passport in order to  give  effect  to  her
    right of permanent residence in Canada and that is precisely  something
    she cannot do on the evidence.  There is no indication that the Iranian
    authorities are going to be co-operative.  It seems from  Mr  Nath  who
    investigated that he did not  expect  any  response  from  the  Iranian
    authorities and I think therefore there is  force  in  both  the  point
    about the failure to consider key evidence properly and  the  issue  of
    finality.  The  appellant  cannot  be  expected  to  remain  in   limbo
    forevermore and as Mr  Behbahani  says  the  grant  of  status  is  not
    something that fixes the position forevermore if the  position  changes
    at some stage and it is open to the Secretary of  State  to  take  into
    account on the basis of active review the position but as matters stand
    it seems to me first that the  judge  did  materially  err  in  law  in
    concluding that the claim was not made out and that, as  a  consequence
    of that error, I substitute for the  judge's  decision  dismissing  the
    appeal a decision allowing the appeal under the Refugee Convention.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

Anonymity direction made.




[pic]


Signed                                  Date


Upper Tribunal Judge Allen




