
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06007/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 MARCH 2019                     |On 28 MARCH 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     TCG
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Dixon
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 4 September 1996 and is a female  citizen  of
    Afghanistan. She entered the United Kingdom  in  January  2016  claimed
    asylum in July 2017. Her protection claim was refused by the  Secretary
    of State on 28 April 2018. She  appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which, in a decision promulgated on  19  October  2018,  dismissed  the
    appeal. The appellant  now  appeals,  with  permission,  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 2. Both parties accept that the appellant is a Sikh  woman  and  that  her
    home area of Afghanistan is Khost Province. The judge  did  not  accept
    the appellant's claim that, whilst engaged to another man, she had  met
    a man from Russia, who was originally from Afghanistan, with  whom  she
    then eloped. The judge considered the risk to Sikhs in Afghanistan  and
    had decided not to depart from the existing country guidance of TG  and
    others (Afghanistan Sikhs persecuted) Afghanistan CG [2015] UKUT  00595
    (IAC). He found that there were no 'very significant obstacles' to  the
    appellant's private life continuing in Afghanistan (Paragraph 276ADE of
    HC 395 (as amended)).

    Credibility

 3. The appellant challenges the judge's assessment of her credibility. She
    argued as follows: The judge ignored historical  links  between  Russia
    and Afghanistan; it was not implausible that the appellant should  meet
    an Afghan who was living in  Russia.  The  judge  had  imposed  Western
    concepts of relationships/marriage onto the  appellant's  account.  The
    judge had failed to take account of the possibility of 'love  at  first
    sight.' It was not open to the judge at [65] to dismiss the appellant's
    account as 'lacking real depth.'

 4. I find that this ground of appeal lacks merit. In essence,  the  ground
    is no more than a disagreement with findings which  were  available  to
    the judge on the evidence. It may  be  the  case  that  the  judge  has
    underestimated  the  links  between   Russia   and   Afghanistan   when
    considering the plausibility of the appellant's account  but  the  fact
    remains that the judge has given a number  of  compelling  reasons  for
    rejecting the  reliability  of  that  account.  Before  commencing  his
    analysis credibility, the judge accepted the submission  of  Mr  Dixon,
    who appeared for the appellant before both Tribunals, that he should be
    careful not to consider the appellant's account 'through Western eyes.'
    I have no reason to suppose that he  ignored  this  self-direction.  As
    regards, 'love at first sight', I have no doubt the judge had regard to
    his own experience of human relations in reaching his findings of fact.
    I also consider that the  judge  did  not  err  by  characterising  the
    appellant's evidence as lacking 'real depth.' The  appellant's  witness
    statement is rather  brief  and  it  was  open  to  the  judge,  having
    considered all the evidence as he says he has, to find that the lack of
    detail in the appellant's account was an indication  that  the  account
    was not true or accurate.

    The Risks to Sikhs in Afghanistan

 5. Irrespective of the accuracy of the appellant's account of past events,
    she asserts that she would be exposed to a real risk  of  ill-treatment
    if returned to Afghanistan. Mr Dixon, although he  had  not  asked  the
    judge to depart from the country guidance of  TG,  submitted  that  the
    country guidance authority should be read in the light of new evidence,
    in particular recent  UNHCR  Guidelines  and  evidence  that  the  Sikh
    community in  Afghanistan  is  rapidly  shrinking;  a  European  Asylum
    Support Service report of June 2018 (which was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal) indicates  that  the  community  is  now  small  as  900
    individuals.

 6. At [70-71], the judge wrote:

         "The country guidance caselaw of TG makes clear that members of the
         Sikh  community  in  Afghanistan  do  not  face  a  real  risk   of
         persecution and ill-treatment such as to entitle them to a grant of
         international protection on the basis of their ethnic or  religious
         identity, per se. Neither can it be said that the cumulative impact
         of discrimination suffered by the Sikh community in  general  reach
         the threshold of persecution.

         Whilst I have taken into account the country information  contained
         within the appellant's bundles, I am not persuaded that it  carries
         enough probative force to persuade this Tribunal to depart from the
         country guidance caselaw in relation to the  Sikh  community  which
         was issued in 2016."

 7. Other than the further diminution in the size of  the  Sikh  community,
    the appellant offers no other evidence which would  indicate  that  the
    guidance of TG is now out of date and not to be followed.  The  problem
    with the evidence regarding the  size  of  the  community  is  that  it
    appears to be based upon general estimates rather than  hard  research.
    There seems little doubt that the community is  shrinking  rather  than
    growing but the rate of shrinkage or the current size of the  community
    is not at all clear. It is simply not possible  to  conclude  that  the
    judge erred in law by choosing to follow the  country  guidance  rather
    than to depart from it on the basis that  the  conclusion  in  TG  that
    Sikhs per se are at risk because their numbers have diminished. It  was
    clearly open to the judge,  having  properly  considered  the  evidence
    produced by the appellant, to decide to  follow  the  existing  country
    guidance.

 8. The appellant also relies on the comments made in TG  regarding  women,
    in particular. Reference is made in the country guidance to the lack of
    access of women to educational opportunities and employment  and  their
    forced dependence on a male guardian in order to access public  spaces.
    The Tribunal in TG does not, however, go so far  as  to  conclude  that
    Sikh women would be at risk generally. I am satisfied  that  the  judge
    has read the country guidance and has followed the advice contained  in
    it to consider the appeal on its specific facts.

    Paragraph 276ADE (vi): Very Significant Obstacles to Integration

 9. The appellant relied on the same  evidence  in  support  of  her  human
    rights claim. The judge did not accept that any Sikh family with  young
    children (the appellant has twins born in August 2016)  will  encounter
    'very significant obstacles' to integration in  Afghanistan.  He  found
    that family would not fall within the ambit of Paragraph 276ADE on  the
    basis of discrimination in the education system in Afghanistan.

10. I find that the judge has reached a conclusion available to him on  the
    evidence. Judge makes the valid point that much of  the  evidence  upon
    which the appellant relied  regarding  the  difficulties  in  accessing
    education, in particular difficulties for girls, apply  throughout  all
    communities in Afghanistan and not just to Sikhs. I cannot say that  in
    the judge's analysis is vitiated by legal error.

11. For the reasons I give above, the  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.






Notice of Decision

12. This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 22 March 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.












