


                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber                              Appeal Number:
PA/06127/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Bradford                  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated      |
|On: 1 November 2019                 |On: 5 November 2019                   |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     M M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Holmes, Counsel

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.

 1. I  make  an  anonymity  order  because  this  decision  refers  to  the
    respondent's international protection claim.


Background


 2. The respondent ('MM') is a citizen of Iraq, of  Kurdish  ethnicity  who
    originates from Tuz Khumatu.  These matters have always  been  accepted
    by the appellant ('the SSHD').


 3. The SSHD has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ('FTT') (Judge Mensah) sent on 8 August 2019, in which MM's appeal  was
    allowed  on  asylum  and  human  rights  grounds,  and   dismissed   on
    humanitarian protection ('HP') grounds.  The FTT  carefully  considered
    MM's evidence together with the country background evidence and country
    guidance including AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT
    212 (IAC), and reached the following findings.

       i) MM's claim that ISIS attempted to recruit him in his home area of
          Tuz Khumatu is not credible.


      ii) MM has been displaced from his home  area  by,  inter  alia,  the
          generalised violence there.  Although the SSHD submitted that the
          security situation in Tuz Khumatu had improved, the FTT  did  not
          accept that there was sufficiently cogent evidence to depart from
          the country guidance to the  effect  that  the  appellant  cannot
          safely return to his home area.

     iii) The FTT therefore went on to consider whether MM could internally
          relocate to Baghdad or the IKR and concluded that this  would  be
          unreasonable for a variety of reasons:
           a) MM does not speak Arabic (Baghdad);
           b) He does not have any family or connections in Baghdad or  the
              IKR;
           c) His family have been displaced from their home area and  will
              be unable to provide financial support;
           d) It is reasonably likely  that  MM's  documentation  has  been
              destroyed or is not accessible given the fact that ISIS  took
              control of Tuz and there  has  been  no  stable  solution  or
              recovery of infrastructure;
           e) MM will struggle to obtain employment.

Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 4. The SSHD relied upon two written grounds of appeal  and  permission  to
    appeal was granted on both.  I deal with each  ground  below,  together
    with the parties' submissions at the hearing before me.

Ground 1 - The FTT was not entitled to allow the appeal  under  the  Refugee
Convention

 5. The FTT clearly accepted that MM would be at  risk  in  his  home  area
    because  of  indiscriminate  violence  and  he  could  not  safely   or
    reasonably internally relocate for a variety of reasons.  The  FTT  did
    not identify a Convention reason for the harm that the appellant  would
    face.  It is clear that the FTT considered  MM  would  be  at  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence in his home area and it would not be reasonable
    to expect him to relocate for a variety of reasons.   In  his  rule  24
    notice Mr Holmes faintly submitted that the harm  the  appellant  would
    face would be perpetrated by a religious extremist organisation seeking
    to establish  a  theocratic  state,  and  as  such  both  religion  and
    political opinion apply as possible Convention reasons.  I  invited  Mr
    Holmes to expand on this but he merely relied upon the rule 24  notice.
    The situation facing civilians in many parts of Iraq is  complex.   The
    appellant's representatives did not make a meaningful effort to explain
    why a Convention reason was applicable  by  reference  to  the  country
    background  evidence  or  any  structured  legal  argument.   In  these
    circumstances, the FTT was not entitled to allow the appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and should have allowed it on HP grounds.   Mr  Diwnycz  agreed
    with this approach.  Mr  Holmes  also  agreed  that  if  there  was  no
    Convention reason identified, the correct course would be to allow  the
    SSHD's appeal on asylum grounds but remake the decision by allowing the
    appeal on HP and human rights grounds.

Ground 2 - The FTT failed to address the options available to  MM  in  order
to obtain a CSID

 6. The head note in AAH includes the following:


           "1.       Whilst  it  remains  possible  for  an  Iraqi national
           returnee (P) to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to do so, or
           do so within  a  reasonable  time  frame,  will  depend  on  the
           individual circumstances. Factors to be considered include:


              i.  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,   or
                 information about the location of his entry  in  the  civil
                 register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates  or
                 an expired CSID would all be of substantial assistance. For
                 someone in possession of one or more of these documents the
                 process should be straightforward. A laissez-passer  should
                 not be counted for these  purposes:  these  can  be  issued
                 without any other form of ID being available,  are  not  of
                 any assistance in 'tracing back' to the family  record  and
                 are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


             ii. The location of the relevant civil registry office.  If  it
                 is in an area held,  or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                 operational?


            iii. Are there male family members who would be able and willing
                 to  attend  the  civil  registry  with   P?   Because   the
                 registration system is patrilineal it will be  relevant  to
                 consider  whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                 father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of  his  CSID
                 would be able to assist in locating the original  place  of
                 registration of the individual's mother, and from there the
                 trail would need to be  followed  to  the  place  that  her
                 records were transferred upon marriage.  It  must  also  be
                 borne in mind that a significant number of IDPs in Iraq are
                 themselves undocumented; if that is the case it is unlikely
                 that they could be of assistance. A woman  without  a  male
                 relative to assist  with  the  process  of  redocumentation
                 would face very significant obstacles in that officials may
                 refuse to deal with her case at all."


     7. AAH makes it clear at [100] that a critical  part  of  the  enquiry
        will be what documents the individual in question has or  might  be
        expected to get.   The  FTT  judge  clearly  had  the  AAH  country
        guidance and her own adverse factual  findings  in  mind  when  she
        accepted that MM's documentation has either been destroyed or would
        be inaccessible.  Notwithstanding the FTT's rejection of MM's claim
        that ISIS attempted to recruit him and he feared his uncle, the FTT
        found that MM's home area continued to be ravaged by its occupation
        by ISIS and his family members there would  be  unable  to  assist.
        The FTT was entitled to conclude that MM does not have a  CSID  and
        would not be able to engage the necessary  support  of  any  family
        members to get one.


     8. Given these circumstances, when pressed,  Mr  Diwnycz  agreed  that
        ground two merely disagreed with the FTT's findings  of  fact.   He
        was right to do so. Ground two is dismissed  because  it  does  not
        identify an error of law.


Decision

     9. The FTT should not have allowed the appeal on  asylum  grounds  but
        was entitled to make the findings of fact it did.


    10. I remake the  decision  by  allowing  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
        protection and human rights grounds only, and dismissing the appeal
        on asylum grounds.



Signed: UTJ Plimmer                              Dated: 1 November 2019
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
