
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06098/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 7 September 2017                   |On 3 October 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     A E
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Manley instructed by Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  Appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was  born  on  [  ]  1960.   He
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum on 1 March 2005.  That
    claim was refused on 27  April  2005  and  his  subsequent  appeal  was
    dismissed in June 2005.  The appellant subsequently  left  the  UK  but
    returned on 2 March 2011 and made a further claim for asylum which  was
    refused on 23  March  2011.   Further  submissions  were  rejected  and
    following  judicial  review  proceedings,  the  appellant's  claim  was
    reconsidered and refused in a decision on 20 March 2016.

 3.  The  appellant  appealed  against  that  decision  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The basis of his claim was that he was a member of the  Beja
    Congress and that he had continued  his  political  activities  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 4. The appeal was heard by  Judge  O'Brien  on  25  October  2016.   In  a
    decision promulgated on 5 December 2016, Judge  O'Brien  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.  In particular, he  did  not  accept
    that the appellant had been a member of the Beja Congress and was, as a
    result, at risk on return.  Further, whilst the judge accepted that the
    appellant had been involved in some political sur place  activities  in
    the UK, he found that they did not create a real risk of persecution on
    return.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 5. The appellant sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission was initially refused by the First-tier Tribunal but  on  23
    March 2017 the Upper  Tribunal  (DUTJ  Taylor)  granted  the  appellant
    permission to appeal.

 6. On 31 March 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice seeking
    to uphold the judge's decision.

Discussion

 7. Mr Manley relied upon the two grounds of appeal.  He submitted that the
    judge had been wrong to apply Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1 in finding, in
    accordance with the earlier Tribunal's findings, that the appellant had
    not established his involvement with the Beja  Congress  prior  to  him
    leaving Sudan including his claimed arrest and  detention.   Mr  Manley
    submitted that the judge had been plainly wrong not to have regard to a
    letter dated 10 June 2015 from the Beja Congress UK and Ireland,  which
    had been authenticated by the expert Mr Verney who gave  oral  evidence
    before the judge, attesting to the appellant's membership of  the  Beja
    Congress.  Secondly, in rejecting the appellant's claim based upon  sur
    place activities, the judge had failed properly to consider the  expert
    evidence of Mr Verney.  Finally, Mr Manley submitted that the judge had
    failed properly to deal with the appellant's claim to be at risk simply
    as a failed asylum-seeker.

 8. The judge dealt with both the evidence from the Beja Congress and  that
    of Mr Verney at paras 33-34 as follows:

         "33.     ... I was provided with 2 letters from  Beja  Congress  UK
             and Ireland, in each of which it is said 'I wish  to  reaffirm
             [the appellant's] membership of the Beja Congress since  1980.
             He took up membership in Port Sudan that year.'   However,  in
             each  letter,  the  author  is  unable  to   provide   contact
             information for members of Beja Congress that would be able to
             confirm that membership.  Each  letter  refers  to  particular
             increased activities since 2012.

         34.  Therefore, the new  evidence  of  the  Appellant's  activities
             before  he  left  Sudan   is   vague,   unparticularised   and
             unsubstantiated by evidence from people with direct  knowledge
             of this participation or activity.  Moreover, it would  appear
             from Mr Verney's report  that  the  Appellant  contacted  Beja
             Congress immediately after  arrival  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             Whilst it is said  that  they  did  not  write  him  a  letter
             straightaway  because  they  waited  until  they   were   able
             subsequently to identify him through mutual  connections,  the
             Appellant described to Mr Verney how he met with two  UK-based
             Beja  Congress  officials.   It  is   entirely   inexplicable,
             therefore, why this evidence was not available and  could  not
             reasonably  have  been  available   at   the   last   hearing.
             Therefore, applying Devalseelan, I  treat  as  conclusive  the
             findings of Immigration Judge Nicholson regarding  the  extent
             of the Appellant's involvement in Beja Congress before he left
             Sudan and  also  whether  he  was  arrested  and  detained  as
             result."

 9. Consequently, in para 35 the judge concluded:

         "I reject the Appellant's claim to have been a recruit for the Beja
         Congress in Sudan."

10. Mr Manley submitted that in para 34 the judge had been wrong to find it
    was "inexplicable" why the evidence from the Beja Congress official had
    not been available earlier and could not reasonably have been available
    at the last hearing.  He submitted that there was clear evidence before
    the judge that the appellant had approached the Beja  Congress  UK  and
    Ireland but that, at the time of the previous hearing,  they  had  been
    unable to produce the evidence that they now did as they  were  seeking
    to verify the appellant's political affiliation.  Mr Manley relied upon
    the evidence (somewhat unusually  including  oral  evidence)  from  the
    eminent and well-respected country expert, Mr Verney who had spoken  to
    the officials and confirmed that the letters were genuine and  attested
    to the appellant's affiliation to the Beja Congress.

11. In my judgment, there is no answer to Mr Manley's  submissions.   There
    was clearly an explanation why the evidence  had  not  previously  been
    available at the earlier hearing.  The new evidence could not simply be
    dismissed on the basis that the judge did not accept that there was  no
    explanation for it not being  produced  earlier.   Added  to  that,  Mr
    Verney, who is a well-respected and well-known expert  in  relation  to
    Sudan, authenticated the letters.  Their content was relevant  both  to
    the appellant's credibility and to the specifics of his account to have
    suffered persecution as a result of being a member of the Beja Congress
    and, of course, thereafter to his political involvement in the UK.

12. As Mr Manley pointed out, the rule 24 notice did not seek to argue that
    if this were an error it was not material.  I  did  not  understand  Mr
    Richards in his oral submissions to seek to make that argument  either.
    The evidence was relevant and, potentially,  significant  in  assessing
    the appellant's asylum claim.  The judge's  reasons  for  rejecting  it
    and, perhaps over-rigidly applying Devaseelan and creating "conclusive"
    findings, together with his failure to properly  consider  Mr  Verney's
    report amounted to an error of law which was, in my judgment,  material
    to the judge's adverse factual findings.

13. In my judgment, the error taints both the findings in relation  to  the
    appellant's claimed account of political involvement in Sudan  as  well
    as in relation to his claimed political involvement in the UK.

14. In these circumstances, the judge's decision and adverse findings  were
    flawed and cannot stand.  The appeal must be reheard de novo including,
    although the claim may have limited prospect of success, on  the  basis
    (if all other factual finding are against the appellant) that he  is  a
    failed asylum seeker.

Decision

15. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal involved the making of a material  error
    of law.  The decision cannot stand and is set aside.

16. Having regard to the nature and extent of  fact-finding  required,  and
    having regard to para 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement,
    the proper disposal of this appeal is that it be remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other  than  Judge
    O'Brien.



                                 Signed

                                                                 [pic]

                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date: 28 September 2017







