
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/06267/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |       Decision & Reasons           |
|                                       |Promulgated                         |
|On 23 January 2018                     |       On 19 February 2018          |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS

                                   Between

                                    m a i
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against  a  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Easterman promulgated on 11  August  2017  dismissing  the  Appellant's
    appeal against a decision of the Respondent dated 14 June 2017 refusing
    a protection claim.


2.   The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born  on  3  July  1981.   He
    entered the United Kingdom in February  2011  as  a  Tier  4  (General)
    Student.  On 5 December 2012  he  made  an  application  as  a  Tier  1
    (Entrepreneur) which was refused on 3 May 2013.  He  lodged  an  appeal
    against this decision which was subsequently withdrawn.  The  Appellant
    made a further application for leave to remain  as  a  Tier  4  migrant
    which was refused on 9 September 2014.  At  this  point  deception  was
    alleged by the Respondent: it was said that the Appellant had made  use
    of a 'proxy tester' in securing an English  language  certificate  that
    was submitted in support of his earlier  application.  On  16  November
    2014 the Appellant was detained.  However,  he  was  granted  temporary
    admission on 22 December 2014.  By the 29 February 2016 he was  treated
    as an absconder because he had failed to report.  On 21  December  2016
    he  was  encountered  working  unlawfully.  On  27  December  2016  the
    Appellant claimed asylum.


3.   The Appellant's application for asylum was characterised by the  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  as  essentially  being   based   on   "political
    difficulties in Bangladesh" (paragraph 10).   These  difficulties  were
    said to result from his own political involvement,  and  also  in  part
    because he had been in a long running land dispute  with  cousins  over
    land inherited from his father - it  was  said  that  his  cousins  had
    connections and support with influential members of the  Awami  League.
    The Appellant claimed that his opponents had made a false case  against
    him in Bangladesh, and he feared the consequences of such  accusations.
    The false case dates back to  events  in  2010  and  a  time  when  the
    Appellant had been studying in Dhaka.  The Appellant fears  persecution
    at the hands of his cousins and their associates in the  Awami  League,
    and, separately, members  of  the  Awami  League  because  of  his  own
    political activities.


4.   In the premises then, it may  be  seen  that  the  Appellant's  claimed
    difficulties date back to 2010.  Manifestly it is  problematic  to  the
    Appellant's case that he made  no  mention  of  any  such  difficulties
    notwithstanding  the  refusal  of  applications  in  2013  and  2014  -
    including when detained in 2014. It is to  be  recalled  that  he  then
    'went to ground' in the United Kingdom rather than pursuing protection.


5.   It also seems plain and obvious from the materials on file  that  there
    are difficulties in respect of the Appellant's case of feared political
    persecution because of his inability to articulate the  nature  of  the
    circumstances of his claimed current fear  during  the  course  of  his
    asylum interview.  At questions 68-70 the Appellant was unable to  name
    any of the people involved in the Awami League whom he  said  might  do
    him harm. He also appeared to be largely unfamiliar with the details of
    the charges supposedly brought against him. He was  asked  "What  crime
    were you accused of committing?", to which he replied - "Mainly as  far
    as I am concerned my representative told me that  it  was  robbery  and
    destruction of houses.  Criminal damage." (question 99). However,  such
    accusations are very different from those that were put at  the  centre
    of his claim before the First-tier Tribunal (and in turn the  challenge
    to the Upper Tribunal), which emphasised that the  Appellant  had  been
    accused of  attempted  murder.  The  Appellant  was  thereby  seemingly
    unfamiliar at interview with the supporting materials in respect of the
    charges that were at the core of his case. Such  seeming  unfamiliarity
    with his own case is inevitably significantly problematic to  his  task
    of ensuring that his account was believed even at  the  lower  standard
    applicable in asylum cases.
6.   The Respondent indeed did not accept the  Appellant's  application  for
    protection, and refused it for  reasons  set  out  in  a  'reasons  for
    refusal' letter ('RFRL') dated 14 June 2017.


7.   The Appellant appealed to the IAC.


8.   The appeal was dismissed for  reasons  set  out  in  the  Decision  and
    Reasons of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.


9.   The Judge in a detailed decision  has  set  out  with  plain  care  the
    germane aspects of the Appellant's narrative account and his supporting
    documents.  Before the First-tier Tribunal  the  Appellant's  narrative
    account included very detailed references to his political  involvement
    - taking up over 7 pages of his  witness  statement.  Such  detail  was
    advanced notwithstanding that at his asylum interview the Appellant had
    stated in terms that he was not a member of any political party.  Also,
    by the time of the appeal hearing he was able to offer  names  for  his
    would-be political persecutors.


10.  Ultimately the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant had  offered  a  credible  account  and  concluded  that  the
    documents  that  he  had  provided  in  support  of  his  account  were
    "fabricated evidence" (paragraph 88).  It is also manifestly clear that
    the Judge struggled to get a coherent account  from  the  Appellant  in
    respect of  many  significant  aspects  of  his  claim  notwithstanding
    questions being put to him repeatedly: see for  example  at  paragraphs
    37, 40, 41, and 87.


11.  The Appellant applied for permission to appeal  which  was  granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin on 1 November 2017.


12.  The Grounds of Appeal essentially raise two  bases  of  challenge.   It
    was considered arguable by Judge Shimmin that Judge Easterman had erred
    in not applying the case of Singh  and  others  v  Belgium  (33210/11).
    Judge Shimmin also considered it arguable that  the  Judge  had  "erred
    materially by drawing an adverse credibility finding on the basis  that
    since the appellant had an alibi he was not likely to be implicated  in
    the charge against him".


13.  I address the latter matter first.  The context  is  that  the  charges
    that  the  Appellant  claims  to  have  been  brought  against  him  in
    Bangladesh relate to matters that had taken place at a time when he had
    been elsewhere in the country and therefore  could  not  possibly  have
    been involved.  The relevant paragraph in the Decision is paragraph 85.
     The Judge says this:

         "Of course, I accept that it is not unknown in Bangladesh for false
         cases to be raised against family rivals  or  political  opponents.
         In this case, there are a large number of people allegedly  charged
         with doing an act which according to the Appellant occurred when he
         was in Dhaka.  It does not seems plausible to  me,  even  with  the
         Bangladesh judicial system in the state that it  is,  according  to
         the background evidence, that enemies of the Appellant would be  so
         foolish as to falsely name him in an event which he could not  have
         attended, if he was active in the home area around election  times,
         there must have been many events that they could have  accused  him
         of being involved in.  It makes little or no sense that they should
         choose to involve him in an incident, where  he  simply  could  not
         have been present".


14.   The  grounds  of  challenge  plead  that  the  Judge  had  in   effect
    misunderstood  the  nature  of  being  accused  falsely  of  crimes  in
    Bangladesh. It was said that the purpose of such cases is to harass and
    intimidate people, and drive them away from their locality or country -
    not necessarily to obtain their conviction.  It was argued that it  may
    well be the case that in due course a person would be  able  to  acquit
    themselves of any such charges, but it was the harassment and the  risk
    of detention and  ill-treatment  during  detention  that  provided  the
    'teeth' of such a mechanism.  It was submitted that the Judge seemingly
    misunderstood the nature of false cases.


15.  I do not accept that  submission.   It  seems  to  me  that  the  Judge
    expressly recognised that such a mechanism might be used against rivals
    or political opponents, and inherent in such recognition  is  that  the
    Judge understood the effectiveness of such a strategy.  What the  Judge
    was saying, however, was that in his evaluation on the  facts  of  this
    particular case it was not plausible that somebody wishing to use  such
    a strategy to do harm to the Appellant would implicate him  in  a  case
    that he could so readily answer.  If somebody genuinely wished to visit
    harm upon the Appellant by bringing into play the organs or  mechanisms
    of the State against the Appellant, then  it  would  be  reasonable  to
    expect that any false allegations made would be more difficult to  deal
    with or defend.


16.  In my judgment it was entirely legitimate of the Judge to  have  regard
    to the unlikeness of an enemy constructing such a flimsy  case  against
    the Appellant, and to factor that into his overall consideration of the
    Appellant's credibility (including the  overall  consideration  of  the
    credibility of the supporting documents provided by the Appellant).  In
    any event, it seems to me  that  the  challenge  does  not  in  reality
    identify anything that might be considered to be an error of law: it is
    essentially a disagreement with the reasoning process and an attempt to
    re-argue the case.


17.  The primary ground of challenge relied upon is in respect of  the  case
    of Singh and others v Belgium.


18.  I note that the Appellant's supplementary bundle before the  First-tier
    Tribunal included a copy of the decision in Singh, and the  Appellant's
    Skeleton Argument before the First-tier  Tribunal  in  referencing  the
    case stated "The case potentially signals the end of the unedifying era
    of Tanveer Ahmed the case deciding the documents stand  and  fall  with
    general credibility of the document holder".  It  is  unfortunate  that
    that the Skeleton Argument made no reference to either of the cases  of
    MJ (Singh v Belgium: Tanveer Ahmed unaffected) Afghanistan [2013]  UKUT
    00254 (IAC) or NA (UT Rule 45: Singh v Belgium) Iran [2014] UKUT  00205
    (IAC), which very clearly indicate that the era of  Tanveer  Ahmed  had
    far from come to an end, but that the case  of  Tanveer  Ahmed  was  in
    substance unaffected by the decision of Singh v Belgium.


19.   MJ,  as  its  case  title  suggests,  considered  Tanveer  Ahmed   was
    unaffected. I note in particular that paragraph 35 of Tanveer Ahmed was
    cited with approval: "In the absence of  a  particular  reason  on  the
    facts of an individual case, a decision by the Home Office not to  make
    enquiries,  produce  in-country  evidence  relating  to  a   particular
    document or scientific evidence should not give rise to any presumption
    in favour of an individual claimant or against the Home Office". MJ was
    approved in NA, which also addressed  the  power  of  the  Tribunal  to
    direct the Respondent to undertake enquiries.


20.  I have also noted paragraph 196 of the UNHCR Handbook,  which  is  also
    referenced in the Grounds of Appeal.  However, this is more  applicable
    in respect of obtaining documentary evidence rather than methodology of
    evaluation: "...a person fleeing from persecution will have  arrived...
    very frequently even without personal documents"; "...it may be for the
    examiner to use all the means at his disposal to produce the  necessary
    evidence...".


21.  The ground of challenge in my judgement is  inchoate.  It  was  pleaded
    that "the Respondent had plenty of time to make  enquiries  as  to  the
    genuineness of [the Appellant's] case", and it was submitted that there
    was a shared burden of proof. It  was  said  that  it  was  "unfair  to
    dismiss the documents pertaining his criminal  case  without  examining
    their authenticity". I invited Mr Reza to articulate precisely what  it
    is that he considered the Judge should have done in light  of  Singh  v
    Belgium, and in light of the fact that the Respondent had not conducted
    her own specific investigation into the documents of the Appellant.  No
    meaningful suggestion was forthcoming.


22.  It was the case that the Appellant had not requested an adjournment  in
    order that a Direction might be given to the Respondent to pursue  such
    enquiries, and in the circumstances it is difficult to see what it  was
    that the First-tier Tribunal Judge was expected to  do  other  than  to
    determine the appeal on the evidence before him  by  reference  to  the
    applicable principles  and  case  law  -  which  necessarily  meant  by
    reference to the case of Tanveer Ahmed.  Indeed, that is  exactly  what
    the Judge did.


23.  It also seems to me in the circumstances that I have adverted to  above
    that it is absolutely clear why the  Respondent  did  not  consider  it
    necessary to run individual checks on the supporting documents provided
    by the Appellant in respect of the claim to be  the  subject  of  false
    accusations and charges in Bangladesh.  The  Appellant's  asylum  claim
    was littered with problematic issues together with  a  lack  of  detail
    such that it was not necessary to go any further  than  the  Respondent
    did in determining the application. In my judgment Judge Easterman  was
    entirely right in observing in the course of his  Decision  that  there
    was no justification to pursue further  enquiries  in  respect  of  the
    documents - "...in my view [Singh] does not apply to  these  documents"
    (paragraph 82). Moreover, and more particularly,  Judge  Easterman  was
    entirely correct thereafter to go on to consider the case applying  the
    usual and established Tanveer Ahmed approach.


24.  The conclusions thus reached by the Judge were entirely sustainable  on
    the basis of the evidence before him and the analysis set  out  in  the
    body of the Decision. Indeed it seems to me not only was  the  Decision
    sustainable but it was one in respect  of  which  the  Appellant  could
    hardly have been surprised.


Notice of Decision

25.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained no error of  law  and
    accordingly stands.


26.  The appeal remains dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:                                 Date: 15 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
