
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06614/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                            |On 15 January 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                   mr a s
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Holmes, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P Solanki of Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild
                    & Dyer Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. In this decision the appellant  is  the  Secretary  of  State  and  the
    respondent is Mr S.  However for the purposes of this decision I  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal,  where  the
    appellant was Mr S.  Mr S is a citizen of Albania,  born  on  22  April
    1999.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against the  decision  of
    the  respondent,  dated  29  June  2017   to   refuse   the   appellant
    asylum/humanitarian protection.  In a decision and reasons  promulgated
    on 24 August 2017, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Miles  allowed  the
    appellant's appeal on protection grounds.  The appellant in  this  case
    is the Secretary of State and the respondent is Ms S.  However I  refer
    to the parties as they were before the First-tier  Tribunal  where  the
    appellant was Mr S.

 2. The Secretary of State applied for permission to appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal had failed  to  have
    regard to the country guidance case of  EH  (blood  feuds)  Albania  CG
    [2012] UKUT 00349 (IAC) and in particular at head note  3  of  EH.   It
    states:

         "The Albanian state has taken steps to  improve  state  protection,
         but in areas where Kanun law predominates (particularly in northern
         Albania) those steps do not yet provide sufficiency  of  protection
         from Kanun-related  blood-taking  if  an  active  feud  exists  and
         affects the individual claimant.  Internal relocation to an area of
         Albania  less  dependent  on  the  Kanun  may  provide   sufficient
         protection, depending on the reach, influence,  and  commitment  to
         prosecution of the feud by the aggressor clan."

 3. It was further submitted that at [10.15]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    determination the judge considered internal relocation  but  failed  to
    consider the position of the P clan and that there was nothing  in  the
    determination to suggest that they had sufficient reach, influence,  or
    commitment to the feud to  pursue  the  appellant  into  an  area  less
    dependent on the Kanun.

Error of Law - Discussion

 4. It was Ms Holmes' submission that there was an error on the part of the
    judge to not consider the country guidance but specifically, as already
    highlighted, that there was nothing  in  the  determination  about  the
    reach and influence of the P clan.  Ms Holmes relied on paragraph 70 of
    EH which confirmed that:

         "A crucial factor in establishing whether internal relocation is  a
         real possibility is the geographical and  political  reach  of  the
         aggressor clan: where that clan has government connections, locally
         or more widely, the requirement to transfer  civil  restoration  to
         any area, as set out at 2.4.4 above, would appear  to  obviate  the
         possibility of 'disappearing' in another part  of  the  country.  A
         crucial factor in establishing whether  internal  relocation  is  a
         real possibility is the geographical and  political  reach  of  the
         aggressor  clan:   where  that  clan  has  government  connections,
         locally  or  more  widely,  the  requirement  to   transfer   civil
         registration to a new area, as set out at 2.4.4 above, would appear
         to obviate the possibility of 'disappearing' in another part of the
         country, and would be likely to drive the male members of a  victim
         clan to self-confinement  in  the  home  area  as  an  alternative.
         Whether internal relocation is reasonable in any particular  appeal
         will always be a question of fact for the fact-finding Tribunal."

 5. This was a  case  where  the  respondent  had  not  accepted  that  the
    appellant was credible in relation to the blood feud.   However,  in  a
    careful decision, Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Miles  gave  cogent
    reasons why he found the appellant credible taking into account all  of
    the evidence including an  expert  report.   Those  findings  of  fact,
    including the reliance on the expert report, are not challenged.

 6. It is of note that  the  judge  took  into  account  and  accepted  the
    appellant's account of events including that the blood feud started  in
    2010 when the appellant was 11 and the appellant's cousin in April 2010
    wounded and paralysed a member of the P family.  It was  accepted  that
    the appellant's brother was shot at and that his cousin's family  moved
    to Belgium as did the appellant and  his  mother  and  the  appellant's
    siblings.  This appellant and his family  claimed  asylum  in  Belgium.
    However they returned to Albania when  that  application  was  refused.
    The appellant indicates that he lost contact with  his  uncle  and  his
    family.  When they returned to Albania the  appellant  and  his  sister
    went back to school and understood that they were safe under Kanun  law
    as the appellant was underage and his sister and mother  were  safe  as
    females.  The appellant said that his brother did not return to  school
    and remained in semi-confinement at home and it was then  that  he  was
    shot at after they came back from  Belgium.   The  appellant  indicates
    that his sister also disappeared about one year after they returned  to
    Albania and it was believed that she was kidnapped but the police could
    not find anything.  The appellant does not know who was responsible for
    her disappearance.  The appellant then left Albania in 2015 because  he
    said that he was in fear of the blood feud and also because of violence
    by his father and life had become extremely  difficult  for  him.   The
    appellant maintained both that his father would  take  revenge  against
    him and kill him, as the appellant had offended his honour  by  leaving
    Albania, but also the appellant feared the P family, particularly as he
    was now over 18 and potentially a target for their revenge.

 7. I am satisfied that the First-tier Tribunal Judge gave  cogent  reasons
    both for the positive credibility findings, which are  not  challenged,
    and for his findings in relation to risk on return.  Although I  accept
    that the judge did not  specifically  refer  by  name  to  the  country
    guidance case of EH (above) it was not  disputed  that  that  case  was
    before the First-tier Tribunal including in the appellant's bundle  and
    that it was addressed  at  length  in  the  skeleton  argument  of  the
    appellant's representative.  The First-tier Tribunal, at  [6]  referred
    to the documents before the Tribunal in the bundles and in addition  at
    [8] referring to the closing submissions which included, I  accept  and
    Ms Holmes did  not  dispute,  references  by  Counsel  to  the  country
    guidance (and Counsel provided her verbatim note from the hearing).

 8. Whilst failure to apply country guidance case law is an error  of  law,
    it is not the case that such guidance must be cited in each  and  every
    instance (EA v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 10 applied).

 9. The country guidance  required  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to  consider
    whether an active blood feud that exists affects the appellant and that
    involves considering the history of the  alleged  feud,  including  the
    notoriety of the original killings, the numbers killed and  the  degree
    of commitment by the aggressor clan to the blood feud.   At  paragraphs
    [10.5] to  [10.8]  and  [10.10]  to  [10.12]  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    considered the history of the feud  in  some  considerable  detail  and
    considered  the  evidence  before  the  Tribunal,  including   of   the
    appellant's profile as a target given the history of difficulties  that
    his family experienced and given his approaching the age  of  18.   The
    judge also considered and made findings in relation to the shooting and
    that his brother went into hiding.  The judge considered the length  of
    time since the last difficulties with the feud at [10.8],  [10.12]  and
    [10.16], then going on to consider the ability of the aggressor clan to
    locate the appellant  in  the  judge's  consideration  at  [10.17]  and
    [10.19].

10. The latter issue was the key issue before me; it is evident  the  judge
    had the relevant jurisprudence in mind and applied the country guidance
    rationale, in his careful consideration of  the  issues.   The  central
    issue that remains therefore, is  whether  the  judge  made  sufficient
    findings as to the reach, influence and commitment  to  persecution  by
    the aggressor clan.

11. I have considered that the First-tier Tribunal gave significant  weight
    to the expert report of Antonio Younger dated 24 July 2017.  This  runs
    to 72 pages and the judge specifically notes, at [10.17]  that  he  has
    attached weight to Ms Young's expert evidence in relation to relocation
    in particular:

         "In terms of relocation within Albania Ms  Young  states  that  the
         appellant has reason to be fearful of returning anywhere in Albania
         which is a small country with a population of less than  one  third
         of that of London.  In Albania both the rural and urban populations
         are based on networks of kin and  neighbours,  in  which  literally
         everyone knows everyone.  Because of a high  reliance  on  personal
         family networks of support, any Albanian person would be  generally
         highly visible if dislocated from the home place.  Not only  is  it
         difficult to integrate and settle somewhere not going that previous
         existing positive personal contacts ties, but  the  whereabouts  of
         anyone is always easily  identified  [sic].   People  are  socially
         positioned through enquiries  and  identities  are  hard  to  hide.
         Furthermore, the law requires  that  people  moving  into  an  area
         register at civil  registry  office.   Such  registration  is  only
         possible when producing relevant documentation from the last  place
         of residence.  The 2013 OGN  noted  that  many  persons  could  not
         provide this proof and thus lacked access  to  essential  services.
         However, without being able to make this registration it  would  be
         impossible for the appellant to access any kind of social  benefits
         or financial  support.   Information  that  a  former  resident  is
         registering elsewhere is easily transmitted by word-of-mouth,  thus
         easing locating [sic] of a blood feud target.  On relocating to any
         of area  of  Albania,  there  is  the  legal  requirement  that  an
         individual registers their last municipality  of  last  habitation.
         Additionally, lone males with no supportive family  are  considered
         highly suspicious."

12. The First-tier Tribunal went on  at  10.18  to  state  that  given  the
    assessment of  Ms  Young  the  Tribunal  was  not  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would be safe in another part of Albania for the reasons  she
    has  set  out.   Ms  Young  considered  internal  relocation  at   some
    considerable length and, in summary, at page 48 of her report  believed
    that:

         "The ability of the P family members to locate Ardi were he  to  be
         returned to Albania is considerable, maybe not immediately  but  in
         the long-term.  Both families come from an area  of  Albania  where
         the Kanun has strong tradition, where forgiveness of blood is  seen
         as a weakness rather than as strength of human character."

13. Ms Young went on at pages 51-54 of her report to provide further detail
    in relation to internal relocation  including  in  her  view  that  the
    appellant had reason to be fearful of returning anywhere and reiterated
    that the risk of  discovery  of  the  appellant  by  the  P  family  is
    considerable. Ms Young was of the  opinion  that  the  P  family  could
    maintain the upper hand and prolong the agony  by  biding  their  time.
    She  concluded  that  relocation  could  not  assure  protection.    In
    reaching this opinion the expert took into account that although  there
    has been no death, E P was seriously wounded; although a  prison  terms
    has been served this gave no assurance that the blood feud was over and
    it was the appellant's account which the First-tier  Tribunal  accepted
    that there had been continued threats.  The expert at page  47  of  her
    report took into consideration that although G A  had  been  tried  and
    imprisoned  for  his  crime  such  penalty  would  not  be   considered
    sufficient and that the only way forward is  a  retaliatory  attack  or
    death or alternatively negotiated forgiveness and since none  of  these
    had happened the threat remained for the  male  members  of  the  Arifi
    family and that  it  was  common  for  low-level  contact  between  two
    families to last for decades before escalation to further  murder  (and
    the expert relied on examples of such situations).

14. In reaching her opinion the expert also  took  into  consideration  the
    difficulties in relocating including the requirement  for  registration
    which made it impossible to "disappear"  and  that  this  would  likely
    drive family members to-self confinement in the home area.

15. In adopting Ms Young's findings (which have not been challenged by  the
    Secretary  of  State)  and  in  the   First-tier   Tribunal's   careful
    consideration of the issues including internal relocation, there is  no
    material error either in the lack of a specific case  citation  of  EH,
    which I find the Tribunal addressed in substance, or  in  the  Tribunal
    not using the term "reach, influence and commitment to  prosecution  of
    the feud".   It is evident that the judge was satisfied that the P clan
    did have such reach, influence and commitment given the  past  history,
    the expert opinion and the background information  including  the  Home
    Office OGN for Albania which the judge referenced in his findings.

16. I also take account of the final sentence at [10.18]  of  the  decision
    and reasons, where the First-tier Tribunal found, in  the  alternative,
    that  relocation  would  be  "unreasonable"  in  any  event  given  the
    appellant's age, lack of support and  difficulties  he  would  have  in
    registering in the area.  Although the judge did not specifically  make
    a finding of undue harshness, that  is  implicit  in  the  findings  at
    [10.18] and again this was not challenged by the Secretary of State.



Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an  error  of
    law such that it should be set aside and shall stand.   The  appeal  by
    the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

As the First-tier Tribunal made  an  anonymity  direction  I  continue  that
order:

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  8 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  8 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
