
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06942/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th May 2019                              |On 29th May 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     MU
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Haque (LR)
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Turner, promulgated on 28th February 2019, following the  hearing
    at Bradford on 8th February 2019.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Bangladesh, and was born on  22nd
    September 1985.  He appealed against the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    dated 18th May 2018,  refusing  his  application  for  asylum  and  for
    humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he  is  a  member  of  the
    Chattra Dahl (JCD), the student wing of the Bangladesh  National  Party
    (BNP).  He was an  officer  of  the  JCD.   He  had  been  involved  in
    political activity against the  ruling  party.   He  was  also  heavily
    involved in the mayoral election which saw the  victory  for  the  BNP.
    Given that he was seen as an opponent  of  the  ruling  party,  he  was
    arrested in  2009  in  relation  to  an  allegation  of  possession  of
    firearms.  He was  detained  for  six  months.   He  was  subjected  to
    torture.  He was beaten.  He was electrocuted.  He was forced  to  make
    confessions.  He did not  make  any  admissions.   His  solicitor  then
    secured bail for him on payment of money.  He was required to report on
    a three monthly basis to the court and to answer  bail  which  he  did.
    The Appellant lived near the border with India.  He applied for a  visa
    for India.  He could cross the border to India with an  official  visa.
    In the alternative, he could also cross by a small river when he needed
    to.  He had family in India where he could stay temporarily.  He  would
    visit and return to Bangladesh.  The Appellant was then arrested  on  a
    further five or six occasions.  He was detained for two or  three  days
    before being released.   He  was  also  sexually  assaulted  whilst  in
    Bangladesh by an unknown group of men.  The attack was not  on  account
    of his  political  opinion.   The  Appellant  was  left  with  enduring
    physical and  mental  problems.   The  Appellant  left  Bangladesh  and
    arrived in the UK on 19th February 2014.  In the UK he initially made a
    human rights application on Article 8 grounds to remain here.  This was
    unsuccessful.  He then applied for asylum after that.  In the UK  also,
    he has been engaged in political activity on behalf  of  the  BNP  (see
    paragraphs 3 to 12 of the determination).

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge was not satisfied  that  the  Appellant  had  discharged  the
    burden of proof that was upon him.  In his screening interview  he  had
    failed to make any reference  to  the  torture,  starvation  or  sexual
    assault that he had subsequently referred to (see  paragraph  34).   He
    had also not provided details of such  mistreatment  in  his  statement
    which he prepared on the same day (paragraph  35).   Moreover,  he  had
    come on a visitor's visa in February 2014 and, despite the fact that in
    his oral evidence he stated that he had been at risk since 2008, he had
    not claimed asylum until much later.

 5. The appeal was dismissed.





The Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of application state that the judge erred  in  stating  (at
    paragraph 34) that the Appellant's failure to mention his  mistreatment
    in his screening interview was an  error.   A  screening  interview  is
    simply designed to provide the basics of  the  claim.   The  judge  was
    wrong to have drawn undue inferences from this.

 7. On 5th April 2019 permission to appeal was granted.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 13th  May  2019,  Mr  Haque,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, as  his  representative,  submitted  that  the
    judge's undermining of the Appellant's credibility on the basis of  his
    having failed to refer to his mistreatment at the  screening  interview
    (see paragraph 34) was a misdirection.  The judge should not have drawn
    an adverse inference.  Furthermore, the judge had wrongly  treated  the
    documentary evidence as being unreliable (at  paragraph  49).   He  had
    been given a range of different  forms  of  evidence  and  yet  he  had
    concluded by saying that  "I  attach  no  weight  to  these  documents"
    (paragraph 49).

 9. For her part, Ms Jones submitted that there was no  material  error  of
    law at all.  This was simply a disagreement with the  decision  of  the
    judge.  The question that the Appellant had been asked in his screening
    interview, which was at question  2.3  (and  not  at  question  3.2  as
    erroneously stated by the judge at paragraph 34) is: "Is there anything
    else you would like to tell me about your physical and mental  health".
    If the Appellant's claim was that he had  been  tortured,  starved  and
    subject to sexual assault, he could not have answered  by  saying  that
    there were no health  issues.   This  is  particularly  given  that  in
    relation  to  the  allegation  of  sexual  assault  upon  him,  he  had
    maintained that "the attack has left the Appellant  with  physical  and
    mental health problems" (paragraph 8).

10. Second, the Appellant in 2016 had made a human rights application,  and
    yet as early as 2008, some six years earlier, he knew he was  at  risk.
    In the UK, he had provided no evidence of torture.  He had provided  no
    authentication of the documentation submitted.  He had gone to India on
    a visa.  He had been  bailed  and  he  had  answered  bail.   This  was
    unlikely for him to do if he was at risk.  Even if there was  an  error
    in looking at paragraph 34, it could not, in the  circumstances,  be  a
    material error.

11. Finally, there could be no criticism of the judge (at paragraph 49)  in
    not finding  the  documentation  to  be  credible,  because  fraudulent
    documents are not uncommon.

No Error of Law

12. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

13. First, as far as the criticism of the Appellant is  concerned,  in  not
    having referred to torture and  sexual  assault  during  his  screening
    interview  (at  paragraph  34),  the  judge  had  concluded  that  "the
    Appellant did state that he had problems in Bangladesh in regard of his
    political activity, but it would be reasonable  to  expect  him  to  go
    further than this  and  to  at  least  explain  that  he  had  suffered
    mistreatment as a result thereof". The judge had also gone  on  to  say
    that "a lot of information was provided at question 4.1 about his claim
    for protection however there is no mention of mistreatment"  (paragraph
    34).  These conclusions were not unreasonable for  the  judge  to  draw
    upon.

14. In any event, there can be no material error  in  this  respect,  given
    that the judge does not  confine  himself  simply  to  the  failure  to
    disclose the mistreatment at the  earliest  possible  time  during  the
    screening interview.  This is because straight after paragraph 34,  the
    judge goes on to state at paragraph 35 that, "the  statement  that  was
    signed and dated the same day as the screening interview also  made  no
    reference to mistreatment at the hands of the  state"  (paragraph  34).
    This being so, it is clear from the manner in which  the  determination
    is constructed, that paragraphs 34 and 35 need to be read together.

15. Indeed, the judge goes on to say that the Appellant "makes reference to
    attack on him and his property generally and  false  allegations  being
    made against him".  However, he had made no reference to an  attack  on
    him (paragraph 35).  The judge comes to this conclusion notwithstanding
    the fact that he also makes proper allowance  for  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant does give more detail in his  AIR  in  particular  (paragraph
    35).  This indicates that the entirety of the claim is  properly  taken
    into account by the judge.

16. In fact, during cross-examination,  when  the  Appellant  was  actually
    asked about the mistreatment and torture that he had suffered, what  is
    recorded as having happened is that "the Appellant  made  reference  to
    false allegations.  He failed  to  mention  until  prompted  about  the
    electrocution and the sexual assault" (paragraph 36).  It is clear from
    all of this that a criticism of the Appellant not  having  referred  to
    the mistreatment in the screening interview on its own does not explain
    the  comprehensive  manner  in  which  the  judge  had  approached  the
    credibility of the Appellant's claim.  It did not stop there.

17. This is because, when the Appellant was specifically asked why  he  had
    not mentioned these issues before, he had said that he had a  difficult
    time and had memory loss problems.  He was then asked if he had  sought
    any medical attention.  He said that he attended  at  his  GP.  He  was
    referred  to  counselling.   The  appointment  was  then  four   months
    thereafter, "but the Appellant  had  failed  to  attend.   He  had  not
    attended for a further referral as he had moved areas  and  GPs."   The
    Appellant had not provided any medical evidence about  this  (paragraph
    36).

18. This, then, is the proper manner in which the judge's appraisal of  the
    Appellant's account should be considered.  It is clear from  this  that
    the Appellant's account about his mistreatment was far  from  credible,
    as the judge found, and that was a finding which  he  was  entitled  to
    come to.  Having considered all of the evidence,  the  judge  concluded
    that the lack of reference to torture and  mistreatment  was  a  matter
    which continued even during oral evidence such as to give  him  concern
    (see paragraph 37).  These findings were entirely open and  proper  for
    the judge to come to.

19. Second, Mr Haque made a determined criticism of the  judge's  rejection
    of the documentary evidence that was before him.  He  stated  that  the
    judge was simply not correct in treating the  arrest  warrants  as  not
    being genuine.  However, the precise manner  in  which  the  judge  has
    dealt with this issue was not addressed by Mr Haque.   What  the  judge
    states is that, on the basis of paragraph 13.2.1 of the Country  Policy
    and Information Note for Bangladesh, where it is stated that  "official
    documents  are  readily  available",  the  judge  was  entitled  to  be
    sceptical and to conclude that, "I have  not  been  provided  with  any
    formal expert evidence to verify the  authenticity  of  the  documents"
    (paragraph 49).  Indeed, Mr Haque  neglected  to  mention  the  judge's
    additional statement that "the objective evidence on balance  suggested
    that it was more likely that the documents were genuine", but that  the
    burden lay on the Appellant to prove that the documents were authentic.
     In this, the judge was entitled to state that, "I do not find that the
    Appellant had discharged this burden and as such I attach no weight  to
    these documents" (paragraph 49).

20. Finally, the judge had  also,  in  looking  at  the  factual  situation
    comprehensively before him, observed how the Appellant had entered  the
    UK on a visitor's visa on 19th February 2014.   He  did  not  tell  the
    Immigration Officer at the  airport  that  he  had  been  subjected  to
    mistreatment (see paragraphs  39  to  40).   Given  that  "it  was  the
    Appellant's claim in oral evidence that his life had been at risk since
    2008 during which time he stated he had been tortured, attacked, beaten
    and assaulted", it was  not  credible  that  the  Appellant  failed  to
    immediately make a protection claim on arrival  in  the  UK  (paragraph
    41).  Even after learning of further problems in relation to his father
    and the business, he failed to make a protection claim (paragraph  42).
    He made a claim under Article 8 of the ECHR.   Indeed,  given  that  he
    could cross the river to go to India, he applied for an official  visa,
    which he procured.  This indeed further indicated that he  was  not  at
    risk (paragraph 43).  Moreover, "the Appellant stated he  had  gone  to
    India and returned back to Bangladesh more times than he could  recall"
    even though he claimed that he was at risk (paragraph 44).   The  judge
    also went on to say that if the arrest warrants were  genuine,  it  was
    not credible that the Appellant would continue to place himself at risk
    of detention by answering his bail (paragraph 46).  He  had  even  been
    able to renew his passport in 2013 despite his case that he was on bail
    (paragraph 47).  Finally, the judge was of the view that he  questioned
    how it was possible for the Appellant to  secure  a  formal  reason  to
    leave Bangladesh if he was always at risk (paragraph 48).  All in  all,
    the judge has given ample grounds for rejecting the appeal.   There  is
    no error of law here.

Notice of Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

22. An anonymity direction is made.

23. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 24th May 2019




