

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA 06584 2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at FIELD HOUSE                    |Decision and Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26.9.2018                            |On 03.10.2018                      |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK

                                   Between

                                 Miss t l b
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr CG Talacchi (Counsel )

For the Respondent:    Mr I Jarvis  (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision   of  the  First  -tier  Tribunal  (Judge   N.   Lodge)("FtT")
    promulgated on 4th  July  2018  in  which  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    protection and humanitarian grounds was dismissed.

Background
2.     The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam born on 18.10.1972.

Grounds of appeal
3.  In grounds for permission to appeal the appellant argued  that  the  FtT
    erred by applying the incorrect burden and standard  of  proof  to  her
    genuine  and   subsisting   relationship   [65-66]   following   Goudey
    (subsisting marriage - evidence) Sudan  [2012]  UKUT  00041  (IAC)  and
    failing to take into consideration  the  oral  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and her partner.

4.   The FtT erred by considering Ex 1(b)  having found that there  were  no
    insurmountable obstacles  to  family  life  outside  the  UK  [66]  and
    considered material that was irrelevant .

5.    The FtT ought to have considered the appeal  out  side  of  the  Rules
    having regard to strong and compelling circumstances.

Permission to appeal
4.     Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal (UT) was  granted  by  FTJ
    SPJ Buchanan on 6.8.2018.  In granting permission  the  FTJ  considered
    that the FtT had not  specifically  considered  the  oral  evidence  in
    reaching conclusions as to the genuine and subsisting relationship. The
    FtT stated that "there is no requirement to look beyond the rules"  and
    thus it was arguable that the FtT erred and ought  to  have  considered
    Article 8 outside the Rules.

Submissions
5.     At the hearing before me Mr Talacchi argued that the  main  complaint
    was the finding in relation to the genuine and subsisting  relationship
    and that there had been no reference to the oral  evidence  at  all  in
    that context. The appellant had also adduced evidence of an invoice for
    medical treatment received following a miscarriage and that the sponsor
    was the father of the child.  The FtT had not considered this evidence.
    There had been no cross examination of the witnesses challenging  their
    relationship. The FtT failed to consider or make findings  on  evidence
    of  harassment  in  Vietnam  relied  on  by  the  sponsor  relevant  to
    insurmountable obstacles test. The FtT failed to consider Article 8 and
    to apply section 117B and made no findings as to proportionality.

6.    In response Mr Jarvis contended that  the FtT had considered the  main
    claim for asylum and found the appellant not to be credible. There  was
    no support for the contention that the respondent  had  not  challenged
    the genuineness of the relationship and Counsel had not appeared before
    the FtT. The FtT  had  made  findings  as  to  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence between the parties as to addresses [23 & 27].  There  was  no
    formal concession by the respondent that the parties were in a  genuine
    relationship. The FtT was entitled to look at the extent  to  which  it
    was corroborated in documentary evidence.

7.    There was no material error in the FtT considering Ex 1 and  paragraph
    276ADE.  Whilst no findings were made as to the sponsor's evidence  the
    FtT referred to it in the decision at [25 & 26] and  in  any  event  it
    could not have amounted to insurmountable obstacles. The  FtT  had  not
    considered Article 8 outside of the Rules.

8.    The grounds were simply wrong by reference to Goudey.  The burden  was
    on the appellant to show that she met Appendix FM in terms of a genuine
    and subsisting relationship.

Discussion and conclusion

9.     I find no material error of law in the FtT's  assessment  of  whether
    or not the appellant was in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  relationship.
    There was no allegation made by the respondent that the  appellant  had
    entered into a marriage of convenience and so the  burden  was  on  the
    appellant to show that she met the Rules on family life under  Appendix
    FM. There is no material error on the issue of Ex1.

10.  I accept that the FtT did not make specific findings in respect of  the
    oral evidence of  either  the  appellant  or  the  sponsor  as  to  the
    genuineness of their relationship, however, I am  satisfied  that  this
    was not a material error.  The FtT did not believe the appellant in her
    asylum claim and having regard to the witness statement and the  record
    of proceedings, I am satisfied that the oral  evidence  amounted  to  a
    confirmation of the relationship and  cohabitation  between  2015-2017.
    There was some cross examination as to how the parties  met  and  where
    they lived. There was no witness statement from the  sponsor.  Even  if
    the FtT failed  to  specifically  reject  the  oral  evidence,  it  was
    entitled to consider the documentary evidence relied on and to conclude
    that there was insufficient evidence to meet the criteria for a genuine
    and subsisting relationship.  The FtT set out the oral evidence of both
    the  appellant  and  the  sponsor  [27-30  &  10-11]  and  referred  to
    discrepancies in their evidence as to  places  where  they  claimed  to
    live.  There was no submission made that any particular aspect  of  the
    oral evidence would have had a material impact on  the  decision  made.
    Further, the fact that there was no major challenge by  the  respondent
    takes the matter no further. The record of  proceedings  recorded  that
    the respondent submitted that there was little direct evidence  of  the
    relationship. The FtT was entitled to place weight on  the  documentary
    evidence.  The evidence  to  the  medical  treatment  received  by  the
    appellant did not substantiate that there was a  genuine and subsisting
    relationship as there was no reference to the sponsor as the father and
    no evidence that it was he who paid for the treatment.

11.  This was primarily an asylum appeal and the grounds of appeal  did  not
    argue that  Article 8 was relied on and there is no record  of  such  a
    submission being made at the hearing before the FtT. I accept that  the
    FtT did not go on to consider Article 8 outside of the Rules.  However,
    it made clear that it had considered the same and  had  regard  to  the
    fact that no argument had been made to suggest that there was  anything
    outside of the rules capable of justifying consideration under  Article
    8 (SSHD V SS(Congo) & ors [2015] EWCA Civ 387 ).  There was no argument
    put to me at the hearing that there were  compelling  circumstances  to
    support Article 8 or that any interference would  be  disproportionate,
    given that the FtT had found there was not  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship.

12.  In conclusion the appellant has failed  to  make  out  her  grounds  of
    appeal and I dismiss the appeal.

Decision

13. There is no material error of law disclosed in the decision which  shall
    stand.


                               Signed                     Date 27.9.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal






 ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                               NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date  27.9.2018


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal



