
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06599/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th March 2018                            |On 20th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                 sharif [i]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Hodson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sudan born on [ ]  1999.   The  Appellant
    left the Sudan on 5th April 2015 made his  way  via  Libya,  Italy  and
    France to the UK arriving by train on 27th  August  2015.   He  claimed
    asylum on 29th September 2015.  The Appellant's claim  for  asylum  was
    based on a fear that if returned to Sudan he  would  face  mistreatment
    due to his race and imputed political opinion.  The  Appellant  belongs
    to the non-Arab Massalit tribe.  The Appellant's claim for  asylum  was
    refused by Notice of Refusal dated 27th June 2017.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Chana sitting at Hatton Cross on 9th August 2017.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 25th September 2017 the Appellant's
    appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. Grounds of Appeal were lodged to the  Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds
    contended:-

    (i)  That the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  made  adverse  credibility
         findings which contradict the Respondent's  expressed  concessions.
         The First-tier Tribunal judge had gone behind  the  refusal  letter
         and dismissed the  appeal  on  the  basis  of  findings  that  were
         inconsistent with the case brought by the Respondent.

    (ii) That the First-tier Tribunal Judge's approach to the  evidence  of
         the Appellant in reaching  sweeping  adverse  credibility  findings
         against him took no account of  the  young  age  of  the  Appellant
         either at the time of the hearing or  when  he  claimed  asylum  or
         generally in relation to events when he was a child.

    (iii)    That cogent, up-to-date and  consistent  professional  medical
         and other evidence relating to the mental health  problems  of  the
         Appellant were overridden by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  on  the
         basis of surmise and totally unfounded personal opinion.

    (iv) That wholly inadequate reasons  were  given  from  departing  from
         current country  guidance  applicable  to  the  Appellant;  limited
         country material from only one source  was  cited  and  taken  into
         account by the First-tier Tribunal Judge who failed to justify  his
         decision  contrary  to  country  guidance.   Further  other  recent
         country material confirming country guidance  was  not  considered,
         dealt with or taken into account at all.

 4. On 8th December 2017 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Murray  granted
    permission to appeal.  He considered that all  the  above  grounds  had
    merit and that the Respondent had accepted in the decision letter  that
    the Appellant was a member of the Massalit tribe; that  he  encountered
    problems from the Janjaweed in his village and that he had demonstrated
    a subjective fear of return to his village.  The Secretary of State had
    contended in the decision letter that the  Appellant  could  internally
    relocate because more recent evidence showed that the country  guidance
    case law could be departed from and the judge had found at paragraph 33
    that the Appellant had not faced problems from  the  Janjaweed  or  was
    attacked  by  them.   Consequently  the  judge  had  gone  behind   the
    Respondent's concession.

 5. Further Judge Murray considered that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  had
    arguably erred in law in making no allowance  for  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant was a child when events occurred and was a vulnerable witness
    due to mental health issues.  He also considered  that  the  judge  had
    arguable erred at paragraphs 47 to 49  in  the  assessment  of  medical
    evidence and had failed to give adequate  reasons  for  departing  from
    country guidance at paragraphs 51 to 54.

 6. There is no Rule 24 response lodged.  It is  on  this  basis  that  the
    appeal comes before me initially to determine whether or not there is a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.
     The Appellant appears by his instructed Counsel Mr Hodson.  Mr  Hodson
    is extremely familiar with this matter.  He appeared before the  First-
    tier Tribunal and he is also the author of the Grounds of Appeal.   The
    Secretary of State appears by her Home  Office  Presenting  Officer  Mr
    Duffy.

Concession

 7. Mr Duffy acknowledges that the key issue is whether or  not  the  judge
    has gone behind the concession in  this  matter.   The  Respondent  had
    accepted in her reasons for refusal letter dated 27th  June  2017  that
    the Appellant was a national of Sudan and  a  member  of  the  Massalit
    tribe.  The Respondent  had  further  stated  that  "it  is  considered
    consistent with background  evidence  that  the  Janjaweed  would  have
    attacked you and your village in Sudan" and it was therefore  "accepted
    that you encountered problems from the Janjaweed in your village."  The
    Respondent had concluded "it is accepted that you are a member  of  the
    Massalit tribe and that you encountered problems with the Janjaweed and
    government supporters in your village."  Mr Duffy  concedes  the  judge
    has gone behind that concession and paragraph 33 in particular  of  his
    determination shows that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  has  made  core
    adverse  credibility  findings  against  the  Appellant  which   flatly
    contradict what the Respondent has expressly accepted.

The Law

 8.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 9. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

10. I agreed with the submission made by Mr Hodson that it is never open to
    a judge to go behind express concessions accepted by the Respondent  in
    the reasons for refusal letter.  It is, as he points  out  to  me,  the
    Respondent's case that is brought against  the  Appellant's  claim  for
    asylum not the judge's and that it is never appropriate or lawful for a
    First-tier Tribunal judge to substitute his or her  reasons  for  those
    advanced by the  Secretary  of  State  where  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge's reasons involve factual findings inconsistent with the  factual
    basis of the decision.  In this matter the judge has  gone  further  at
    one point by way  of  making  a  blanket  adverse  credibility  finding
    against the Appellant which again is in stark contrast to the  approach
    taken by the Respondent in stating "I am not being ... told  the  whole
    truth  about  the  Appellant's  circumstances.    The   more   credible
    explanation is that the Appellant ... was living in Khartoum before  he
    came to this country and his whole story about his father on  the  farm
    has been fabricated."

11. This and the findings of the judge at paragraph 55 and his findings  at
    paragraph 29 are wholly different  and  fundamentally  incompatible  to
    that made by the Respondent as to the Appellant's overall claim  namely
    that he did have a genuine subjective fear on return to  Abyad  village
    where his family farm is located, reflect that the judge has materially
    erred in law.

12. In such circumstances I find that there are material errors of law that
    make the whole of the decision unsustainable.  I set aside the decision
    with none of the findings of fact of the judge to stand.

Further Submission

13. Mr Hodson asked me to go on to rehear this matter  and  to  remake  the
    decision allowing it pointing out that that would be in accordance with
    current country guidance.  He  takes  me  to  the  up-to-date  guidance
    provided by the Danish Immigration Service dated August 2016 which is a
    detailed analysis between the Danish Immigration  Service  and  the  UK
    Home Office Fact Finding Missions on the Sudan.  He  reminds  that  the
    burden of proof is on the Secretary of State in the event that  country
    guidance is challenged.  Mr Duffy says there is  a  change  in  country
    evidence  shown  in  the  2106  report  and  again  in  2017  and  that
    potentially internal relocation is now possible.

14. Against this background Mr Hodson refers me  back  to  the  Grounds  of
    Appeal pointing out that it is the submission on the Appellant's behalf
    that all necessary bases for an appeal on the  Appellant's  behalf  are
    met.  He reminds me that the Appellant was of young age at the time  of
    hearing and that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings are legally objectionable in themselves in that they  fail  to
    take into account at all the young age of the Appellant not least  when
    many of the material events occurred.  Further the judge has failed  to
    give due consideration to  the  report  from  Dr  Sundaran,  consultant
    psychiatrist from Medway Community Mental Health team dated 2nd  August
    2017 which records that  the  Appellant  was  admitted  for  "psychotic
    illness" on 2nd March 2016 and was only released on 23rd May  2017  for
    management of his condition.  He emphasises  the  considerable  ongoing
    mental health problems of the Appellant and that  it  would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect the Appellant  to  relocate  to  Khartoum  particularly
    bearing in mind that country guidance indicates that  anyone  from  the
    Appellant's tribe  or  the  region  from  where  he  originates  cannot
    relocate to Khartoum.  Mr Duffy relies on  his  previous  position  and
    indicates that it is a matter for me as to how I now proceed.

Findings on the Remaking of the Error of Law

15. I am persuaded by Mr Hodson that the correct approach is to go  on  and
    remake this decision and to allow the appeal.  It is accepted that  the
    Appellant has a fear from the Janjaweed and that he is from  the  tribe
    which he states he is and there is consequently  clearly  a  Convention
    reason.  His fear is the attack which it is  accepted  took  place  and
    consequently he cannot be expected to relocate to Khartoum.   There  is
    much within the report of the Danish Immigration Service which supports
    the Appellant's position but even if I accept  that  there  some  areas
    which  indicate  that  return   may   be   possible   the   Appellant's
    circumstances  are  such  in  following  country   guidance   and   the
    concessions made that he cannot return to Khartoum which  is  where  he
    would have to be returned to.  Further it is appropriate that I look at
    the current health and age of the Appellant and Mr Duffy does not  seek
    to challenge the fact that the Appellant has  been  the  subject  of  a
    professional mental health assessment which diagnose him from suffering
    from a psychotic illness and that thereafter he has been detained under
    Section 48 of the Mental Health Act for over a year.

16. The country guidance of AA (Non-Arab Darfuris -  relocation)  Sudan  CG
    [2009] UKAIT 00056 as reaffirmed in MM (Darfuris) Sudan CG [2015]  UKUT
    00010 (IAC) supports the proposition that all non-Arab Darfuris are  at
    risk of persecution in Darfur and  cannot  be  reasonably  expected  to
    relocate elsewhere in Sudan.  Further therein the Tribunal in  AA  went
    on to hold that "it is clear that persons who are non-Arabs from Darfur
    facing relocation  to  Khartoum  are  now  a  risk  category."   It  is
    interesting to note that the Appellant in AA was also from the Massalit
    tribe as is the Appellant in the instant appeal.

17. In all these circumstances I consider firstly the concessions that  are
    made, secondly the position relating to the Appellant's mental  health,
    thirdly his age at the time the incidents occurred and fourthly that it
    is appropriate to follow country guidance in this matter and that  this
    is an Appellant who has given a credible version of  events.   Standard
    of proof in asylum cases is whether something is reasonably  likely  to
    have occurred.  That is accepted by the Secretary of State.  So far  as
    the approach to credibility is concerned that requires an assessment of
    the evidence of the general claim including the  internal  consistency,
    the plausibility  of  the  claim  and  external  factors  of  the  sort
    typically found in country guidance.  All those requirements  are  met.
    Further it is clear that this is not an Appellant who based on  country
    guidance could possibly be returned to Khartoum.

18. In such circumstances I am satisfied that the Appellant  has  made  out
    his case and I remake  the  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds.

Decision

The appeal is allowed and I remake the  decision  allowing  the  Appellant's
appeal on asylum grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
