
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06325/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 2 March 2020                     |On: 17 March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MT
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel, instructed by Aask Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  2  January  1985.  She
arrived in the United Kingdom on 1 October 2009 with leave  to  enter  as  a
Tier 4 student valid until 20 October 2010 and was granted  further  periods
of leave to remain as a points-based migrant until  8  July  2013.  She  was
refused further leave to remain as a  Tier  1  Entrepreneur  Migrant  on  11
February 2014 and unsuccessfully appealed that decision  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal, becoming appeal rights exhausted  on  12  August  2015.  She  then
claimed asylum on 10 March 2016. Her claim was refused on 21 June  2019  and
she appealed that decision to the First-tier Tribunal.

The appellant's claim was based upon her fear of the Sri Lankan  authorities
as a result of her work as a journalist and their belief that she  supported
the LTTE. She claimed to  have  volunteered  for  the  Tamil  Rehabilitation
Organisation (TMO) in 2005 and to have written for a Tamil magazine in 2007-
2008. She claimed that she  was  arrested  on  10  March  2008  after  other
journalists from the magazine were arrested and that she  was  detained  for
two days. She claimed to have been arrested again on  28  November  2008  on
martyr's day after having a picture of her friend and lighting a candle  for
her and to have been detained for 20 days on suspicion of  involvement  with
the LTTE during which time  she  was  beaten,  burned  with  cigarettes  and
sexually abused. She was released upon payment of a bribe. On  30  September
2009 she was arrested again when going to the airport and was  released  the
same day and she then left the country on 1 October 2009.  She  returned  to
Sri Lanka on three occasions, in 2011,  2012  and  2013,  for  her  father's
funeral and to visit her mother when she was ill. She paid for an  agent  to
assist her in travelling in and out of the country on all  three  occasions.
The appellant claims to have been involved in activities  for  the  TGTE  in
the UK, including attending meetings and protests, and that the  Sri  Lankan
authorities have visited her family  home  as  a  result  and  required  her
mother to report to them. She has also given evidence to  the  International
Centre for Prevention and Prosecution of Genocide.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, did not accept  that  she
was involved in journalism in Sri Lanka and did not accept  her  account  of
being arrested  and  detained.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
appellant was at risk on return to Sri Lanka. It was accepted that  she  had
spoken to  the  International  Centre  for  Prevention  and  Prosecution  of
Genocide but it was not considered that she would be at risk on  that  basis
since such evidence would have been  given  anonymously  and  there  was  no
evidence that she would have  come  to  the  attention  of  the  Sri  Lankan
authorities.

The appellant appealed against that decision and her  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Moffatt on 8 November 2019. The appellant did  not
give evidence before the judge and was told by her legal  representative  to
leave the Tribunal, in light of a psychiatric report from Dr S Dhumad  which
concluded that she was not fit to give evidence. Aside from the  psychiatric
report the judge had before her  a  medical  (scarring)  report  from  Dr  A
Martin, the appellant's GP  notes  and  letters  from  Changing  Minds  IAPT
Services in regard to the appellant's mental  health.  The  judge  also  had
evidence of the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  in  the  UK  with  the
Transnational Government of Tamil Eelam (TGTE) including photographs of  her
attending demonstrations in the UK.

The judge did not find that the appellant was a credible witness  and  noted
various inconsistencies in her evidence. Taken together with the  fact  that
the appellant had returned to Sri Lanka on three occasions,  the  judge  did
not accept that the appellant was at any risk on return to  Sri  Lanka.  The
judge did not accept that the appellant was at risk of harm as a  result  of
her low-level involvement with the TGTE and did not consider that she  would
experience problems on the basis of returning  to  a  female-led  household.
The judge dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on five  grounds:  firstly,
the judge had erred by failing to  apply  the  joint  Presidential  Guidance
Note No.2 of 2010 when assessing the appellant's credibility and had  failed
to treat her as a vulnerable adult; secondly that the judge  had  failed  to
assess the scarring report with anxious scrutiny;  thirdly  that  the  judge
had failed to assess the risk of persecution to the appellant as part  of  a
female headed household in line with PP  (female  headed  household;  expert
duties) Sri Lanka [2017] UKUT  117;  fourthly  that  the  judge  had  failed
properly to assess the risk of persecution to the appellant  on  account  of
her activities with the TGTE in line with UB  (Sri  Lanka)  v  Secretary  of
State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA  Civ  85;  and  fifthly  that  the
judge had made further unreasonable findings  when  assessing  the  risk  of
future persecution.

Permission was granted on all grounds.

In response to Ms Miszkiel's submission on the first  ground,  Ms  Isherwood
agreed that the judge had not referred in  the  decision  to  the  appellant
being  treated  as  a  vulnerable  witness.  However  she  relied  upon  the
acknowledgement by the appellant's representative,  at  the  hearing  before
the First-tier Tribunal, that the weight to be afforded to  the  appellant's
witness statement may be affected by the fact that the respondent could  not
challenge any aspect of it owing to her absence. I have  to  agree  with  Ms
Miszkiel that that did not mean, however, that the judge  was  not  required
to look at all the evidence and take account  of  the  medical  evidence  in
assessing the appellant's credibility.

I am in agreement with Ms Miszkiel that the judge did  not  properly  engage
with the medical evidence when assessing  the  appellant's  credibility  and
did not appear  to  assess  credibility  in  the  context  of  her  being  a
vulnerable  person.  The  judge  focussed  on   what   she   found   to   be
inconsistencies in the accounts  given  by  the  appellant  to  the  medical
experts, and noted a lack of consistency in the  appellant's  references  to
her injuries in the medical evidence,  but she did not consider  the  impact
of  her  vulnerability  on  her  credibility  and   did   not   assess   the
inconsistencies in her evidence in light of  her  mental  health  condition.
Indeed the judge did not actually assess, in any part of her  decision,  the
nature and cause of the injuries described by the medical  experts  and  did
not make any findings on those injuries in the context  of  the  appellant's
account of being detained and  ill-treated.  There  was  limited  engagement
with Dr Martin's report and no consideration of his conclusions  as  to  the
appellant's scars being typical of injuries caused by torture. I agree  with
Ms Miszkiel  that,  on  that  basis  alone,  the  judge's  decision  is  not
sustainable.

I would add, however, that I  also  find  merit  in  the  fourth  ground  of
appeal, in which a  challenge  is  made  to  the  judge's  findings  on  the
appellant's sur place activities in the UK. The judge's  assessment  of  the
risks arising as a result of the appellant's activities, at [50], is  brief,
and lacks a proper engagement with all  the  evidence.  At  [45]  the  judge
appears to dismiss the photographic evidence because she had  not  seen  the
appellant herself, but as Ms Miszkiel submitted, she had the  benefit  of  a
photograph of the appellant's face annexed to Dr Martin's  report,  at  page
180 of the appeal bundle.

I accept that the judge may have had good reason to have concerns about  the
appellant's claim to be at risk on return to  Sri  Lanka  in  light  of  her
trips back to Sri Lanka, as she found at [48].  However,  I  agree  with  Ms
Miszkiel that that was not sufficient in itself to conclude that  there  was
an absence of any risk, when there was evidence before the  judge  that  she
had not properly considered. In the absence of a proper  assessment  of  the
appellant's sur place activities and the risks arising  from  that,  and  in
the absence of a proper credibility assessment in regard to past and  future
interest in the appellant, the judge's conclusion, that there  was  no  risk
on return, was simply not sustainable.

In the circumstances, and in light of the errors I have  identified  in  the
judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility, the judge's  decision  as
a whole must be set aside. Ms Isherwood agreed that if  the  'vulnerability'
ground of challenge was made out, it would be difficult to  uphold  anything
else in the judge's decision. Accordingly, I set aside the decision  in  its
entirety, with  no  findings  preserved.  The  appropriate  course  in  such
circumstances is for the matter to be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
to be heard afresh.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  with  no
findings preserved,  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b),  before  any
judge aside from Judge Moffatt.



    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for  anonymity.  I  continue  the
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.

Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 3 March
2020
