
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-DN-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06772/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 September 2018                          |On 4 October 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                  Mr h d m
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Imamovi?, Counsel instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a national of Iraq  born  on  1  March  2001.   He  is
    currently 17 years old.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal against
    the decision of the respondent dated 15 May 2018 to  refuse  his  claim
    for asylum leave.  The appellant was granted discretionary leave as  an
    unaccompanied minor until 31 August 2018.  In a decision promulgated on
    9 July 2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Row  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the following grounds:

      1) Failure to take into account a material matter in  respect  of  the
         judge's  findings  that  the  appellant  provided  an  inconsistent
         account whereas the judge identified  only  one  inconsistency  and
         that it could  be  reasonably  inferred  that  the  judge  did  not
         consider  there  to   be   substance   in   those   other   alleged
         inconsistencies.

      2) Failure to take into account a material matter in relation  to  the
         judge's assessment of plausibility at paragraphs [19] to [21];  the
         arrangements made to enter the UK were not  the  appellant's.   The
         appellant had given evidence he had not been able to ask the  agent
         and the judge did not take into consideration the appellant  was  a
         minor and that the agent was in a position  of  authority  and  the
         judge gave no weight to the fact that the agent had been in contact
         with his uncle and therefore his family would  have  known  he  was
         safe.  It was also submitted that the appellant had sought to  make
         contact with his family but this had been unsuccessful.

      3) Misdirection of law.  The judge failed to  note  that  it  was  the
         respondent who asserted that the restaurant was not genuine and the
         duty therefore was on the respondent to prove that allegation.  The
         appellant produced a document which was asserted to be genuine  and
         there was nothing granted to suggest that it was  not  and  it  was
         submitted the judge failed to properly assess the evidence  in  the
         round Tanveer Ahmed v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00439.

      4) Failure to take into account a material matter with respect to  the
         assertion  that  the  appellant  could  relocate  to  the  IKR  and
         submitted that the appellant could not return home  to  obtain  his
         CSID and the judge has already accepted that the appellant  was  at
         risk in his home area on account of the  conditions  there  meeting
         Article 15(c) and submitted that the appellant would in  any  event
         face undue hardships by relocating to the IKR as he had  no  family
         connections there or connections there and did not have a CSID.  It
         was submitted that the judge misapplied AA (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of
         State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ  944.   Although  the
         judge referred to AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation)  Iraq  CG
         UKUT 00212 (IAC) at paragraph 8, the judge failed to give substance
         to the guidance.  The  appellant  has  been  accepted  to  have  no
         adequate reception arrangements with his family by  the  respondent
         and the Immigration Judge did not take this into consideration.

Error of Law Discussion

Ground 1

 3. Ms Imamovi? relied on her grounds for permission.  With respect to  the
    judge's findings at [19] and [20], although not raised in the  grounds,
    Ms Imamovi? drew my attention to questions  99,  107  and  108  of  the
    asylum interview record.  However, it is evident that  the  judge  took
    this into consideration together with the  witness  statement  dated  3
    April 2018: the appellant had said that his employer had  been  started
    to be asked to close the restaurant down two or three months after  the
    appellant had started his job and 2-3 months after the first threat the
    restaurant was bombed.  His evidence was that he  started  his  job  in
    2016.  The explosion was said to have happened on 22 August 2017.   The
    appellant stated his witness statement was incorrect.   The  judge  was
    entitled to take into  consideration,  as  he  did,  that  the  witness
    statement  had  been  prepared  by  the   appellant's   solicitors   on
    instructions and the appellant  would  have  had  the  benefit  of  the
    presence of a social worker (and  I  note  that  the  judge  took  into
    consideration the appellant was a vulnerable witness, held the  hearing
    in private and took into account that he is a young person and he might
    not remember anything important or think matters were  important  where
    they might seem so to an adult).  Even  if  this  ground  was  properly
    before me, which I am not satisfied it was, no error  is  disclosed  in
    the judge's approach to this discrepancy.

 4. The judge was entitled to reach the conclusion he did  in  relation  to
    this discrepancy. It is also not the case that the judge could be  said
    to have resolved the other discrepancies  in  the  appellant's  favour.
    This is evidently not the case including given that the judge concluded
    at [24] that he did not believe the appellant  and  at  [26]  that  the
    account was fabricated.  The judge was not  required  to  set  out  all
    factual issues providing there were adequate  reasons  to  justify  the
    overall conclusion.  The judge found, at [19], that there were  aspects
    of the appellant's account which were not coherent and plausible.   The
    judge was required to provide an explanation for the conclusions on the
    central issues on which  the  appeal  was  determined.   There  was  no
    requirement for those reasons to be extensive if, as  is  the  case  in
    this decision, the decision as a whole makes sense (Shizad (sufficiency
    of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC)).  No error  of  law  is
    disclosed in ground 1.

 5.  Although  the  appellant's  grounds  appeared  to  suggest  that  only
    implausibilities were relied on, other than the inconsistency at  [19],
    the judge went on at [23] to take into account that there had  been  no
    independent confirmation  of  the  alleged  bomb  attack;  whereas  the
    appellant had been very precise with the date and location, there  were
    no news reports of the bombing or the demonstrations that were said  to
    follow it; there were news reports of other demonstrations in the  area
    but not on the date that the  appellant  had  stated.   The  judge  was
    entitled to reach the finding that he  did  that  it  might  have  been
    expected that there  would  be  a  report  available  of  something  as
    significant as a bomb in an urban area.

Ground 2

 6. Ms Imamovi? asserted the judge's findings were flawed from [19] to [22]
    and she cited the "power struggle" with the agent.   She  submitted  it
    was inconsistent for the judge to resolve the Section 8 matter  in  the
    appellant's favour, as not damaging to the appellant's credibility  for
    not claiming asylum before he came to the UK, given that  he  was  very
    young and was doing what he was told, and then for the  judge  to  take
    this as a matter relevant to plausibility in that  if  the  appellant's
    family were seeking to ensure his safety this could have been done much
    closer to Iraq and at much less expense.

 7. It is difficult to see where the alleged inconsistency lies:  The first
    matter relates to whether the appellant's credibility was  specifically
    damaged by his failure to claim in a  safe  country,  which  the  judge
    found it was not given his age and that  he  was  with  an  agent;  the
    second matter is in relation to the judge's overall finding as  to  the
    credibility of the appellant's story that he had been sent  to  the  UK
    for safety.   The  judge  properly  took  into  consideration  all  the
    evidence and it  was  available  to  the  judge  to  find  this  to  be
    implausible given the expense and length of the journey and that if his
    uncle wanted to ensure his safely this could have been done far  closer
    to Iraq and at less expense and less danger to the appellant.  That was
    a finding available to the judge.

 8. Ms Imamovi? relied on the grounds, that the appellant  had  sought  the
    assistance of friends and the community in the UK to locate his  family
    and that this had been misrecorded.  Although it is asserted the  judge
    has incorrectly recorded this there has been no attempt to verify  that
    assertion,  for  example  by  seeking  permission  to  produce  further
    evidence such as Counsel's record of the proceedings.  Although  it  is
    asserted the judge has incorrectly recorded this,  there  has  been  no
    attempt to verify the assertion for example by  seeking  permission  to
    produce further evidence such as Counsel's record of the proceedings.

 9. The judge was entitled to take into account all the evidence  including
    the appellant's oral evidence, which the judge recorded at  [22],  that
    the appellant had been in regular contact with his family by  telephone
    until he entered France but since that time he had had no contact  with
    them and had not telephoned and had made no enquiries  of  friends  and
    had not sought their whereabouts on Facebook.  He had  not  written  to
    them at their home address, had not  attempted  to  find  them  through
    Kurdish associations in the United Kingdom  his  explanation  for  that
    being that he did not have a telephone on the  journey  from  Iraq  and
    that his family did not give him a telephone number and  that  he  used
    the agent's phone but did not ask the agent for his family's  telephone
    number which the judge  did  not  accept.   I  note  that  the  alleged
    misrecording relates to seeking assistance of friends and the community
    to locate his family, whereas, as set out above, the judge has provided
    a number of other routes which the appellant did not pursue (which have
    not been challenged).  Any error in misrecording therefore would not be
    material.

10. The First-tier Tribunal Judge gave adequate reasons for the conclusions
    he  reached  and  was  entitled  to  find  that  information  from  the
    appellant's family would have been invaluable in assisting his case and
    to find the flaws he did with the appellant's account  for  not  having
    that information.

Ground 3

11. In respect of the arrest warrant, the judge stated, at [18], that there
    was "a challenge to the  authenticity  of  the  arrest  warrant".   The
    respondent in the refusal, at paragraph 40, noted that the warrant  was
    issued to the appellant's address by post and was dated 24 August  2017
    and the respondent stated that the arrest  warrant  was  considered  in
    line with Tanveer Ahmed:  that  it  was  of  poor  quality,  the  Iraqi
    imperial eagle was blurred with  no  strong  defined  lines,  that  the
    official stamps appeared to be stamped prior to the print as  the  type
    was covering the stamp, that there was no reference number for the case
    and no crime listed under the type of crime in legal  provisions.   The
    Judge recorded those difficulties, at [14].  Therefore, the  respondent
    concluded, at 41, that no weight was given to this document in  support
    of the claim.

12. The judge at [18] therefore  might  have  worded  his  summary  of  the
    respondent's position differently.  The respondent, at [40]  and  [41],
    set out the reasons why no weight was given to the  document.  Although
    the judge states that in short the respondent did not "believe that the
    document was  genuine"  any  error  in  the  judge's  wording  was  not
    material.  The error was one of terminology rather than  a  substantive
    error.  The respondent had concluded that little weight could be  given
    to the documents.  It is settled law that if  the  respondent  was  not
    satisfied that the document was genuine that it was for the  respondent
    to demonstrate that it was not genuine.  Whereas if the respondent  was
    not satisfied that any weight could be attached to the document, as was
    the case in this appeal, considered in the round the  burden  of  proof
    remains with the appellant to establish that the document can be relied
    on.

13. In that context, there is no material error in the judge's findings  at
    [18] that the appellant ought to have been in  a  position  to  provide
    further information or evidence in relation to the document although he
    was 17 and could not personally be blamed for making enquiries, he  was
    represented by solicitors and such information ought reasonably  to  be
    have been available to him.  That is not to have required corroboration
    and the judge correctly directed himself at  [15]  that  there  was  no
    obligation to  provide  corroboration,  although  it  remained  for  an
    appellant to make genuine efforts  to  substantiate  his  case  and  to
    submit all material facts at the appellant's disposal in line with  the
    provisions of paragraphs 339L.  The judge was not  satisfied,  for  the
    sustainable reasons he gave, that the appellant had done so.

14. The judge, in reaching his  conclusions  at  [24]  and  [25],  directed
    himself that he  "take  into  account  all  the  above  matters"  which
    included the inconsistencies, implausibilities and that  the  appellant
    had failed to submit all material matters at his disposal including  in
    relation to the arrest warrant.  The judge correctly took into account,
    again, the appellant's age and the low standard of proof however  given
    the findings there was no error in the judge's ultimate  conclusion  at
    [24] that "even taking that into account I  do  not  believe  what  the
    appellant says".

15. Although again at [25] arguably the judge's wording,  in  stating  that
    the appellant failed to make reasonable enquiries about  the  document,
    might have been different, what the  judge  was  saying  was  that  the
    appellant had failed to discharge the burden on him to demonstrate that
    the document could be relied on as  claimed.   There  was  no  material
    error in any miswording.





Ground 4

16. There was no material error disclosed in the judge's  approach  to  the
    country guidance case law, Although it was argued  that  the  appellant
    had been unable to return to his  home  area  and  that  there  was  no
    evidence of the appellant's CSID or passport and the judge  had  failed
    to take into account the undue hardships for him  to  relocate  to  IKR
    with no family or no connections and without a CSID  and  that  he  had
    failed to properly take into account the country guidance of AA  (Iraq)
    and AAH, the judge's findings must  be  seen  in  the  context  of  his
    factual findings.

17. The judge did not accept the appellant  is  a  credible  witness.   The
    judge concluded at [26] that the appellant did not work in a restaurant
    which was bombed.  The judge found that the  appellant  had  not  taken
    part in any demonstration.  The judge found that the appellant was  not
    wanted by the Iraqi  authorities  or  that  he  would  be  arrested  or
    mistreated.   The  judge  concluded  at  [26]  that  "his  account   is
    fabricated.  I find that he has been sent to the United Kingdom by  his
    family for other purposes than to ensure his safety."

18. The judge's subsequent conclusions must be considered in light of those
    findings.  The judge reminded himself that the country guidance  in  AA
    indicates that it was not safe for the appellant to return to his  home
    province of Salahadin.  Although the respondent suggested  it  was  now
    safe for the appellant to return there the judge found that  there  was
    no cogent evidence to persuade him to depart from AA and find  that  he
    could not return to his home area and the issue was  whether  he  could
    safely relocate somewhere else in Iraq and specifically the IKR.

19. The judge properly considered that although the appellant was not  from
    the IKR, he was an Iraqi Kurd and the judge made findings on the  basis
    of AA and AAH  including  that  there  were  domestic  flights  between
    Baghdad and the IKR but that the appellant would require a  CSID  or  a
    valid passport.  Although the appellant argued that he did not  have  a
    CSID the judge  specifically  considered  that  this  was  for  him  to
    establish and that it was unlikely that his mother  did  not  have  any
    identification documents.  Again, this must be considered in  light  of
    the judge's findings that the appellant had fabricated his case and the
    judge specifically reiterated at [31] that "I have found him to  be  an
    unreliable witness as to fact.  It  is  likely  that  his  family  have
    arranged and paid for him to come to the United Kingdom."

20. The judge went on to find that there was no reason  why  the  appellant
    should not be able to obtain his CSID from his family  members  or  use
    their assistance to obtain another one.  The judge was entitled to take
    into account, as he did, that his family had assisted  him  financially
    and would be likely to do so again.  Although the judge was mindful and
    took into account throughout the determination, the young  age  of  the
    appellant and that he was a minor, it was also open to him to take into
    account that the appellant claimed to have worked in Iraq in  the  past
    and that there was no reason why he could not in the future.

21. The judge's findings of fact, at [31] were  directly  relevant  to  his
    consideration of the risk  factors  identified.   Paragraph  9  of  the
    headnote of AAH summarises that those without the assistance of  family
    in the IKR have limited  accommodation  options  and  that  it  is  not
    reasonably likely, absent special circumstances, for  an  appellant  to
    gain access to one of the refugee camps.  The guidance goes on to  find
    that there are apartments available for $300 to $400 per month and that
    although there are 'critical shelter arrangements' it would  be  unduly
    harsh to expect an appellant to relocate  to  the  IKR  to  a  critical
    housing shelter without access to basic necessities such as food, clean
    water and clothing.  The guidance continues, that whether an  appellant
    would be able to access basic necessities necessitates consideration of
    the fact that failed asylum seekers are entitled to apply for  a  grant
    under the Voluntary Returns Scheme (VRS) and  consideration  should  be
    given to whether an appellant can obtain financial support from sources
    such as employment  (and  further  consideration  should  be  given  to
    whether an appellant is likely to secure employment), remittances  from
    relatives, charity.

22. In reaching the findings the  Tribunal  did  at  [31],  including  that
    failed asylum seekers can apply for a VRS grant,  that  the  judge  was
    satisfied his family were likely to financially assist him and that the
    appellant, although a young man, had previously worked in Iraq and  was
    a healthy young man and was therefore there was no reason he should not
    obtain employment again, the judge was properly applying  the  relevant
    country guidance and  was satisfied in the  appellant's  case  that  he
    could safely relocate to the IKR.  Those were findings  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach on the available evidence.

Notice of Decision
23. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not contain  an  error  of
    law and shall stand.  The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]                  Date:  26 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.

Signed   [pic]                  Date:  26 September 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson
