
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06597/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds Combined Court Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 17 January 2020                   |On 4 March 2020                      |
|Decision given orally at hearing     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     SM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Ell, Paragon Law
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    which,  following  a  hearing  in  Birmingham  on  12  September  2019,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the refusal by the  respondent
    of the appellant's protection claim.

 2. The appellant was accepted to be a minor and a  citizen  of  Iran.   He
    said that he had been engaged in the transportation  of  goods  in  the
    mountainous Kurdish region that straddles the border between  Iraq  and
    Iran.  He was what is known as a  Kolber,  who  is  a  form  of  trader
    tolerated to some extent by  the  Iranian  authorities  to  take  goods
    between Iraq and Iran in order for them to be sold in Iran.  The expert
    report of Dr Kakhki, which was before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    explains in great detail the Kolber system and the way in which Kolbers
    operate  at  the  margins,  at  least  in  some  respects,  of  Iranian
    toleration.  They are not, however, entitled to transport goods  of  an
    inherently illegal nature from Iraq to Iran.  This was the matter  that
    the appellant said had  caused  him  to  flee  and  seek  international
    protection.

 3. On a particular evening, he was travelling from Iraq to Iran  with  two
    horses when he was approached by individuals who compelled him to  hand
    the  horses  over  to  them,  and  also  to  hand   over   his   Kolber
    identification documentation.  The appellant then travelled some little
    way behind these individuals, who attempted to  cross  the  border  but
    were intercepted by guards, whereupon there was shooting.   The  upshot
    of this, according to the appellant, is that police came to his village
    and were told by the local headman there that a horse or horses were in
    fact those belonging to the appellant.  Fearing that his  life  was  in
    danger because the authorities would regard him as  being  involved  in
    the transportation of proscribed literature across the  border  by  the
    individuals to  whom  I  have  made  reference,  the  appellant  sought
    international protection.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal Judge described  the  appellant's  evidence  at
    paragraph 16 as confused and contradictory.  At paragraph 17 he  wrote:
    "Second, even if I am wrong about this, the plain ...".  This  sentence
    then breaks off, and we do not know what was intended to be said.  That
    may not be necessarily material if  the  judge  nevertheless  had  made
    cogent  findings  regarding  the  appellant's  lack   of   credibility.
    However, reading on from paragraph 17, it is in my view  apparent  that
    the judge failed to make such findings.

 5. Paragraph 20 contains some aspects  of  the  evidence  that  the  judge
    considered to be in effect confused  and  contradictory.   One  passage
    that troubles me, however, is that related to the oral  evidence  given
    by the appellant, who said that he never showed the ID card to  anyone.
    The judge considered  that  that  ID  card  was  the  so-called  Kolber
    booklet.  However, since the judge has  not  placed  in  the  file  any
    Record of Proceedings, it is difficult to know  quite  what  the  judge
    meant by this.

 6. The judge in any  event  in  my  view  failed  to  place  his  findings
    regarding the credibility of the appellant's account in the context  of
    the detailed expert report, to  which  I  have  made  reference.   That
    further undermines the safety of the adverse credibility findings  that
    the judge made.

 7. At paragraph 22, the judge noted that  the  appellant  was  a  licensed
    Kolber; but then said: "There is  no  suggestion  that  he  himself  is
    involved in any illegal activity.  There is no  evidence  that  he  has
    been apprehended with proscribed literature materials".   Whether  that
    was a finding that is compatible with the contents of paragraph  20  is
    in my view doubtful.  It is unclear whether at paragraph 22  the  judge
    is saying that even if the appellant's account were correct, he has not
    been apprehended with proscribed literature  materials.   If  that  was
    what the judge was saying, then plainly there is a problem because  the
    Iranian  authorities,  according  to  the  appellant,  suspect  him  of
    involvement with the transhipment of such materials.

 8. Quite apart from this, I also consider that there is merit in Mr  Ell's
    submission that the expert report,  taken  with  the  relevant  Country
    Guidance, required consideration by the First-tier Tribunal Judge, even
    if that judge had decided that details of the appellant's  account,  in
    particular the  events  on  that  particular  night,  were  not  to  be
    believed.  The judge found that the appellant was  a  licensed  Kolber.
    Given that and his Kurdish ethnicity, there is an issue as  to  whether
    the appellant would be at real risk of serious harm on return, even  if
    he has not told the truth about the events of that particular  evening.



 9. For these reasons, I find that the judge's decision  cannot  stand.   I
    accordingly set it aside in its entirety.  It will be for a  new  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal to decide all questions  of  fact  and  then
    apply to them the relevant law and Country Guidance in order to reach a
    sustainable decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date 20 February 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber







