
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06684/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 June 2019                      |On 18 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     HS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. N. Paramjorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr. C. Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  a  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Davidson, promulgated on 28  March  2019,  in  which  he
    refused the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to
    refuse a grant of asylum.

 2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity  direction,  continuing
    that made in the First-tier Tribunal.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  that  it  was  "arguable
    that the judge failed at all to consider the evidence of Dr Chris Smith
    upon which the Appellant relies".

 4. At the hearing Mr. Avery accepted that the failure to take into account
    the country expert report of Dr. Smith was a material error of law.   I
    stated that I agreed that this amounted to a material error of law  and
    set the decision aside.  I remitted it to the First-tier Tribunal to be
    remade.



Error of Law

 5. The Judge sets out the evidence which was before him at [8].   At  [8c]
    he refers to the "opinion of Dr Chris Smith regarding the  position  in
    India in relation to the matters in issue including  his  opinion  that
    bribery is widespread in India and that there is a risk  in  requesting
    the arrest warrant as that could mark the person  as  being  associated
    with the Khalistan movement".

 6. At [20] to [26] the Judge sets out the Appellant's case, and refers  in
    these paragraphs to Dr. Smith's report.

 7. However, despite clearly being aware of Dr. Smith's report, there is no
    reference at all to this report in  the  findings  from  [29]  onwards.
    There is no consideration of this report at all.  I find that the Judge
    has failed to engage with the report  of  Dr.  Smith.   Given  that  he
    acknowledged that this report went to the matters in issue at  [9],  it
    is clearly material to the Appellant's appeal.  I find, as accepted  by
    Mr. Avery, that this failure to engage with the expert  report  of  Dr.
    Smith is a material error of law.

 8. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier  Tribunal.   The  nature  of  the  error  means   that   the
    credibility findings cannot stand and so, given the nature  and  extent
    of the fact-finding necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  and
    having  regard  to  the  overriding  objective,  I  find  that  it   is
    appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

 9. The decision involves the making of a material error of law.  I set the
    decision aside.  The appeal is remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal  to
    be reheard.







Directions

 1. Mr. Paramjorthy is representing the Appellant  on  a  pro  bono  basis.
    Prior to this appeal being listed, the listing team at Hatton Cross  is
    to  contact  Mr.  Paramjorthy's  clerk  on   [~]   to   ascertain   his
    availability.

 2. A Punjabi interpreter is required.

 3. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Davidson.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 13 June 2019

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

