

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                Appeal
Number: PA/06277/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal |Decision & Reasons promulgated   |
|on 21 June 2017                         |on 22 June 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     MTS
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Samra of Harbans Singh & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mrs Petterson Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Fenoughty ('the Judge') promulgate on 5 January 2017 in  which  the
        Judge dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


     2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq born on [ ]  1993  who  appealed
        against the refusal to grant him asylum. The appellant  claimed  he
        faces a real risk from IS and did not  want  to  live  in  an  area
        controlled by them. He also claims to  fear  a  number  of  Kurdish
        groups as his father had been a member of the  Ba'ath  party  which
        had targeted Kurds. The appellant also asserted a fear of  the  PUK
        and KDP as he had been part  of  a  party  that  voiced  opposition
        against the President and took part  in  demonstrations  and  media
        interviews criticising him. Other aspects of the appellant's  claim
        were rejected by the Secretary of State too.
     3. The  Judge  sets  out  the  evidence  provided,  appropriate  legal
        provisions, and the submissions relied upon by the advocates before
        making findings of fact at [58 - 90] of the decision. The  findings
        may be summarised in the following terms:


   i. A number of inconsistencies in the evidence undermined the credibility
      of the appellant's evidence [58].
  ii. The tribunal was willing to attach some credence  to  the  appellant's
      account of his family life as it was  consistent  with  his  brother's
      account [59].
 iii. The tribunal did not accept that the appellant and his family would be
      at risk as a consequence of his  father's  membership  of  the  Ba'ath
      party (if true) seventeen years after his death in light of  the  fact
      his mother had been able to live in the village and  Sulaimaniyah  and
      owned and sold property and worked  in  business  and  enrolled  on  a
      course without being subjected to any harm or threats over that period
      [59].
  iv. The tribunal did not accept the appellant had left  his  identity  and
      nationality documents behind when he left home in Dooz [60].
   v. The tribunal found it inconsistent that the appellant would have  left
      Dooz  without  his  CSID  card  and  yet  been  able  to   travel   to
      Sulaymaniyah, obtain a passport, buy, operate and sell a business  and
      enrol on a hairdressing course without documents  [61].  The  Tribunal
      found the appellant had taken  his  identity  documents  with  him  or
      obtained replacement identity documents on arrival in Sulaymaniyah  in
      2014 [61].
  vi. The appellants claim to be  at  risk  was  inconsistent  with  country
      guidance which indicated that Kurds who are not  from  the  IKR  could
      relocate to the area. The same material  found  having  former  Ba'ath
      party connections did not enhance the risk of indiscriminate  violence
      [62].
 vii. The appellants evidence regarding threats following his establishing a
      political party with friends in February 2011 and being  arrested  was
      inconsistent [63].
viii. The appellant purported to be a  member  of  the  Gorran  party.   Two
      letters provided were  not  dated,  one  had  no  heading  one  had  a
      questionable  heading,  neither  envelope  sending  the  letters   was
      provided to the tribunal. The appellant claims to have taken part in a
      TV programme for approximately one and a half minutes  and  criticised
      what the P UK were doing for Sulaymaniyah [64].
  ix. The tribunal  accepted  it  was  improbable  the  police  would  allow
      detainees to take photographs of themselves in handcuffs and a  police
      car and found it inconsistent the appellant would have  been  arrested
      and released if he was in breach  of  bail  conditions.  The  tribunal
      accepted the respondent's submission that the TV channel on which  the
      appellant had appeared was one  which  the  regime  tolerated  despite
      opposition views, accepted the transcript did not contain any specific
      criticism which had been shown to  put  the  appellant  at  risk,  and
      accepted the Gorran Party is an official opposition party. It  is  not
      accepted the appellant's activities went beyond legitimate  opposition
      activities to an extent it placed at risk of harm or that he  received
      a specific threat to his life [65].
   x. The appellant's representatives did not address the  tribunal  on  the
      appellants sur place activities. There was no evidence  the  appellant
      was involved in political activities in the UK which might  place  him
      at risk from the authorities on return to Iraq [66].
  xi. Extracts from social media in telephone conversations did not identify
      the originator of the threatening remarks or indicate he  was  in  any
      way connected with or influential over the authorities  in  Iraq.  The
      appellant's representative did not address the tribunal in relation to
      these documents [67].
 xii. The tribunal found the  appellant  gave  a  vague  and  unsatisfactory
      account of the  contact  between  himself  and  his  mother  which  is
      contradicted by his brother's account regarding when they were last in
      contact. [68].
xiii. The tribunal did not accept the reason it was claimed nobody from  the
      church came to support the appellant, which was said to be because the
      conversion was recent, was reasonable to expect a member of the church
      would have been invited to give evidence of the  appellant's  interest
      in Christianity, irrespective of its extent and duration. [69].
 xiv.  The  appellant's  evidence  was  found  to   be   contradictory   and
      inconsistent such that the Judge could not place significant weight on
      his evidence. The tribunal was not prepared to accept the  unsupported
      claim the appellant had converted to Christianity and that evidence to
      this effect had been given in order to bolster his case [70].
  xv. Evidence regarding contact  by  the  appellant  with  his  mother  was
      inconsistent. The appellant remained in contact with  his  mother  who
      could continue to support him financially as she had  done  when  they
      lived in Iraq and will be able to  vouch  for  him  if  he  needed  to
      establish his identity for the purpose of re-documentation [71].
 xvi. The appellants evidence  is  unreliable  and  inconsistent.  Documents
      relied upon by the appellant had not been shown  to  be  authentic  by
      reference to material or expert evidence that is  independent  of  the
      appellant. The letters and photographs were  not  documents  on  which
      reliance could properly be placed [72].
xvii. The tribunal  did  not  accept  that  every  inconsistency  identified
      undermined the appellant's credibility. The tribunal was  prepared  to
      accept  that  the  appellant's  support  for  the  Gorran  party   was
      consistent with his views and  opinions  but  did  not  consider  that
      amounted to evidence of active political engagement of  a  kind  which
      would lead to the appellant being subjected to adverse attention  from
      the authorities [73].
xviii. The appellant's credibility is damaged as a result of his failure  to
      seek asylum in France or Germany, especially as he had direct  contact
      with the German authorities where he had been fingerprinted [74].
 xix.  The  tribunal  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  account   of   the
      circumstances in which he claimed to have left Iraq. The tribunal  did
      not accept the appellant will be at  risk  on  return  to  Iraq  as  a
      consequence of his relationship to his father who died in 1999, if  it
      was accepted he was a member of the Ba'ath party [75].
  xx.  The  tribunal  accepted  the  appellant  could  not  return  to  Dooz
      personally but found his mother had access to proxies who sold land on
      her behalf after she had left and considered it reasonable  to  assume
      that the appellant would similarly be able to access a proxy to assist
      in obtaining the required documentation [77].
 xxi. The tribunal did not accept the appellant's claim that his mother  had
      disowned him as a consequence of finding out about  his  new  religion
      and found they remained in contact and that  she  should  be  able  to
      support him financially and by providing  copies  of  information  and
      documentation to enable the appellant to obtain replacement documents,
      if required [78].
xxii. The appellant did not tell  the  tribunal  whether  he  had  made  any
      attempt to obtain replacement identity documents [79].
xxiii. The appellant as a former resident could travel directly to  the  IKR
      or as a Kurd gain temporary admission without needing a sponsor [82].
xxiv. Had the appellant not been a resident of the IKR he would be  returned
      to Baghdad from where it had not been shown he would be precluded from
      taking a flight to the IKR.
 xxv.  The  tribunal  was  not  satisfied  the   appellant's   interest   in
      Christianity was genuine. There was nothing in case law to indicate  a
      Christian relocating to the IKR would be at risk of harm [86].


     4. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The operative part of the
        grant reads:


        2.    The grounds argue that the Judge made  factual  errors  about
             the  evidence  which  led  to  negative  findings  which  were
             therefore unsafe. The Judge failed to make a finding regarding
             the actions of the PUK or KDP against critics.


        3.   It is arguable that  the  Judge  erred  in  finding  that  the
             appellant had not been critical of the PUK and KDP in view  of
             the  transcript  from  1/10/15  (video   1)   found   in   the
             respondent's bundle. This  ground  is  arguable.  It  is  also
             arguable that the appellant's answers regarding  his  passport
             were not clear and could have been read as the grounds assert.
             This ground is arguable. It is also arguable  that  the  Judge
             erred in finding the appellant claimed to have  been  released
             on bail in 2012 or 2015. This ground is also arguable.


     5. The respondent opposes the appeal.



Error of law


     6. Mr Samra asserted the Judge had made a number of factual errors  in
        the decision. These include the Judge mistaking the meaning of  the
        answer to question 59 of the appellant's asylum interview. In  this
        part of the interview the  appellant  was  being  asked  about  his
        passport. At question 58 he was asked why  he  had  a  passport  to
        which he replied "For travel or holiday". At  question  59  he  was
        asked when he obtained the passport to which  he  responded  "2014,
        don't remember date, it  was  when  I  moved  from  DK".  Mr  Samra
        submitted that the appellant was stating that the passport was made
        in 2014 when he was leaving Dooz not that he had it made  after  he
        moved. Mr Samra accepts the reply may be interpreted both ways  but
        claims the Judge should have sought clarification before making  an
        adverse finding.
     7. The Judge at [59 - 61] did not accept that the appellant  had  left
        his identity and nationality documents behind him when he left  his
        home in Dooz. This accords with the appellant's claim that  he  had
        his passport with him at that  time.  The  Judge  noted  the  above
        questions and interpreted the response as a statement the appellant
        got the passport in 2015 when he moved from Dooz because he  wanted
        to go to Turkey for a visit. The issue arose as in a later  written
        witness statement the appellant  had  claimed  to  have  left  Dooz
        hurriedly but to have taken his passport with him. The Judge  found
        it inconsistent that the appellant would have left Dooz without his
        CSID card yet been able to  travel  to  Sulaimaniyah  to  obtain  a
        passport. The  Judge  summarises  the  findings  at  [61]  as  "the
        tribunal found that either the appellant  had  taken  his  identity
        document with him, or  he  had  been  able  to  obtain  replacement
        identity documents on arrival in Sulaimaniyah in 2014, by which  he
        was able to live and work in the region  for  over  a  year".  This
        finding  encompasses  the  appellant's  claim  to  have  taken  the
        identity documents with him when he left Dooz. The grounds fail  to
        make out any arguable material  error  based  upon  the  Judge  not
        bringing this matter to the appellant's attention and nor  do  they
        establish arguable legal error material to the decision. The  Judge
        accepted that the appellant had the documents, as  he  claims,  and
        that he used the documents to enable him to live and  work  in  the
        IKR.
     8. Mr Samra also submitted the Judge made an error of fact [63] as the
        appellant did not state that  in  2012  he  was  released  on  bail
        conditions as this only applied to the 2011 arrest. Mr Samra stated
        the evidence given at the hearing was that the appellant was bailed
        and released on conditions in 2011 and  arrested  and  released  in
        2012 and 2015 which is consistent with the evidence in his  witness
        statement. Bail conditions and  court  appearance  related  to  one
        arrest only. It is argued there are no consistencies  as  found  by
        the Judge recorded in the interview, witness statement or in  court
        papers and that the Judge misunderstood or misread the evidence.
     9. In [63] the Judge noted the appellant's claim to have been arrested
        in 2011 which is not disputed. The Judge then finds  the  appellant
        claimed  he  had  been  arrested  in  2012  and  released  on  bail
        conditions and that he was again arrested in 2015, yet  claimed  in
        reply to a question at interview only to have been detained once in
        2011 and that on the  other  two  occasions  he  was  arrested  and
        released the same day.
    10. The appellant in reply to question 124  of  the  interview  claimed
        that he gave interviews regarding  political  issues  when  he  was
        released in February 2012, and did not give an interview  in  2015.
        In reply to question 126 when the appellant was asked how  long  he
        was detained on each occasion replied "just one time in  July  2011
        for four days, the other times I was  arrested  and  released  same
        day".
    11. The appellant has been arguably consistent in relation to his claim
        to have been arrested in 2011 and to have  been  released  on  bail
        conditions and that on other occasions in 2012 and 2015 not to have
        been made the subject of bail conditions, but to have been released
        shortly thereafter, although Mr Samra claimed  in  his  submissions
        that the appellant was also beaten on these occasions.  I  find  it
        made out that the Judge appears to  have  made  an  error  of  fact
        although it has not been made  out  that  it  is  material  to  the
        overall decision.
    12. Mr  Samra  submitted  that  at  [65]  the  Judge  found  the  video
        conference did not show the appellant was critical of  the  Kurdish
        Government which is stated not to be materially correct. A copy  of
        the  transcript  of  the  interview  has  been  provided   in   the
        appellant's bundle and attached  to  the  respondent's  bundle.  Mr
        Samra's submission is that the appellant accused the PUK  of  doing
        nothing for the region but stealing the money and the KDP of  being
        against the Kurds by supporting Saddam in 1996 and also  criticises
        a regional leader by saying he is the cause of the crisis and  will
        not solve the same. It has submitted such statements  are  critical
        of the main parties in the region  which  have  not  been  properly
        considered by the Judge.
    13. At [65] the Judge makes a number of findings including that part of
        the appellant's  claim  was  improbable  and  inconsistent.  Whilst
        accepting the appellant had undertaken the interview it  was  found
        that it was one on a channel the regime tolerated,  notwithstanding
        the broadcast of opposition views. The finding by the Judge is that
        the transcript did not contain any  specific  criticism  which  had
        been shown to put the appellant at risk. It is not a finding by the
        Judge  that  the  interview  was  not  critical  of   the   Kurdish
        Government. A reading of the transcript shows criticisms raised  by
        the appellant but it was not made out,  as  the  Judge  identified,
        that even though they appear on the face of  them  to  be  critical
        they are of a sufficiently antagonistic nature  to  create  a  real
        risk of persecution in the eyes of any  potential  persecutor.  The
        specific finding is that the appellant had not  demonstrated  that,
        despite his comments in the television interview, he faced  a  real
        risk of ill-treatment on return. The party the  appellant  supports
        is the main opposition party in the IKR and it is likely that  many
        things of a similar nature are said.   The  appellant's  stance  in
        relation to the degree of risk was not made  out  by  reference  to
        relevant country information. No material error  of  law  has  been
        arguably established.
    14. Mr Samra further submits that at [73] the Judge found the appellant
        was a supporter of the Gorran party and active on TV but found such
        activities would not be  enough  to  subject  him  to  the  adverse
        attention of the authorities but did not state why as  the  content
        of the evidence is critical and the Judge should highlight where he
        thinks the line is for parties like the PUK and  KDP  to  react  to
        criticism they received. Such ground has  no  arguable  merit.  The
        burden of proving a person is entitled to a grant of  international
        protection lies upon the person so alleging. If the  appellant  was
        claiming that what he did crossed the threshold of tolerance,  such
        that he faced a real risk from either of the parties named, it  was
        necessary for the  appellant  to  produce  sufficient  evidence  to
        corroborate this claim.
    15. The Judge did not dispute that the appellant had made the  comments
        on television or that he was a member of the opposition  party  but
        the country information provided in the appellant's  appeal  bundle
        and/or at the hearing does not arguably support a finding that  the
        Judge materially erred in law in not allowing the appeal.  In  this
        ground, Mr Samra is attempting to reverse the burden of proof which
        does not fall upon the Judge.
    16. The grounds submit that the  errors  led  to  negative  credibility
        findings and  are  not  adequately  reasoned.  Even  though  it  is
        accepted the Judge made some errors, what is not accepted  is  that
        these errors have been shown to be material on  the  basis  of  the
        reasons pleaded in the grounds seeking permission to appeal to  the
        Upper Tribunal.

  17. At the hearing, Mr Samra sought to  introduce  a  further  element  by
      reference to the country guidance case of AA (Article 15 (c)) Iraq  CG
      [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC). Mr Samra submitted it  was  accepted  that  the
      appellant came from a contested area. Mr Samra refer to  the  headnote
      at paragraph 17 which reads: "17.  The Respondent will only  return  P
      to the IKR if P originates from the IKR and P's identity has been 'pre-
      cleared' with the IKR authorities. The authorities in the IKR  do  not
      require P to have an expired or current passport, or laissez passer. "
      It was argued that the term "originates from" refers to the fact  that
      a person has to be from the IKR before he can be returned directly  to
      that region. A person not entitled to return  directly  will  have  to
      return via Baghdad.  In such a case the Judge was required to  examine
      in detail the findings made by the Upper Tribunal in AA in relation to
      the reasonableness of internal relocation to Baghdad. As stated,  this
      is not a matter that was raised in the original grounds of appeal.

  18. In AA, the tribunal found:

        Internal relocation


                                                      Legal Framework


 147. Article 8 of  the  Qualification  Directive,  which  applies  to  both
      Refugee Convention and subsidiary (humanitarian) protection claims, is
      headed "Internal protection" and provides:


                   "1.    As  part  of  the  assessment   of   international
             protection, Member States may determine that an  applicant  is
             not in need of international protection if in a  part  of  the
             country of origin there  is  no  well-founded  fear  of  being
             persecuted or no real risk of suffering serious harm  and  the
             applicant can reasonably be expected to stay in that  part  of
             the country.
                  2.   In examining whether a part of the country of  origin
             is in accordance with paragraph 1, Member States shall at  the
             time of taking the decision on the application have regard  to
             the general circumstances  prevailing  in  that  part  of  the
             country and to the personal circumstances of the applicant.
             3. Paragraph 1 may apply notwithstanding  technical  obstacles
             to return to the country of origin."


                                            148. The  correct  approach  to
                                                 the issue of relocation is
                                                 that  set  out   by   Lord
                                                 Bingham   in Januzi   v
                                                 Secretary of State for the
                                                 Home   Department [2006]
                                                 UKHL 5  [2006]  2  AC  426
                                                 i.e. whether a person  can
                                                 reasonably be expected  to
                                                 relocate  or  whether   it
                                                 would be unduly  harsh  to
                                                 expect them to do  so.  In
                                                 AH (Sudan) &  others  (FC)
                                                 [2007] UKHL  49  at  [22],
                                                 Baroness  Hale   described
                                                 the reasonableness test as
                                                 being  "stringent".    The
                                                 burden of proof,  as  with
                                                 all   aspects    of    the
                                                 subsidiary      protection
                                                 determination process that
                                                 we  are  concerned   with,
                                                 falls on the appellant.


                                            149. If  an  ordinary  civilian
                                                 can establish a real  risk
                                                 of serious harm  exceeding
                                                 the     Article      15(c)
                                                 threshold  in  their  home
                                                 area,  then  in  order  to
                                                 found  eligibility  for  a
                                                 grant   of    humanitarian
                                                 (subsidiary)   protection,
                                                 it   also   has   to    be
                                                 demonstrated that  such  a
                                                 person cannot relocate  to
                                                 another   region    either
                                                 because there  is  a  real
                                                 risk of serious  harm  in,
                                                 or en  route  to,  such  a
                                                 region     or      because
                                                 circumstances exist  there
                                                 that would otherwise  make
                                                 it unreasonable or  unduly
                                                 harsh for such a person to
                                                 relocate. The presence  of
                                                 Article  3  etc.   serious
                                                 harm is not a prerequisite
                                                 for      finding      that
                                                 relocation would be unduly
                                                 harsh or unreasonable.


                                                      Places of Return


                                            150. The Respondent states that
                                                 she will only return Iraqi
                                                 nationals    to     either
                                                 Baghdad or to the IKR. The
                                                 Respondent also identified
                                                 that she will only  return
                                                 a person  to  the  IKR  if
                                                 that person  is  from  the
                                                 IKR and  such  person  has
                                                 been    pre-cleared    for
                                                 return    by    the    IKR
                                                 authorities.


  19. The reference to return to the IKR is a reference to the Secretary  of
      State's position/policy. The tribunal in AA do not  specifically  seek
      to limit the meaning of the phrase "if that person is  from  the  IKR"
      which therefore has to be given its ordinary meaning. The Judge  noted
      in [32] that  the  guidance  in  AA  stated  that  "return  of  former
      residents to the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be to the IKR".  This
      clearly indicates that what is required is a connection with  the  IKR
      before direct return is considered with no indication  that  this  did
      not apply to former residents who did not originate from that area. It
      is accepted that those who will be returned directly are likely to  be
      Iraqi Kurds as this is a predominantly Kurdish area. The appellant  is
      an Iraq Kurd and a former resident of Sulaimaniyah within the IKR. The
      Judge was arguably entitled  to  conclude  that  he  fell  within  the
      definition of a former resident which is a term not only satisfied  by
      having a birth connection or duration of any specific  minimum  period
      of residence within the IKR. The appellant lived in that area, worked,
      traded and functioned as a member of that community.
  20. It is also noted in AA that any returns directly to the IKR have to be
      pre-cleared by the Kurdish authorities. On  the  facts  known  to  the
      Judge there was little evidence to indicate a likelihood that such pre-
      clearance would be refused.
  21. The Judge does consider return to  Baghdad  at  [83]  but  by  way  of
      speculation if the appellant had not been a  former  resident  of  the
      IKR. In that respect the Judge  found  return  would  be  feasible  to
      Baghdad from where the appellant could fly to  the  IKR.  No  arguable
      legal error is made out in the Judges  approach  to  the  question  of
      return to Baghdad as this is not a primary finding. As  stated  it  is
      the Judge, at its highest, considering matters in the alternative.
  22. There is no other challenge pleaded to the findings of the Judge which
      set out  other  adverse  credibility  issues.  Having  considered  the
      submissions, with the appropriate degree of anxious scrutiny, as  this
      is a protection claim, this tribunal  finds  that  the  appellant  has
      failed to establish any arguable legal error material to the  decision
      to dismiss the appeal.


Decision

    23. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    24. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 21 June 2017












