
                                    [pic]
The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06053/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4th January 2017                      |On 8th February 2017              |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                 Mr. A.T.A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

An Anonymity Direction is made.

Representation:

For the Appellant:                Unrepresented.
For the Respondent:    Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.  The appellant in the First-tier Tribunal proceedings is the one  who  is
   appealing to the Upper Tribunal. Consequently, the parties are  named  as
   before.

2. The appellant claimed protection in December 2015 on the basis  he  fears
   persecution from the State. He said he is  an  Iranian  national  and  is
   Kurdish. He is a Sunni Muslim. His brother, Mr ATM was born in  1986  and
   left Iran in 2008. He made a claim for protection in the United Kingdom a
   number of years earlier which was granted on appeal. The  appellant  said
   that his brother was a supporter of  the  left-wing  Kurdish  nationalist
   party Komala who fled in fear of the authorities.

3. The appellant said he was fearful of the Iranian authorities  because  of
   the family connection and said the authorities questioned him on  several
   occasions about his brother, the last  occasion  being  in  2008  shortly
   after his brother left. Furthermore, the appellant had been involved with
   a group called the Green Mountain Council and believes this  would  cause
   him difficulties.

4. The respondent accepted the appellant was Iranian.  However, no  risk  to
   him was identified due  to  his  brother's  claimed  activities.  It  was
   pointed out that the appellant had not experienced problems  between  his
   brother leaving in 2008 and the appellant coming to the United Kingdom in
   November 2015.

5. The Green Mountain Council is an environmental group  which  is  accepted
   by the Iranian authorities and so any involvement by the appellant should
   not cause difficulties.

The First tier Tribunal

6.  His appeal was heard by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Hindson  at
   Bradford in September 2016. Neither party was represented. The judge  had
   the respondent's bundle which  included  his  screening  and  substantive
   interview and documents the appellant had provided to the respondent. The
   appellant provided no additional documentation  .The  appellant  attended
   and his brother, Mr ATM, was  called  as  a  witness.  His  brother  gave
   evidence about his activities with Komala. The appellant claimed that the
   Green Mountain Council was a cover for a Kurdish group.

7. The judge did not find the  appellant  to  be  a  credible  witness.  The
   appellant claimed that he had lost contact with  his  brother  until  two
   weeks before the hearing. His brother produced documentation  showing  he
   had been granted indefinite leave to remain. The judge was satisfied that
   they were siblings and that his brother has been granted refugee  status.
   The judge commented on the point made  by  the  respondent,  namely,  the
   appellant had lived in the family home for the last eight  years  without
   any serious difficulties.

8. The judge did not find the appellant would be at risk  on  return  solely
   on the basis he had left the country illegally and was being returned  as
   someone who had unsuccessfully claim protection. However, he would be  at
   risk if his brother was a political activist and the Iranian  authorities
   asked him if they had been in contact  with  each  other  in  the  United
   Kingdom (para 30).  However,  the  judge  stated  that  on  the  evidence
   presented he could not be satisfied  that  the  appellant's  brother  had
   secured  refugee  status  because  of  political  opinion  and  concluded
   therefore the appellant would not be at risk  as  a  consequence  of  his
   brother's activities.

9. The judge did not accept that  Green  Mountain  Council  is  a  political
   organisation and membership or support would not cause difficulties  with
   the Iranian authorities. The judge did not find the appellant  had  taken
   part in any anti-government activities under cover of this organisation.

10. The appellant had made an additional claim based on the  possibility  of
   being required to do military service  and  his  father's  opposition  to
   this. The judge concluded that neither his father's disapproval  nor  the
   prospect of conscription would found a claim for protection.





The Upper Tribunal

11. The application for permission to appeal was on the basis the judge  had
   found his brother's evidence about his  political  activities  consistent
   with that given by the appellant and had accepted he was granted  refugee
   status yet doubted the appellant's own claim.

12. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was  open  to  the
   judge to seek a copy of the determination of the appellant's brother. The
   judge had accepted the relationship between the appellant and his brother
   but said there was no evidence as to the basis upon which his brother had
   secured protection beyond what he said.  Having  identified  a  potential
   risk factor it was arguably only just the judge should have sought a copy
   of the decision in his brother's appeal.

13. The respondent has replied by way of rule  24,  pointing  out  that  the
   burden of proof was upon the appellant and it was not for the tribunal to
   speculate in the absence of evidence the basis upon  which  he  had  been
   granted protection. In any event, the authorities in Iran had  not  shown
   any interest in the appellant for almost 8 years. It was  submitted  that
   if anything the judge went to far at paragraph 30 in  concluding  contact
   with his brother since coming to the United Kingdom would  place  him  at
   risk. There was no challenge to the  judge's  conclusion  in  respect  of
   Green Mountain Council.

14. I asked the appellant about representation. He said at one stage he  did
   have advice but not any longer. He said that if returned he would  be  at
   risk for leaving the country  illegally  and  for  his  involvement  with
   Mountain Council. He said that one of his friends who had  been  involved
   with this group had been arrested. He said when he was  a  child  he  was
   questioned about his brother but nothing further happened because he  was
   so young. He said the problem about return related to  the  treatment  of
   Kurds in Iran. He said that if he was returned and was  questioned  about
   his  brother  he  would  tell  the  authorities  the  truth  although  on
   reflection he thought he might say he had not seen him.

15. The presenting officer submitted that the burden of proof  is  upon  the
   appellant. Furthermore, the judge's comment  at  paragraph  30  that  the
   appellant would not be expected to lie if questioned about his brother on
   return appears to be an unjustified extension of the principle set out in
   HJ Iran.

Consideration

16. The First-tier judge was  faced  with  unrepresented  appellant  and  no
   appearance on behalf of the respondent. The only documentation  available
   was that contained in the respondent's bundle. The  judge  accepted  that
   the person the appellant  presented  as  his  brother  was  in  fact  his
   brother. This brother had provided a driving licence and  a  UK  identity
   card in the same name as that given. The documents gave his date of birth
   as  1986  which  accorded  with  the  account  given  by  the  appellant.
   Furthermore, the judge accepted his brother had been  granted  indefinite
   leave to remain as evidenced by the identity card  presented.  The  judge
   accepted that they had not had contact for several years and met  shortly
   before the hearing. However, beyond what  the  appellant's  brother  said
   there was no other evidence about the basis upon which  he  had  obtained
   asylum.

17. A judge can only deal with  the  evidence  presented.  Whilst  tribunals
   have an enabling function in the context of immigration appeals this does
   not mean a judge errs in law for not adjourning to  seek  evidence  which
   may help an appellant. It was open to the appellant and  his  brother  to
   bring along the determination.

18. In any event, there is nothing to suggest that  had  the  decision  been
   available the judge would have erred in law in dismissing the appeal. His
   brother was accepted as a person at risk by reason of political  opinion.
   However, this has been reached on the basis of a  very  low  standard  of
   proof. On the claims made by the appellant and his  brother  the  Iranian
   authorities were aware of his brother's activities  in  Iran.  The  point
   made by the respondent was that his brother left in 2008 at  which  stage
   the appellant was only nine years old. In the intervening years he had no
   trouble from the authorities.

19. The judge's comment at paragraph 30 that  the  appellant  could  not  be
   expected to lie about his brother is not supported by any  authority.  At
   the hearing the appellant was ambivalent about whether he  would  mention
   his brother. Without  more,  it  is  difficult  to  see  how  this  would
   materially enhance the risk for the  appellant  given  that  the  Iranian
   authorities were aware of his brother.

20. In conclusion, I do not find the judge materially erred in  law  in  not
   attempting to obtain the decision issued in the appeal of the appellant's
   brother. Consequently, the decision  dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
   shall stand.

Decision.

The decision of First tier Judge Hindson dismissing the appeal shall  stand.
No material error of law has been established.



Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly


An Anonymity Direction is  made.  Unless  and  until  a  tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  them.  This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of Court proceedings.

