
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06703/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC               |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 January 2020                     |On 10 January 2020                  |
|                                      |                                    |


                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     SA
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Nicolauo, instructed by Birnberg Peirce &
Partners
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  Devlin  promulgated  20.9.19,  dismissing  his  appeal
    against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 13.6.19 to refuse
    his protection claim made on 4.7.19, based on imputed political opinion
    and fear of punishment by Hamas on return to the  Occupied  Palestinian
    Territories.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison refused permission to  appeal
    on 29.10.19. However, when the application was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan granted permission to appeal on
    15.11.19.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found such error of law in the  making
    of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal as to require it to  be  set
    aside.

 4. The appellant, who is Palestinian, claims a fear of  persecution,  ill-
    treatment, or killing from Hamas on account of the fact that he  evaded
    recruitment,  failed  to  assist  them  in  developing  their   weapons
    technology, and  breached  a  specific  agreement  to  return  to  Gaza
    following their conditional grant of permission to travel to the UK.

 5. Judge Devlin did not find the appellant credible and rejected the claim
    to be in fear of Hamas on return to Gaza.

 6. It is submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  erred  in  the  following
    specific ways:

      a) Procedural unfairness in failing to provide the appellant  with  an
         opportunity to address the judge's key credibility concerns;

      b) Failing to consider court photographs of the appellant receiving  a
         prize for an app  he  invented  and  email  correspondence  between
         himself and UNWRA seeking protection on return to Gaza;

      c) Finding that the appellant's family is not presently  supported  by
         UNWRA;

      d) Stating that the appellant's father put him through university when
         in fact he paid his own way through loans and awards;

      e)  Without  reasons  being  not  satisfied  that  the  appellant   is
         sufficiently politically committed to  place  himself  at  risk  by
         attending demonstrations against Israel;

      f) Failing to consider the appellant's explanation as to  why  he  did
         not provide detail  about  his  app,  namely  because  it  was  not
         patented and because he had already  talked  to  the  head  of  the
         university about it and that he had mentioned an  email  about  the
         app named surveying app project which is used in civil engineering.
         The judge did not use any IT expert to verify if the app existed or
         not but concluded without any evidential  basis  that  he  was  not
         convinced that it existed;

      g) Requiring expert evidence  about  Hamas'  conduct  when  there  was
         significant country information before the  tribunal  as  to  human
         rights  abuses  committed  by  Hamas  and  its   ill-treatment   of
         opponents;

      h) Failing to apply the correct standard  of  proof  in  that  on  the
         evidence  provided  the  judge  should  have  concluded  that   the
         appellant's account was reasonably likely to be true so that he  is
         at risk on return to Gaza.

 7. In general terms, the according of weight to evidence is a  matter  for
    the judge. It is not an arguable error of law for a judge to  give  too
    little or too much weight to a relevant factor, unless the exercise  is
    irrational. Nor is it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal  with
    every factual issue of argument. Disagreement with  a  judge's  factual
    conclusions,  the  appraisal  of  the   evidence   or   assessment   of
    credibility, or the evaluation of risk does not give rise to  an  error
    of law.

 8. Neither is it necessary for a judge to defer to the appellant on  every
    adverse finding to allow him yet a further opportunity to  explain  his
    case. That would require a  judge  to  return  to  court  after  having
    carefully considered the case to put  his  potential  findings  to  the
    appellant for comment. The appellant had a full and fair opportunity to
    put his case before the tribunal. The judge was  entitled  to  make  an
    overall assessment of the evidence, provided  that  it  is  clear  that
    cogent reasons have been provided to support the findings made.   Those
    findings followed the judge's assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
    appellant's account taken as a  whole  and  made  only  after  all  the
    evidence had been considered in the round.

 9. I have addressed the first ground in more detail  below.  However,  the
    second ground alleging bias or that the judge descended into the  arena
    is no more that a repeat of the first ground, put in a  different  way,
    and amounts to a disagreement with the decision. It is not accurate for
    the grounds to suggest that the judge has transposed his own theory for
    that of the respondent. This ground also alleges inconsistency and even
    perversity in the judge's approach, none of which  is  made  out  on  a
    reading of the decision.

10. The third ground is also  devoid  of  merit.  I  reject  Ms  Nicolauo's
    submission in relation to the third ground that the judge's approach to
    the screening interview was procedurally  unfair.  Whilst  a  screening
    interview is not intended  to  be  a  comprehensive  statement  of  the
    appellant's case, he is expected to be truthful and is invited to state
    in brief terms all the reasons for claiming  international  protection.
    The judge was entitled to draw inferences from an omission to mention a
    key element, or inconsistencies between the appellant's account in that
    interview  and  any  later  interview,  statement  or   evidence.    Ms
    Nicolauo's submission was effectively that no reliance could be  placed
    on the screening interview. That  is  entirely  inconsistent  with  the
    current case law. Whilst Ms Nicolauo relied on R (Dirshe) v SSHD [2005]
    EWCA Civ 421, she failed to  note  that  in  MB  (admissible  evidence;
    interview records) Iran[2012] UKUT 00019(IAC) the  Tribunal  held  that
    Dirshe is not authority for  the  proposition  that  where  a  claimant
    requests tape-recording of an interview, but that is not  carried  out,
    the record is inadmissible. Tribunals do not have a general  discretion
    to refuse to receive relevant  evidence  on  the  basis  of  procedural
    defects as to how it  was  obtained.  Rule  51(1)  of  the  Asylum  and
    Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005  is  not  to  that  effect.
    Apart from circumstances where lateness of the  evidence  means  it  is
    unfair to receive it, issues  of  fairness  go  to  the  weight  to  be
    attached to evidence, not admissibility. The judge was entirely correct
    to rely on YL (Rely on SEF) China [2004] UKAIT 00145 in relation to the
    appellant's earlier accounts. However, the point the judge  was  making
    at [110] of the decision was not in relation to the screening interview
    but the Preliminary Information Questionnaire. The judge  was  entitled
    to rely on the interviews, having taken into account  the  concerns  of
    the appellant and purported corrections. In VW (Sri Lanka) [2013]  EWCA
    Civ  522  at  [12],  LJ  McCombe  stated,  "Regrettably,  there  is  an
    increasing tendency in immigration cases, when  a  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge has given a judgment explaining why he has reached  a  particular
    decision, of seeking to burrow out industriously areas of evidence that
    have been less fully dealt with than others and then to use this  as  a
    basis for saying the judge's decision is legally flawed because it  did
    not deal with a particular matter more  fully.  In  my  judgment,  with
    respect, that is no basis on which to sustain a proper challenge  to  a
    judge's finding of fact." In the circumstances, there is  no  merit  in
    this ground of appeal.

11. The allegation of failure to consider relevant considerations or having
    taken into account irrelevant considerations set out in ground  4,  has
    no merit. The specific country background information relied on in this
    ground was a prediction made in 2012 and commented on in  2014,  not  a
    contemporary assessment of conditions in  2019.  No  error  of  law  is
    disclosed. Similarly, the alleged factual errors set out  in  ground  5
    are of no relevance or materiality at all and are simply a scraping  of
    the bottle of the barrel in an attempt to undermine the decision.

12. Many of the grounds are in reality little more than a disagreement with
    the findings and conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal dressed  up  as
    alleged errors of law. None of the case authorities relied  on  by  the
    appellant materially assist his case.

13. However, I note that in granting permission to appeal,  Judge  Sheridan
    considered it to be arguably unfair for the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    to find that the  respondent's  reasons  for  finding  the  appellant's
    account not credible did not withstand scrutiny but then  proceeded  to
    find he lacked credibility for different reasons,  not  raised  by  the
    respondent or put to the appellant for a response. In essence, this  is
    the first and primary ground of appeal.

14. The way in which the decision  is  structure  is  unusual.  First,  the
    decision is so long and unmanageable at [247] paragraphs set  out  over
    some 44 pages, that the parties are put in difficulty in digesting  the
    findings and reasons. By that reason  alone,  the  decision  verges  on
    being in error of law. As  the  Upper  Tribunal  stated  in  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014]  UKUT  00341  (IAC),  "It  is  generally
    unnecessary  and  unhelpful  for  First-tier  Tribunal  judgements   to
    rehearse every detail  or  issue  raised  in  a  case.  This  leads  to
    judgements becoming overly long and confused and is not a proportionate
    approach to deciding cases. It is, however,  necessary  for  judges  to
    identify and resolve key conflicts in the evidence and explain in clear
    and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can  understand  why
    they have won or lost."

15. Not only is the decision unnecessarily and unduly lengthy, but a  large
    part of the findings reject the respondent's reasons for rejecting  the
    credibility of  the  appellant's  claim.  Peculiarly,  the  judge  then
    proceeded to make a number of his 'own observations,' before proceeding
    to make findings on credibility. It appears that  the  'conclusions  on
    credibility' at [192] were predicated on the  'observations.'  However,
    none of these 'observations' were matters put to  or  canvassed  during
    the oral appeal hearing. There were no 'clarification' questions put to
    the appellant by the judge or the representatives  at  the  hearing  in
    relation to these issues. In the circumstances, Mr Tan conceded in  his
    submissions that was a 'fairness issue' in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal. There is  a  balance  between  making  findings  on  the
    evidence before the tribunal and making points on  that  evidence  that
    have not been previously canvassed or addressed so as to undermine  the
    credibility of the appellant's claim. Having considered the submissions
    of both representatives on this issue, I am in agreement that  the  way
    in  which  the  judge  approached  the  making  of  the  decision   was
    procedurally unfair so  that  the  conclusions  cannot  stand  and  the
    decision must be set aside.

Remittal

16. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  with  directions,
    or it must be remade by the Upper Tribunal. The scheme of the Tribunals
    Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of  primary
    fact finding to the  Upper  Tribunal.  The  errors  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge vitiates all other findings of fact and the  conclusions
    from those facts so that there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the issues in the appeal.

17. In all the circumstances, at the invitation and request of both parties
    to relist this appeal for a fresh hearing in the First-tier Tribunal, I
    do so on the basis that this is a case which falls squarely within  the
    Senior President's Practice Statement at paragraph 7.2.

Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier  Tribunal   in   accordance   with   the   attached
                    directions.

     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated 6 January 2020



Consequential Directions

19.  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester;

20. The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved;

21. The ELH is 3 hours;

22. There are likely to be three witnesses, including the appellant;

23. An Arabic interpreter will be required;

24. The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge, with the
    exception of Judges Devlin and Grant-Hutchison;

25. The appellant is to ensure  that  all  evidence  to  be  relied  on  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective and  subjective  material,  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all  case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.  The
    Tribunal will  not  accept  materials  submitted  on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing;

26. The First-tier Tribunal may give such further or alternative directions
    as are deemed appropriate.

     Signed   DMW Pickup

         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated: 6 January 2020

