







Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06298/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th February 2020                |On 3rd March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     NV
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U Miszkiel, instructed by Greater London
Solicitors Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in  this  determination  identified  as  NV.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

      1. The appellant, a Sri Lankan national,  was  granted  permission  to
         appeal a decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing his  appeal
         against a refusal of his international protection and human  rights
         claims. First-tier Tribunal judge Bristow dismissed his appeal  for
         reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 3rd October 2019.

      2. The appellant had  previously  claimed  asylum,  that  claim  being
         refused, and his appeal  dismissed  by  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
         Gurung-Thapa for reasons set out in a decision promulgated  on  3rd
         March 2014.

         Error of law

      3. The appellant relied upon five grounds of appeal.

         Ground 1

      4. The appellant had submitted evidence to the First-tier Tribunal  of
         his sur place activities with and membership of the TGTE. Mr Melvin
         accepted that there was no reference to the TGTE in the  First-tier
         Tribunal decision but that the evidence relied upon was one  letter
         which was flimsy and  lacking  in  detail;  that  no-one  from  the
         organisation had attended, his activity such as it  may  have  been
         was some considerable time ago and  no  detailed  submissions  were
         made.

      5. In fact the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal  consisted  not
         only of the letter but also various  news  articles.  The  skeleton
         argument  relied  upon  by  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
         Tribunal listed the supporting sur  place  activity  documents  and
         made detailed submissions.

      6. It may be that the activity was some time ago  and  the  First-tier
         Tribunal judge may have had reasons for placing little or no weight
         upon it; but the evidence was there. It  was  relied  upon  by  the
         appellant as a significant element of his  asylum  claim  and  that
         evidence should have been assessed by the  judge  in  reaching  his
         findings.

      7. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in  failing  to  address
         what was a significant part of the appellant's evidence.

         Ground 2

      8. The appellant had produced various letters in support of his  claim
         that there was an  outstanding  arrest  warrant.    The  First-tier
         Tribunal judge considered those documents as follows:

              30. The appellant seeks to rely again on documents  that  were
                  before the Tribunal in the  earlier  appeal,  particularly
                  the documents referred to in  ...  Those  have  previously
                  been found to be unreliable.

              31. The appellant additionally relies upon documents that  are
                  dated after the last hearing. The first is a  letter  from
                  T.Sivanathan, Attorney at Law dated  01  June  2017....The
                  writer states that he  has  examined  the  file  for  case
                  number  B/943/13  in  the  Record   room   at   Batticaloa
                  Magistrates Court and that  the  arrest  warrant  for  the
                  Appellant is still "alive". The second is  another  letter
                  from T Sivanathan, Attorney at Law dated 18th January...in
                  which he refers to three letters dated 20  November  2013,
                  10 January 2014 and 01 June 2017 (the first new  letter  I
                  have referred to above.) He confirms  that  the  documents
                  and enclosures are genuine.

              32. I find that these documents  are  not  reliable.  The  two
                  letters dated 20 November 2013 and 10  January  2014  pre-
                  date the earlier hearing. The judge considered  a  receipt
                  in the name of T Sivanathan at the earlier  hearing  [85].
                  [In fact the documents were considered by that first First-
                  tier Tribunal judge in [82,  83  and  84][1]].  The  judge
                  found  the  documents  produced  in  that  hearing  to  be
                  unreliable.  I  am  not  satisfied,  even  to  the   lower
                  standard, that a subsequent letter from the  same  author,
                  previously named in unreliable  documents,  remedies  that
                  deficiency. Moreover, it is clear from the High Commission
                  letter referred  to  by  the  earlier  judge  that  it  is
                  difficult for copies of arrest warrants to be obtained  by
                  an  accused  and  that  forged   documents   are   readily
                  available.

              33. The Appellant additionally  relies  on  the  letter  of  K
                  Yogeswaran dated 27 January 2018...This does post-date the
                  earlier hearing. I find I can attach little weight to this
                  document. It has appeared in the proceedings, by  which  I
                  mean the proceedings commenced by the asylum claim  on  30
                  October 2013, very late. It refers to  a  case  which  was
                  apparently filed in Batticaloa  Magistrates  Court  before
                  the previous Tribunal hearing. It adds little if  anything
                  to the evidence already considered by the Tribunal at  the
                  earlier hearing. Again I also keep in mind the letter from
                  the High Commission. I do  not  find  this  letter  to  be
                  reliable.

      9. The appellant submitted, relying on PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA  Civ
         1011, the First-tier Tribunal had failed to engage with the content
         and provenance  of  the  letters  relied  upon.  In  particular  he
         submitted

          a) The history of the documents was relevant: the  first  letters
             before the First-tier Tribunal had been  obtained  by  lawyers
             other than those instructed by the appellant in this claim and
             appeal;

          b) Correspondence in this instance  was  sent  'lawyer-to-lawyer'
             and not through other parties;

          c) There is no allegation that any of the lawyers were either not
             qualified or were engaged in 'discreditable conduct';

          d) The current lawyers had contacted  the  writer  of  the  first
             letters and obtained confirmation direct from him;

          e) Both lawyers' professional details  were  either  produced  or
             found on the Sri Lanka Bar Association website;

          f) The appellant's evidence in relation to the circumstances that
             led to the arrest warrant is consistent with the documents.

     10. Mr Melvin submitted the appellant's case did not  fall  within  PJ,
         that the judge had approached the documents correctly and there was
         no error of law.

     11. PJ is not authority for the proposition  that  the  involvement  of
         lawyers creates a rebuttable  presumption  that  documents  'across
         borders' are reliable. But detailed consideration does have  to  be
         given to the source of the documents relied upon. In [41] the Court
         of Appeal referred to the route by which the documents in that case
         were obtain namely the source was the court in Sri  Lanka  obtained
         by two independent lawyers who sent them directly to the  solicitor
         in the UK. PJ goes on to state that

              41. ....In the absence of a sufficient reason  for  concluding
                  otherwise , the inescapable conclusion to  be  drawn  from
                  this material -  retrieved  independently,  it  is  to  be
                  stressed, by two lawyers from  the  Magistrates  court  on
                  separate  occasions  -  is  that  the  appellant  will  be
                  arrested  on  his  return  to  Sri  Lanka.....without   an
                  adequate explanation, it is difficult  to  understand  how
                  the appellant could  have  falsified  a  letter  from  the
                  Magistrate of the relevant  court  to  the  Controller  of
                  Immigration and Emigration ordering the appellant's arrest
                  which he then placed in the court records so that it would
                  later be retrieved by two separate lawyers....

     12. Neither the First-tier Tribunal judge nor Mr Melvin submitted  that
         the lawyers involved and referred to were in any way discreditable.
         The burden of proof is of course not on  the  respondent  to  prove
         that documents are in some way falsified  or  unreliable.  But  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge simply did not address how the  documents
         could have been falsified or be unreliable in the circumstances  of
         two separate independent lawyers corresponding with  two  different
         sets of UK solicitors. The fact that forged documents are available
         in Sri Lanka is not justification  for  the  conclusions  that  the
         documents obtained in the circumstances in  which  these  documents
         were obtained are false or unreliable.

     13. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law in failing  to  consider
         the evidence regarding the documents in the round in the particular
         circumstances in which they were obtained.

         Ground 3

     14. The appellant submits the First-tier Tribunal judge  erred  in  his
         consideration of the medical evidence in concluding  that  although
         the appellant is suffering from PTSD, he  has  not  proved  to  the
         lower standard that it was caused by his arrest and detention.

     15. The report by Dr Halari refers to  earlier  reports  which  include
         attempted suicide and disappearance. It is also to  be  noted  that
         the appellant  was  found  unfit  to  give  evidence.  The  medical
         evidence that the First-tier Tribunal judge  has  not  referred  to
         includes a scarring report.

     16. The appellant submitted that on arrival  in  Sri  Lanka  he  would,
         irrespective of other matters  be  questioned.  The  scale  of  his
         mental health problems are such that he either would not answer  or
         his answers would be confused. This would inevitably lead to second
         stage questioning.

     17. Mr Melvin submitted that the First-tier Tribunal  judge  had  dealt
         with the medical evidence adequately; the reports  referred  to  in
         the most recent medical evidence  pre-dated  the  first  First-tier
         Tribunal when the first First-tier Tribunal decision was taken.

     18. The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge's  consideration  of  the  medical
         evidence in the context of an asylum claim is  lacking.  The  judge
         does not refer to the appellant's scars. That Dr  Halari  finds  it
         difficult to identify the actual causes of the  appellant's  mental
         health problems does not mean that they  should  not  be  addressed
         both holistically in terms of the appellant's overall claim and  in
         terms of the impact of these issues on  return  to  Sri  Lanka  and
         probable questioning.

     19. The First-tier Tribunal judge erred  in  falling  to  approach  the
         medical evidence as a whole and as a part of the assessment of  the
         asylum claim.

         Ground 4

     20. The appellant submitted the First-tier Tribunal  judge  failed,  in
         referring to the appellant's stabilising family, to factor  in  the
         actual  medical  evidence;  failed  to  consider  the   impact   of
         questioning on return,  failed  to  recognise  and  factor  in  the
         appellant's cognitive difficulties and failed to  consider  GJ  and
         the level of medical facilities available in Sri Lanka.

     21. Mr Melvin did not address this directly save that he submitted  the
         judge had dealt with the evidence adequately.

     22. I do not agree with Mr Melvin. There has  been  a  failure  by  the
         First-tier Tribunal judge to consider and reach a reasoned decision
         on the medical evidence overall and its impact both in terms of the
         asylum claim and Article 3.

         Ground 5.

     23. The appellant made limited submission on Article 8  save  that  she
         submitted the judge had, because of the  other  errors,  failed  to
         adequately address Article 8. She confirmed that in the event  that
         the appellant succeeded on one or any of the other grounds, it  was
         her submission that the appellant succeeded on that ground as well.

         Discussion

     24. The First-tier Tribunal decision has numerus errors of law  as  set
         out above. They are significant and go to the heart of the decision
         on the appellant's claim.

     25. I set aside the decision to be remade.

         Remaking the decision

     26. The appellant would, on arrival in Sri  Lanka  be  questioned.  His
         mental health is such that either he would not answer questions, or
         the  answers  to  questions  would  elicit  information  about  his
         involvement with the TGTE albeit some considerable time  ago.  Even
         if the appellant is selectively and voluntarily mute and could,  in
         circumstances that he would anticipate cause him harm, be  expected
         not to behave so, there is evidence of past  involvement  with  the
         TGTE even if the letter is ignored and even though it is some  time
         ago.

     27. The evidence supports a finding that there is an arrest warrant; to
         conclude otherwise would fly in the face of the evidence  that  has
         been produced. The independent  evidence  from  the  lawyers,  sent
         separately  to  two  separate  UK  lawyers  would   have   involved
         extensive, deliberate and co-ordinated deception being exercised by
         a number of individuals both in the UK and in Sri Lanka.

     28. It follows that I remake the  appeal  on  international  protection
         grounds and allow it.

     29. In the light of my findings on international  protection,  I  allow
         the appeal on human rights grounds.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision

    I re-make the decision in the appeal by allowing it.




    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

     Date 19th February 2020
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] 82.  ...There is a letter from the registrar of  the  Magistrates  Court
in Batticaloa confirming that they attached a certified copy taken from  the
complete file of Case no 934/13 of the Batticaloa  Magistrates  Court....The
next document is entitled 29/04/2013....it is said  to  be  written  by  the
Officer-in-Charge of the Special Unit for Prevention of  Terrorism  attached
to the Batticaloa police station  reporting  that  the  Special  Task  Force
arrested (on suspicion) a person called Mathan Fernando  ...and  handed  him
over to the police station on 28/04/2013. It asserts that upon  enquires  it
came to light that one of his close contacts was [NV]  ...and  that  he  had
used him to carry out terrorist activities in the region for the  LTTE.  The
information asserts it is now necessary to arrest  [NV]  who  had  committed
crimes ... An arrest warrant was requested from the court against  [NV]  and
the first suspect namely Mathan Fernando was remanded in prison.
83.   The  other  document  is  the  summons...This  indicates  that  Mathan
Fernando was  remanded  until....and  further  remanded  on  24/06/2013.  In
respect  of  [NV]  as  arrest  warrant  was  requested  on  29/04/2013,   on
27/05/2013 and for an open warrant on 24/06/2013. The arrest  warrant  dated
24/06/2013 appears....There is a cash receipt in the name of  T.  Sivanathan
indicating that the amount of  18  rupees  was  paid  on  06/02/14  for  the
certified copy in Case B/934/13...I note at paragraph  10.19  [of  the  2012
COIR  report]  it  is  reported  that  a  court  summons  can  be   obtained
fraudulently and at  Sections  27.01  and  27.02  it  again  refers  to  the
correspondence from the British High Commission which  states  that  due  to
the high level of corruption at all levels forged and fraudulently  obtained
official documents can be obtained...
84.  I find [these documents] are no  more  reliable  than  the  appellant's
account. I am satisfied that hey provide no  support  or  corroboration  for
the appellant's claim.

