
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06218/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13th January 2020                 |On 23rd January 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                  G A BLACK


                                   Between

                                   mr M G
                            ANONYMITY ORDER MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Majid (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr Tan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                      ERROR OF LAW DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an error of law hearing.  The  appellant  appeals  against  the
    decision of the First tier Tribunal (Judge Chambers) (FtT)  promulgated
    on 16th August 2019 in  which  the  appellant's  protection  and  human
    rights claims were dismissed.

    Background

2.   The appellant claimed that he was born on 4.2.1994 and  was  a  citizen
    of Eritrea and Ethiopia.  His mother was Eritrean and  his  father  was
    Ethiopian.  His claim was that if  returned  to  Eritrea  he  would  be
    persecuted. Nationality was an issue at the appeal.

3.   The appellant gave evidence and called a witness EF to corroborate  his
    account in particular of having undergone military training at a number
    of camps in Eritrea.  The FtT found the evidence of the witness  to  be
    untruthful as it was not consistent with the information contained in a
    Home Office Asylum Grant minute.  The FtT went so far as to  find  that
    the witness had fabricated his account to support  the  appellant  [18]
    and concluded that the witness was "not  dependable"  [21],  and  found
    that he is "not a witness of truth" [22]. At [22] the FtT  stated  that
    "the evidence that EF gave to the Tribunal when it is  contrasted  with
    the relevant sections of the Asylum Minute  cannot  live  in  the  same
    world."  The FtT found that the information in the Minute  was  a  fair
    and accurate reflection. The FtT concluded  that  as  the  witness  was
    untruthful then by association the appellant must have  known  that  he
    was not telling the truth and  was  himself  "being  dishonest  in  the
    presentation of his case and was trying to deceive the Tribunal." [23].

Grounds of appeal

4.   In grounds of appeal the appellant argued that the FtT erred by  making
    material mistake of facts and  by  failing  to  properly  consider  the
    documentary evidence in the form of the Asylum Grant  Minute  which  in
    fact recorded details of the places where the witness claimed  that  he
    was assigned and which was entirely consistent with the  account  given
    by the appellant.

5.   The FtT failed to put to the witness inconsistencies  in  his  evidence
    although it is recorded in the decision that this was the case.

6.   The FtT in reaching its decision  as  to  the  appellant's  nationality
    failed to take into account evidence of the appellant's  ID  card,  his
    mother's ID card and the  undisputed  fact  that  the  appellant  spoke
    fluent Tigrinya.

Permission to appeal

7.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  (UT)  was  granted  by  FTJ
    O'Brien on 2.10.2019 on all grounds.

Submissions

8.   At the hearing before me Mr Majid, representing the  appellant,  relied
    on the grounds of appeal. Mr Tan for the respondent did not oppose  the
    appeal.

    Discussion and conclusion

9.   I have considered the documentary evidence that was before the  FtT  in
    the form of the Asylum Grant Minute.  The FtT found that  the  document
    was fair and accurate.  I am satisfied that the document refers to  the
    witness having been assigned to Wia in 2008 and to Maereba in 2009/2010
    military camps and also to Vasea and Dekemere in 2009  (see  pages  2/9
    and 3/9 Minute).  This evidence was consistent with the accounts  given
    in the witness statements and evidence of both the  appellant  and  his
    witness.  I am satisfied that the FtT  made  a  mistake  of  fact  that
    amounts to a material error of law as the evidence went to the core  of
    the appellant's claim which the FtT found to be  untrue.   The  factual
    error formed the basis for the FtT's decision and conclusion  that  the
    appellant and his witness had fabricated the account and were trying to
    deceive the Tribunal.  The  evidence  in  the  Minute  was  capable  of
    corroborating the appellant's account.

10.  The FtT  failed  to  give  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  content  of  the
    documentary evidence leading to a material error  of  law.   Thereafter
    the FtT in reaching its conclusions repeatedly made forceful statements
    as to the honesty of  the  appellant  and  his  witness  which  had  no
    foundation.  It is incumbent on the FtT to fairly and  properly  assess
    and scrutinise the evidence before it and in this instance its  failure
    to do so falls well below the standard expected.

11.  There is a material error of law disclosed in the decision which  shall
    be set aside.

Decision

12.  The appeal is allowed.  The decision is set aside and  is  remitted  to
    the FtT at Manchester for a hearing do novo (excluding FTJ Chambers).




                               Signed                     Date 13.1.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

ANONYMITY ORDER MADE

Direction Regarding Anonymity - rule 13 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-
tier Tribunal) (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



NO FEE AWARD




                               Signed                     Date 13.1.2020


                               GA Black
                               Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
