
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06912/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On: 5 March 2020                     |On: 19 March 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KAMARA


                                   Between

                                     DK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Swain, counsel instructed by Nag Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



Introduction

 1. This is the remaking of an appeal against the decision of the Secretary
    of State dated 10 July 2019 refusing the  appellant's  application  for
    asylum.



Anonymity

 2. No such a direction was made previously however as this is a protection
    matter involving an appellant with mental health issues, a direction is
    given below.

Background

 3. Prior to arriving in the United Kingdom in July 2010 on a student visa,
    the appellant, who claims to be a national of  Sri  Lanka,  made  three
    earlier unsuccessful applications for student visas,  using  an  Indian
    passport, during 2008. The appellant applied for asylum on  29  January
    2012. That claim was refused and certified as clearly unfounded  on  15
    November 2012. The appellant was removed to India on 2 March 2013.  The
    appellant returned to the United Kingdom during  2014  using  irregular
    means. He made further submissions which were  refused  on  7  February
    2017. It is the refusal of a second set of  further  submissions  in  a
    decision letter dated 10 July 2019 which is the subject of this appeal.



 4. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he is a Sri  Lankan  citizen
    of Tamil ethnicity who was born in India to Sri  Lankan  Tamil  parents
    who fled the conflict in Sri Lanka and did not regularise  their  stay.
    The appellant says that he has  never  been  recognised  as  an  Indian
    citizen. The appellant fears the Sri Lankan authorities  owing  to  his
    father's links to the Liberation  Tigers  of  Tamil  Eelam  (LTTE).  He
    describes being detained and tortured in Sri Lanka  after  his  removal
    from the UK in 2013; that an arrest warrant had been issued against him
    and that the Indian  passport  he  used  previously  had  been  falsely
    obtained. The appellant also relied on his sur place political activity
    in the United Kingdom as well as a psychiatric report. He  claims  that
    his removal to Sri Lanka would breach Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.

 5. In refusing that claim, the respondent noted  that  the  appellant  had
    repeatedly described himself as an Indian  national  and  had  used  an
    Indian passport to travel and apply for visas. The respondent placed no
    weight on a newspaper article said to  support  the  appellant's  claim
    that he was removed from India to  Sri  Lanka  nor  any  of  the  other
    documents he relied upon. It was not accepted that his  involvement  in
    sur place activities would lead to a risk of  being  recognised  if  he
    travelled to Sri Lanka. Little weight was  placed  on  the  psychiatric
    report provided by Dr Roger Singh dated 5 July 2018.

The previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal

 6. At a hearing before me on 2 December 2019, I found  that  the  previous
    Tribunal made a material error of law in failing to  consider  evidence
    which gave support to the appellant's claim to be a Sri Lankan national
    and set aside that decision, for remaking. Directions  were  given  for
    appellant's solicitors to obtain expert evidence as  to  whether  there
    was any basis for concluding that a child of Sri  Lankan  refugees,  as
    the appellant appeared to be, would be entitled to Indian  nationality.
    Such evidence was to be served on the respondent and the Upper Tribunal
    no later than 10 days prior to the resumed hearing date.

The hearing

 7.  The  appellant  attended  the  hearing  and  gave  evidence  with  the
    assistance of a Tamil interpreter. Mr Swain confirmed that no  specific
    reasonable adjustments were required other than to  bear  in  mind  the
    content of  the  report  of  the  appellant's  treating  physician.  In
    addition, the appellant's father, PK also gave evidence.

 8. I duly heard submissions from both advocates and I have taken the  oral
    evidence and submissions into  account  in  my  consideration  of  this
    appeal. I shall not repeat that here but will refer to relevant aspects
    in my findings.

Discussion

 9. The burden is on the appellant to show there are substantial grounds to
    believe he meets the requirements of  the  Protection  Regulations  and
    that he is entitled to be granted humanitarian protection in accordance
    with paragraph 339C of the Rules and that his return to Sri Lanka  will
    cause the UK to be in breach of the 1950 Convention.

10. I take into account the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No. 2 of 2010,
    in  relation  to  Child,  Vulnerable  Adult  and  Sensitive   Appellant
    Guidance. I have also taken into account the following documents placed
    before  me  which  include  the  respondent's  bundle  comprising   the
    screening and asylum interview records  and  the  reasons  for  refusal
    letter, alongside various other documents relevant to  the  appellant's
    immigration  history.  There  are  also  psychiatric  reports  on   the
    appellant dating from 2018 and 2020 alongside the  appellant's  medical
    records which together amount to over 150 pages.  A  witness  statement
    from the  appellant's  father  was  also  provided  together  with  the
    respondent's Country Information and Guidance on Sri  Lanka  and  Tamil
    Separatism (Version 5.0 June 2017). The appellant  additionally  relies
    on an expert report from Mr Shatanu Mohan Puri as well as an additional
    email from Mr Puri. I have been guided by the  findings  in  GJ  &  Ors
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 319 (IAC).

11. The principle question to be determined is the appellant's nationality.
    I have determined this matter after consideration of all  the  evidence
    before me as well as the submissions made.

12. I was assisted by the opinion  of  Mr  Puri.  He  cites  his  extensive
    experience which includes the following. He was called to  the  Bar  in
    1999 and specialises in Indian nationality, citizenship and immigration
    law, particularly regarding non-resident Indians. He received the Felix
    Scholarship which enabled him to study for an LLM at SOAS, specialising
    in Comparative Nationality and Immigration Laws. He has  been  retained
    by the British High Commission, the Canadian High  Commission  and  the
    Embassy for the United States of America, among many other missions.  I
    take into consideration that Mr Puri was  provided  with  all  relevant
    documents relating to the appellant including the decision  letter  and
    the previous decision of the First-tier Tribunal. It  is  fair  to  say
    that Ms Everett did not challenge the conclusions of the expert nor his
    expertise but submitted that the appellant  had  failed  to  provide  a
    credible account.

13. Mr Puri was instructed to address whether a person with the appellant's
    history of being born in India to Sri  Lankan  parents  residing  there
    without permission, could have become an Indian national or whether  he
    would now be able to become an Indian national under the provisions  of
    the Citizenship Act, 1955 (as amended).  Essentially, Mr Puri explained
    that the appellant was not entitled to acquire  Indian  citizenship  by
    birth or descent because neither of his parents were Indian citizens at
    the time of his birth. Mr Puri further  explained  that  the  appellant
    could not acquire citizenship by registration as  a  person  of  Indian
    origin  ordinarily  resident  outside  undivided  India,  because   his
    previous residence was  illegal.  Mr  Puri  also  examined  the  latest
    amendments to the citizenship laws but concluded they  did  not  assist
    the appellant owing to his Sri  Lankan  nationality.  Lastly,  Mr  Puri
    considered  whether  the  appellant  could   acquire   citizenship   by
    naturalisation but concluded that he could not owing to the  provisions
    of section 6 of the Act which prohibits  applications  by  "an  illegal
    migrant."

14. I have also considered additional evidence which tends to show that the
    appellant is likely to be a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka.  The  appellant's
    father (PK) was recognised as a refugee in the United  Kingdom  and  is
    now settled here. His Sri Lankan nationality is  confirmed  on  his  UK
    residence permit. The appellant  has  provided  his  birth  certificate
    which shows that PK is his father  and  DNA  evidence  dating  from  22
    October 2014 has proved the relationship. The appellant  also  provided
    his  mother's  birth  certificate  which  confirms   her   Sri   Lankan
    nationality, as well as a document which the appellant said was  issued
    to him in 2008 by the Indian authorities which is  titled  "Particulars
    of Sri Lanka National." None of these documents were challenged  by  Ms
    Everett during her submissions and having considered them carefully,  I
    can see no reason to reject them as being unreliable.

15. The respondent relies on the appellant's use of an  apparently  genuine
    Indian passport issued to whom when he was aged 17. I place  weight  on
    the fact that the appellant used this  document  to  enter  the  United
    Kingdom and that he was also removed using this  document  without  any
    concerns being raised as to its  validity.  The  appellant's  oral  and
    written evidence was consistent, in that this document was obtained  by
    his uncle by fraudulent means. He is unaware of the details, which I do
    not find to detract from his credibility given his age at the time  the
    document was issued.  While  no  evidence  was  before  me  as  to  the
    prevalence of false documents in India, I considered a document in  the
    public domain, specifically the Home Office Country Background Note  on
    India, Version 1.0 of January 2019  where  the  following  was  stated,
    under the heading of Fraudulent Documents at 6.4.1:

         "Passports are relatively more difficult to forge than other  types
         of identity  documents,  but  genuine  passports  may  be  obtained
         relatively easily using fraudulent information."

16. Taking into consideration, the respondent's background  information  as
    to  the  ease  of  obtaining  a  genuine   passport   with   fraudulent
    information, the appellant's evidence as to the circumstances in  which
    the Indian passport was issued cannot simply be dismissed out of  hand.



17. I have also considered  the  respondent's  point,  that  the  appellant
    claimed to  be  an  Indian  national  during  his  2012  screening  and
    substantive  interviews,  in  particular.   I  found  the   appellant's
    evidence  on  this  point  to  be  credible,  in  that  he   explained,
    essentially, that his attempts to explain that  he  was  a  Sri  Lankan
    national despite being born in India and in  possession  of  an  Indian
    passport fell on deaf ears and in the end he allowed the  officers  put
    his nationality down as Indian.

18. The appellant  provided  a  newspaper  article  and  translation  which
    supports his claim to have been deported from India  to  Sri  Lanka  in
    2013 owing  to  the  discovery  that  he  had  falsely  claimed  Indian
    nationality  using  a  "forged"  passport.  During  the  hearing,   the
    appellant confirmed that his friend, a Mr SK had seen the  article  and
    sent it to the appellant in the  UK.  There  is  confirmation  of  this
    account in the form of a letter from Mr SK and a translation,  as  well
    as the accompanying envelope. The reliability of  these  documents  was
    challenged in the decision letter and I accept that the article is  not
    entirely accurate in referring to the involvement of the London  police
    and that the credentials and availability of this  newspaper  were  not
    produced. I therefore place little weight on these documents.

19. Ms Everett submitted that there was a "profound connection" with India,
    evidenced by recent visits  made  by  the  appellant's  father  to  the
    country.  I  do  not  accept  that  submission.  The  evidence  of  the
    appellant's father was that his visits were recent  and  for  religious
    reasons or owing to an interest in religious buildings and that he  has
    no relatives in India.

20. Furthermore, PK's evidence was that his wife was safe in Sri Lanka  and
    lived with her mother and that  was  why  he  had  visited  India  more
    frequently than Sri Lanka since obtaining settlement in the UK.

21. I now consider the credibility of the appellant's claim.  The  core  of
    his account has been generally consistent throughout  during  his  Home
    Office interviews, his witness statement  and  his  contacts  with  the
    mental health professionals who  are  treating  him.  That  consistency
    continued during the hearing, despite extensive cross-examination.  The
    manner in which the appellant gave evidence contributed to my findings,
    in that his replies were given without hesitation and  were  rich  with
    detail. In  addition,  his  demeanour  was  not  incongruous  with  the
    considerable medical evidence provided as to his mental state  in  that
    he came across as extremely  vulnerable  and  was  visibly  upset  when
    giving his evidence.

22. The appellant's account of his nationality and  his  mental  state  was
    confirmed by his father whose evidence was also consistent and given in
    an open manner. Ms Everett raised no credibility issues with  the  oral
    evidence of either witness. The appellant has provided further evidence
    by way of psychiatric reports, which I find, for reasons set out below,
    lend significant support and weight to show that he  is  likely  to  be
    telling the truth about what happened to him in Sri Lanka.

23. Dr Roger Singh provided two reports  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    mental health. Dr Singh is a  consultant  psychiatrist  working  for  a
    specific team in the  North  East  London  NHS  Trust  and  he  is  the
    appellant's responsible clinician, meaning that he is in charge of  the
    appellant's care and treatment.

24. From the first report, dated 30 June  2018  it  is  apparent  that  the
    appellant became known to psychiatric services in around March 2016 and
    he was referred to Dr Singh's team on  22  November  2016.  The  report
    notes that the appellant was assessed and treated  in  the  psychiatric
    clinic, on four occasions during 2017 as well  as  receiving  treatment
    through the Redbridge Refugee Psychology Service.

25. That treatment continued into 2018. Dr Singh reviewed  the  appellant's
    electronic medical records including from his GP and those relating  to
    his admission to hospital following  four  "impulsive  overdoses."  The
    2018 psychiatric report notes that the  appellant  was  diagnosed  with
    PTSD and moderate to severe depressive episode with suicidal ideas. The
    appellant told Dr Singh that he was experiencing distressing flashbacks
    from torture which he underwent in Sri Lanka, that he was not concerned
    about his immigration status and that he had self-harmed, albeit not at
    the time Dr Singh produced this report. At the time of the 2018 report,
    the appellant was being treated  with  antidepressants,  antipsychotics
    and  sedating  medication.  The  opinion  of  Dr  Singh  was  that  the
    appellant, whose progress was slower than expected, retained  the  need
    of long term formal therapeutic psychiatric and psychological  services
    to address his PTSD, combined with medicines. Dr  Singh  was  concerned
    that the appellant's symptoms could worsen on removal to Sri Lanka  due
    to a lack of resources and that he may act impulsively to end his life.

26. Dr Singh has provided an updated report  dated  20  February  2020.  He
    states that since the previous report, the appellant has been  assessed
    in the clinic on 6 occasions, most recently on 6 February 2020 and  has
    attended "numerous"  psychological  therapy  appointments.  The  report
    notes that the appellant was twice admitted to accident  and  emergency
    following overdoses and that he continued to self-harm in a variety  of
    ways.  The appellant's current diagnoses are PTSD, moderate  to  severe
    depressive episode, anxiety and insomnia. Dr Singh's  opinion  is  that
    the appellant has benefitted from  antidepressant  medication  and  had
    counselling for his symptoms.

27. Dr Singh also considered that the appellant's PTSD diagnosis continued,
    albeit during the February 2020 appointment it was at  reduced  levels.
    Dr Singh was concerned regarding the appellant's "risk behaviours"  and
    daily suicidal ideation. While  he  remarked  that  the  appellant  had
    completed a course of trauma focussed therapy, his  disorder  continued
    and was of the view he could receive further therapy.

28. Dr Singh feared that the appellant's removal to Sri Lanka would  worsen
    his disorders and may lead to loss of life. He described the degree  of
    risk as "unquantifiable" but emphasised that the appellant had told him
    that he "would not wish to live."

29. Ms Everett did not challenge the expertise of Dr Singh nor the  content
    of the psychiatric reports. Her submission is simply that the appellant
    has not given a credible account. I have placed significant  weight  on
    these reports, as evidence of the appellant's mental state because they
    are written by his treating physician who has had access to his medical
    records as well as information regarding his therapeutic  sessions  and
    has assessed him regularly for in excess of three  years.  I  therefore
    accept that the appellant is suffering from PTSD,  moderate  to  severe
    depression, anxiety and insomnia and that  there  is  a  real  risk  of
    suicide.

30. The appellant has provided additional evidence  to  support  his  claim
    that he was of adverse interest to the Sri Lankan authorities after his
    release from detention was secured. He relies on a chit  from  the  Sri
    Lankan CID dated 1 June 2018, which was  handed  to  a  family  friend,
    Uncle K, which requested that the appellant  report  on  7  June  2018.
    Uncle K sent this document to the appellant along with an  accompanying
    letter which confirmed the circumstances. Those documents  as  well  as
    the accompanying letter have been  produced  but  were  not  challenged
    during the hearing. I could no obvious reason to reject the reliability
    of these items.

31. The appellant gave evidence of his participation in demonstrations  and
    his membership of Tamil Eelam and the TGTE in the UK. He also relies on
    a quantity of photographs showing that  participation,  some  of  which
    have been published  on  the  eelamalar.com  website  as  well  as  his
    membership cards for both organisations. Ms Everett did  not  challenge
    the extent of the appellant's sur place activity, her submission  being
    that his activities did not suffice to engage the adverse  interest  of
    the Sri Lankan authorities. I accept that the appellant is involved  in
    the said organisations and his oral evidence that  his  involvement  is
    born of genuine support for a separate Tamil state. He  also  explained
    that working with others for this purpose helped to calm his mind.

32. Having considered all the evidence and  submissions  I  heard,  in  the
    round and for reasons set out above, I accept that the appellant  is  a
    Sri Lankan national, that he is not a national  of  India  and  is  not
    entitled to seek Indian citizenship, that he was deported from India to
    Sri Lanka in 2013 where he was detained and subject to  severe  torture
    owing to suspicions that he was involved with the LTTE. The  extent  of
    that torture is described in the medical reports. I accept that  it  is
    reasonably  likely  that  the  appellant's  psychiatric  diagnoses  are
    overwhelmingly owing to the ill-treatment he experienced when  detained
    in Sri Lanka in 2013.  I further accept that  the  appellant  has  been
    politically active in the UK.

33. I now consider whether the  appellant  is  likely  to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution if removed to Sri Lanka. Ms Everett's strongest  point  was
    her reliance on the fact  that  the  appellant's  father  had  recently
    travelled to Sri Lanka given the appellant's evidence was that  he  was
    accused of LTTE involvement  because  of  his  father's  activities.  I
    reject that submission because the evidence was that PK's visits to Sri
    Lanka were brief, of around two weeks duration, he is a mature man  who
    has been absent from Sri Lanka for many  years  and  he  returned  only
    after obtaining indefinite leave to remain in the UK.

34. Turning  to  further  risk  factors  identified  in  GJ,  the  relevant
    conclusions of the Tribunal to this case as set out at  the  head  note
    are:

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.

         (4)  If a person is detained by the Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5)  Internal relocation is not an option within Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6)  There are no detention facilities at the airport.  Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport.  Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.

             (b)  Journalists (whether in print or other  media)  or  human
             rights activists, who, in either case, have criticised the Sri
             Lankan government, in particular its human rights  record,  or
             who are associated  with  publications  critical  of  the  Sri
             Lankan government.

             ...

             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as    to activities within Sri Lanka and in  the
         diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

35. The respondent's CPIN on Sri Lanka: Tamil Separatism June 2017, reports
    arrests and detention of LTTE members and supporters as well as the
    risk posed to perceived LTTE supporters, all of whom are at risk of
    being sent to "rehabilitation centres" at unknown locations where a
    range of human rights abuses are known to occur.

36. I also take into consideration that the appellant suffers from PTSD and
    severe to moderate depression, that he has made several attempts on his
    life, he self-harms and continues to express suicidal ideation.  In  GJ
    the following was said about resources for  the  mentally  ill  in  Sri
    Lanka [456]and I was not referred to any evidence to the contrary;

         "The resources in Sri Lanka are  sparse  and  are  limited  to  the
         cities. In the light of the respondent's own evidence that  in  her
         OGN that there are facilities only in the cities and that they  "do
         not provide appropriate care for mentally ill people"

37. The appellant has been receiving psychological help over an extended
    period of time and it is the opinion of his psychiatrist that this work
    is not complete. In GJ, there was reference to the dearth of
    psychologists working in Sri Lanka [455].

38. I find that the appellant's previous lengthy detention and torture
    owing to the authorities suspicions of his LTTE support, combined with
    the indication of further interest in his whereabouts in 2018 as well
    as his current activism on behalf of the Tamil separatist movement is
    reasonably likely to attract the adverse attention of the authorities
    in Sri Lanka. Furthermore, the appellant's mental state is poor and
    according to the medical evidence is likely to deteriorate on removal.
    I find that there is enough in the appellant's background and personal
    history for him to come to the immediate and adverse attention of the
    Sri Lankan authorities upon arrival and certainly shortly afterwards.

39. Having followed the most recent and up to date country guidance in GJ,
    I find that the appellant has shown that he will be at risk of
    persecution upon return. Internal relocation is not an option as is
    stipulated at sub-paragraph 5 of paragraph 356 of GJ. The appellant's
    claims under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR stands with his claim for
    asylum. In addition, the appellant's freestanding claim under Article 3
    succeeds for the same reasons as those of the third appellant in GJ.

40. I therefore find that the appellant has successfully discharged the
    burden which rests upon him to prove his case to requisite standard



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on protection grounds.

The appeal is allowed under Article 3 of the ECHR.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                          Date: 12 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara

















