
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06614/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport (Columbus House)             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 July 2017                                |On 14 July 2017               |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    z r b
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or  indirectly  identify  the  Respondent  (ZRB).   This
    direction applies to both the appellant and to  the  respondent  and  a
    failure to comply with this direction could lead to Contempt  of  Court
    proceedings.

 2. The Secretary of State appeals against a  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Suffield-Thompson) which  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    respondent (hereafter "the claimant") under Art 8  of  the  ECHR.   The
    judge,  however,  dismissed  the  claimant's  appeal  on  international
    protection grounds rejecting his claim to be a stateless person who was
    at risk if returned to  Azerbaijan.   The  claimant  has  not  appealed
    against the dismissal of his appeal on international protection grounds
    which stand.

 3. The claimant first arrived in the UK on 11 September 1997.  Thereafter,
    he claimed asylum, sought leave to remain as a spouse and also  applied
    for a residence card as a family member of an EEA national.  That  card
    was issued on 5 March 2010 and was  valid  until  5  March  2015.   The
    claimant also made a number of other applications seeking  ILR  on  the
    basis of long residence but these were refused on 22 January  2009  and
    21 July 2009.

 4. On 11 May 2015, the claimant made an  international  protection  claim,
    having been returned from Switzerland where he had claimed asylum.  His
    international protection claim was refused on 26 August 2015.

 5.  On  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  the  judge  dismissed  his
    international protection claim.  However,  the  judge  found  that  the
    claimant was the father of a 9-year-old child who had been born to  his
    former partner, the  EEA  national.   The  judge  found  that  applying
    s.117B(6) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA
    Act 2002") the claimant  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship  with  a  qualifying  child  and  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect him to leave the United Kingdom, consequently  the
    public interest did not require his removal.

 6. The Secretary of  State  sought  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal on the basis that the judge had failed  properly  to  consider
    the public interest in concluding that the claimant's removal would  be
    disproportionate and a breach Art 8.

 7. On 17 February 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Adio)  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal on that ground.

 8. At the hearing before me, Mr Mills who  represented  the  Secretary  of
    State submitted that the judge had misapplied s.117B(6) of the NIA  Act
    2002 by failing to have regard to the public interest in  reaching  her
    finding that it was not reasonable to expect the  claimant's  child  to
    leave the UK.  He submitted this was an error in the light of the Court
    of Appeal's decision in R (MA (Pakistan) and Others) v SSHD [2016] EWCA
    Civ 705.  However, Mr Mills indicated that he did not  wish  to  pursue
    the point that the error was material given the  circumstances  of  the
    child, who was then aged 9, and is now 10 years  old  and  eligible  to
    become a British citizen by naturalisation.  He did not seek  to  argue
    that it would be reasonable, even having regard to the public interest,
    to expect her to leave the UK.

 9. Whilst it is clear that the judge did err in law  by  failing  to  take
    into account the public interest in applying s.117B(6) in the light  of
    MA (Pakistan),  in the light of  Mr  Mills  position  -  which  it  was
    entirely proper to take - I  am  satisfied  that  even  if  the  public
    interest had been taken into account, the judge would  inevitably  have
    found that s.117B(6) applied such that  the  public  interest  did  not
    require  the  claimant's  removal  and  that  his  removal   would   be
    disproportionate and a breach of Art 8.

10. For these reasons, the First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  to  allow  the
    claimant's appeal under Art 8 did not involve the making of a  material
    error of law.  That decision stands.

11. The First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the claimant's appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds was not challenged and  that
    also stands.

12. Accordingly, the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  is
    dismissed.


                                 Signed




                                 A Grubb
                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                 Date:  14 July 2017





