
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06221/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 3 October 2018                             |On 17 October 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                   mrs p m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Elliott-Kelly, counsel instructed by Rashid &
Rashid   solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of India born on 12 June 1975.  She made  a
    number of family visits to the UK and on 16 September 2014 she  arrived
    with her young  daughter,  whom  she  left  here  to  reside  with  the
    Appellant's sister.  On 28 January 2017, the Appellant last entered the
    UK  when  she  was  detained  for  failing  to  declare  a  change   in
    circumstances and making a false declaration and she claimed asylum  on
    1 February 2017.  This application was refused on 9 April 2018 and  the
    Appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  Her appeal came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Baldwin for hearing on 15 June 2018.

 2. The Appellant gave evidence along with her sister EM, her mother JM and
    Kate Allen, a project worker with Family Action.   In  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 29 June 2018, the  judge  dismissed  the  appeal
    rejecting the credibility of the Appellant's asylum claim  and  finding
    that in relation to Article 8 that it would not be disproportionate  or
    unreasonable to expect the Appellant  and  her  dependant  daughter  to
    return to India.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis that the judge had
    erred materially in law:

      i) In failing to engage with or make findings on the evidence  of  the
         Appellant's sister and mother.  It was asserted in the  grounds  of
         appeal that these witnesses gave oral  evidence  corroborating  the
         Appellant's claim that her former partner had continued to threaten
         and harass her after the breakdown of their relationship  and  this
         is clear from their witness  statements.   It  was  submitted  that
         despite hearing this evidence and having the opportunity to  assess
         it when tested under cross-examination the judge failed  to  engage
         with the evidence or make  any  findings  in  respect  of  it  when
         conducting his evaluation of the Appellant's credibility at [24] to
         [27].

     ii) Secondly, it was asserted that the judge had failed to engage  with
         or take proper account of material evidence about what  is  in  the
         Appellant's daughter's best interests.  The judge  considered  best
         interests at [28] and [29] but in so doing, failed to take  account
         of the evidence of professionals  who  had  been  involved  in  D's
         welfare, in circumstances where it  is  clear  that  she  has  been
         profoundly affected by the domestic violence she witnessed and  was
         subjected to by her father whilst in India.  The evidence  included
         the oral evidence and witness statement of Kate  Allen,  a  project
         worker with Family Action and letters from D's schools and Place2Be
         a  national  charity  working  in  schools  to   support   children
         experiencing emotional difficulties.   It  was  asserted  that  the
         evidence goes to the heart of the impact  on  D  in  terms  of  her
         wellbeing and emotional health if returned to India and thus it was
         incumbent upon the judge to assess it as part of the best interests
         assessment.

 4.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge
    Hollingworth in a decision dated 10 August 2018 on the basis

         "It is arguable that the judge has not dealt with the  question  of
         receiving or rejecting the evidence of the Appellant's  mother  and
         sister before reaching conclusions in the  case.   It  is  arguable
         that the judge has not dealt with the full scope of  the  available
         evidence in assessing the best interests of D in  applying  Section
         55."

Hearing

 5. At  the  hearing  before  me  Miss  Elliott-Kelly,  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, sought to rely on the skeleton argument dated 3 October 2018
    in support of the contention the judge had made material errors of law.



 6. She submitted that there was no doubt the evidence was before the judge
    in respect of ground 1 because it is summarised at [17] to [19] of  the
    decision.  However, she submitted that a summary is not  an  assessment
    and it cannot be denied that in  findings  at  paragraph  [24]  onwards
    there is no reference to the evidence of  the  Appellant's  mother  and
    sister.  She submitted there were three general errors in  the  failure
    to engage with that evidence:

      i) the failure to give reasons, in that it is  unknown  if  the  judge
         found the evidence to be unreliable or implausible  or  lacking  in
         credibility or whether he just forgot that he had heard it;

     ii) it is irrational in  as  it  fails  to  take  account  of  material
         considerations; and

    iii) there is a failure to give  anxious  scrutiny  to  the  Appellant's
         case.

 7. Miss Elliott-Kelly submitted the judge should have assessed what weight
    should be attached to  this  evidence  and  provided  reasons  for  his
    finding.  She submitted that it would not be sufficient to rely on  the
    other reasons given by the judge  in  respect  of  the  other  evidence
    before him e.g. at [26] and [27] that the Appellant has returned to her
    home area and even if the judge would have come to the same conclusions
    had he considered that evidence, the  fact  that  he  came  to  adverse
    findings means that the principles identified apply with  even  greater
    force because  there  was  evidence  which  may  have  counteracted  or
    overridden the evidence  he  did  in  fact  use  as  a  basis  for  his
    determination.

 8. She submitted that  the  judge's  erroneous  approach  means  that  the
    Appellant has not had a fair hearing of her  appeal  and  the  decision
    should be set aside on that basis alone without having regard  of  what
    the evidence goes to.

 9. She prayed in aid the former presidential decision in MK (duty to  give
    reasons) Pakistan [2013]  UKUT  00641  (IAC)  and  in  the  alternative
    submitted that the key part of the Appellant's case was  that  she  and
    her daughter continued to be at risk from her ex-husband; that  he  has
    significant contacts within the Indian authorities and that they  would
    not be safe anywhere in India.

10. The evidence of the  Appellant's  mother  and  sister  corroborate  the
    Appellant's account that there have been ongoing threats and  one  very
    serious incident of violence and the evidence of the Appellant's sister
    corroborates a failure on the part of the police to act,  which  it  is
    the Appellant's case is attributable to the  influence  her  ex-husband
    has with the police.  She submitted that this evidence  has  a  bearing
    not  only  on  credibility  but  also  whether  there  was  in  fact  a
    sufficiency of protection in the Appellant's home area and an  area  to
    which she could safely relocate.

11. In respect of the second ground of appeal, Miss Elliott-Kelly submitted
    with reference to [28] and [29] of the judge's decision that there  was
    no reference at all by the judge to the fact that D's project worker Ms
    Allen attended to give evidence and be cross-examined as to D's extreme
    fear and anxiety as to the prospect of return to  India.  The  evidence
    from D's school confirms concerns about her emotional wellbeing and the
    fact that she has received one-to-one counselling as a result.

12. Whilst ultimately it may be that the judge would have decided  that  it
    was in D's best interest to return to India or remain  in  the  UK  but
    that was cumulatively outweighed by the public interest considerations,
    however, there was simply no proper assessment of this  aspect  of  D's
    best interests at all which rendered his conclusions on  this  part  of
    the appeal unsafe and unsustainable.

13. In her submissions, Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted that with  regard  to
    the issue of the evidence of  the  Appellant's  sister,  there  was  no
    indication in the grounds of appeal as to  exactly  what  evidence  the
    judge should have taken into account.  She accepted, however, that  the
    judge does not make  any  direct  reference  to  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's sister and mother in his findings.

14. She submitted that it is necessary to start from the position that  the
    Respondent accepted that the Appellant had been subjected  to  domestic
    violence and the issue is the risk of  future  domestic  violence.   Ms
    Willocks-Briscoe  submitted  that  neither  the  mother   or   sister's
    statements deal with the issue of the risk of domestic  violence  post-
    separation and it was necessary to  look  at  the  background  evidence
    which the judge had done and had tackled head on, dealing with the lack
    of police engagement at [26]; the fact the Appellant was able  to  work
    and at [27] that the Appellant has employed an  advocate  to  represent
    her  in  the  custody  case.   The  judge  looked  at  the  Appellant's
    circumstances, including the fact that she is bilingual, able  to  work
    and has access to funds and her ability to obtain employment. He  found
    that her former partner would not be able to relocate  outside  of  her
    home area and that this was not an issue that had been addressed by the
    evidence of the Appellant's mother and  sister.   She  submitted  that,
    even if there was an error not to address the witness evidence, it  was
    not material.

15. In respect of the second ground of appeal Ms Willocks-Briscoe submitted
    that the judge had looked properly at this issue.  Whilst she  accepted
    he had not referred to Ms Kate Allen by name, he was properly appraised
    of the issues, noting that the Appellant's daughter has had the benefit
    of lengthy counselling sessions and has adjusted with  the  move  to  a
    foreign country.  He concluded, notwithstanding new  factors,  that  it
    will be in her best interests to live with her mother and it would  not
    be unjustifiably harsh, disproportionate or  unreasonable  in  all  the
    circumstances for D to return to India with her mother.  She  submitted
    that his findings were ones that were reasonably open to him, they were
    not perverse and were adequately reasoned on the  evidence  before  the
    Tribunal.

16. In reply, Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted in respect of the first ground  of
    appeal, that this was not simply a matter of pedantry or a  failure  to
    refer to evidence by name but rather it was a material error as it went
    to the fairness of the proceedings and decision.  In terms of what  the
    evidence  goes  to,  it  is  not  correct  that  the  evidence  of  the
    Appellant's mother and sister  simply  corroborated  past  abuse.   The
    relationship between the Appellant and her husband broke down  in  2012
    which is when the Appellant left the house she had been living  in  and
    moved to her mother's house.   The  issue  is  whether  the  abuse  and
    threats continued and whether the abuser could find the  Appellant  and
    her daughter if they internally relocated.

17. The evidence of the Appellant's sister corroborates that  there  was  a
    violent incident post separation (see [18]  of  the  decision  and  her
    witness statement).  There was clearly an ongoing series of threats and
    violence which the judge simply has not taken into account when  making
    his findings.  At [26] the judge erred  materially  in  fact  where  he
    finds "following its breakdown it is not suggested he has at  any  time
    used violence on the Appellant".  It is not the case, as the Presenting
    Officer suggests, that this turns solely on objective evidence, in that
    it was open to the judge to find that the past condoning of his actions
    by the police towards the Appellant's former husband indicated the kind
    of  influence  rendering  internal  flight  unavailable.   The  general
    background evidence referred to speaks only of the general position and
    does not take into account the potentially material consideration  i.e.
    the degree of influence that the abuser might have.

18. She further submitted that, whilst  Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  attempted  to
    assess  the  evidence  on  behalf  of  the  Respondent,  this  did  not
    substitute for an assessment by a judge which was clearly lacking.  The
    same point can be made in respect  of  the  evidence  of  Ms  Allen  in
    respect of D.  It is axiomatic that  a  judge  must  consider  all  the
    evidence as part of the best interests assessment.  Ms Allen was tended
    for cross-examination and her  evidence  is  contrary  to  the  judge's
    finding at [28] that D is well adjusted and has coped with a move to  a
    foreign country.

My Findings

19. I find material errors of law in the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Baldwin, essentially for the reasons set out in  the  grounds  of
    appeal and expanded upon by Miss Elliott-Kelly in her skeleton argument
    of 3 October 2018 and her oral submissions.  I accept  the  failure  by
    the judge to engage with the evidence of any  of  the  witnesses  other
    than the Appellant does undermine the safety of his  findings  and  the
    fairness of the hearing, such that none of his findings can  stand  and
    the decision is rendered unsafe and unsustainable.

20. It is the case, as Miss Elliott-Kelly submits, that the evidence of the
    Appellant's mother and sister does go  to  the  continued  threats  and
    violence against  the  Appellant  by  her  former  husband  after  they
    separated.  This continuation is clearly a  material  consideration  in
    respect of the assessment of the risk  of  persecution  by  her  former
    husband if the Appellant and her daughter returned to India.

21. I find the failure to engage with and assess the evidence not  only  of
    Ms Allen, most importantly, who attended the Tribunal in order to  give
    evidence on behalf of the Appellant's daughter, D, but also the letters
    from her school and Place2Be do undermine the  safety  of  the  judge's
    findings as to D's best interests.  It would appear  from  the  judge's
    conclusions that he took a very positive view of the impact on D  as  a
    consequence of receiving education and counselling in the UK.  When  he
    found at [29]:

         "D who has proved herself capable of adjusting not only to a change
         of schools twice but also adjusting to a new culture,  country  and
         an extended period of having had neither parent caring for her."

    And at [28]

         "She has had  the  benefit  of  a  lengthy  course  of  counselling
         sessions and there are no serious  concerns  about  the  mental  or
         physical health of her or her mother.  D is well adjusted  and  has
         coped with the move to  a  foreign  country,  separation  from  her
         mother and two changes of school since she left India."

22. I find those findings are rendered unsafe in light of the evidence that
    in fact although D has now flourished  since  the  start  of  secondary
    school, there is clearly an amount of emotional distress  which  caused
    her to be withdrawn and that she  suffers  from  anxiety  and  distress
    about the family situation and the fear of being forced  to  return  to
    India. This is reflected for example in the letter from Place2Be  dated
    31 January 2017, the letter from Kate Allen in  respect  of  the  Young
    Carers Homework  Club  at  D10  of  the  Respondent's  bundle  and  the
    assessment at her primary  school  that  she  can  still  sometimes  be
    withdrawn and needs ongoing support.

23. For the reasons set out above I set aside the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Baldwin and remit the  appeal  for  a  hearing  de  novo
    before a different judge of the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed with the effect that the  appeal  is  remitted  for  a
hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 11 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
