
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06016/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely by Skype at Field     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|House                                |                                     |
|On 8 January 2021                    |On 16 February 2021                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                            claudia juanita reid
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Khan, Nationwide Law Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Jamaica born on 1st December 1974.   She
    appeals, with permission, against the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    dated 10th  January  2020  which  dismissed  her  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights appeal under  the  European  Convention  on
    Human Rights.  The appellant had  appealed  against  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision dated 12th June 2019 refusing the appellant's claim on
    the same matters.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Owens  on  the
    basis that it was arguable  that  First-tier  Tribunal  Thew  erred  in
    finding that the appellant delayed claiming asylum for three years  and
    that the appellant's evidence was that she became  fearful  after  July
    2017 when her son's neighbour's mother was killed.  Threats  were  made
    against her by her neighbour and a member of her own  family  was  also
    murdered.  It was suggested that the delay was  arguably  much  shorter
    than three years.

 3. Permission was also granted on the basis that the judge failed to  give
    adequate reasons for rejecting the evidence of  the  appellant's  son's
    lawyer that there was an ongoing  family  feud,  that  the  appellant's
    son's family had received numerous threats and one  family  member  had
    been killed thereby linking the appellant to  the  accusations  against
    her son.

 4. The grounds as set out were as follows:

    Ground 1

    The judge failed to consider that the interviewing officer should  have
    asked the appellant the relevant questions to clarify the relevant  and
    important matters.

    Ground 2

    The judge stated there was a  lack  of  credible  evidence  making  any
    connecting links between the situation of the appellant's son and  that
    of the appellant, but this showed that the judge failed to consider the
    evidence  before  him,  and  the  appellant  provided  a  letter   from
    solicitors in Jamaica which clearly clarified the link.   Although  the
    advocate's letter  did  not  name  the  person  for  whose  murder  the
    appellant's son had been charged,  nevertheless  the  language  of  the
    appellant's advocate letter made it clear that the advocate was talking
    about the murder of Jacqueline Bowen.

    Ground 3

    The news article confirmed that the attack was linked to  a  gang  feud
    and the advocate also stated the same thing, that  is  the  matter  was
    linked to an ongoing family feud.  The advocate corroborated  what  the
    appellant stated that her life was in danger and that  members  of  her
    family had received numerous threats and one met  her  death.   It  was
    clear the advocate was talking about the murder of  Jody  Ann  Reid  (a
    relative) .  The judge clearly disregarded  the  appellant's  statement
    with regard to the murder of Jody Ann Reid without  giving  any  proper
    consideration.

    The newspaper report dated 7th September 2018 confirmed the  fact  that
    the advocate's letter stated that the case against the appellant's  son
    was out of malice and that people behind the murder of Jacqueline Bowen
    were named by the police as Dominic Campbell and Owen Jenkin.

    The judge asserted that the failure to make  the  asylum  claim  at  an
    earlier opportunity damaged the appellant's credibility  under  Section
    8, but the judge failed to understand that the threats she received  to
    her life started after the murder of Jacqueline Bowen when her son  was
    charged with her murder and the incident with regards to the  death  of
    Miss Bowen was in July 2017.  Less than six months after  she  received
    that information that her life was in danger, she claimed asylum.

    Ground 4

    In relation to Article 8 the judge made an error of law with regards to
    the assessment of Article 8.  The appellant had been living in  the  UK
    for more than nineteen years and had clearly  developed  private  life.
    She had no social, cultural or family ties in Jamaica, all  her  family
    had moved to America and her cultural and social ties were in the UK.

    In relation to Article 3  the  judge  had  also  made  an  error.   The
    appellant suffered with  many  illnesses  and  in  particular  a  life-
    threatening illness called Lupus.  She had been treated for her illness
    for a number of years and if removed from Jamaica  she  would  face  an
    early death as there was a lack of proper treatment at a right time for
    Lupus which was life-threatening.

Submissions

 5. In his oral submissions Mr Mahmood relied on  the  written  submissions
    but stated the judge had erred in considering that there was a delay in
    filing the asylum claim.  The appellant had received  threats  in  July
    2017 and had tried to make arrangements to obtain documents thereafter.
     It was the death of Miss Bowen which was the trigger  to  the  events.
    There was the death in 2009 of her brother but there is no evidence  to
    point the finger at either side albeit that there was a suspicion  that
    the brother had been murdered by the neighbour.   There  was  then  the
    incident in relation to the bike damage which the son asserted was  the
    neighbour Blake and there followed the conflict in the shop  whereby  a
    young boy was shot.  Thereafter there were some incidents, but  it  was
    the incident where Blake's mother, Jacquelin Bowen, had died  that  was
    blamed on the appellant's son and the police arrested the son.  It  was
    then asserted that Blake had murdered the stepmother of the appellant's
    daughter as revenge and threatened to kill the appellant in July 2017.

 6. Mr Mahmood referred me to the letter from the lawyers dated  July  2020
    which he had subsequently forwarded  to  the  Tribunal  to  remedy  the
    omission in the evidence that the judge found there was no link between
    the appellant, the case of the death of Jacqueline Bowen and  the  news
    article.  It was the appellant's case that there was a clear  link  and
    the subsequent letter provided and it should be accepted because it was
    relevant.

 7. It was also submitted that it was the role of the interviewing  officer
    during the asylum interview was to make clear the questioning  and  the
    interview was distorted.  The judge had erred in law  in  finding  that
    the witness statement which had been prepared by the solicitors who had
    taken the client through the background of the incident, was  made  up.
    The asylum interview had not  tried  to  clarify  the  issues  and  the
    judge's approach to the interview was not reasonable and unfair on  the
    appellant when the purpose of having a hearing  was  to  clarify  those
    issues.

 8. The approach to Article 8 was wrong because the appellant had  been  in
    the country for twenty years and she had had no contact with her home.

 9. Mr Khan also conceded that, despite the grounds of appeal  in  relation
    to Article 3 to the Upper Tribunal, he had formerly  probably  conceded
    before the First-tier Tribunal that no reliance was  to  be  placed  on
    Article 3.

10. Mr Avery submitted that the issue of why the  appellant  did  not  seek
    asylum earlier was dealt with comprehensively at paragraph  32  of  the
    determination and the evidence in  relation  to  the  circumstances  in
    Jamaica deteriorated according  to  the  appellant's  claim  from  2014
    onwards.  It was now argued that the shooting of  Jacqueline  Bowen  in
    2017 had caused the situation to deteriorate further but the judge  was
    entitled to state at the time that it deteriorated prior to that.

11. The letter from the attorney as supporting evidence was dealt  with  at
    paragraph 23 of the judge's decision  and  the  judge's  reasoning  was
    adequate.  The judge had read the letter from the  attorney  and  found
    there was nothing to link the incident as reported in the article  with
    the appellant.

12. This was simply  a  disagreement  and  in  the  overall  assessment  of
    credibility, the judge was entitled to find the appellant's account had
    the hallmarks of something which had been embellished.   It  was  clear
    from what the judge had  stated  that  the  appellant's  narrative  was
    confusing.  The observations were open to  the  judge  and  simply  the
    appellant's account was not reliable and not borne out by the evidence.

13. The judge had dealt adequately with Article 8.  The Appellant's private
    life had been formed when here status was unlawful and looking  at  the
    claim through the lens of Section 117 of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act and on the basis of  the  background  circumstances,  it
    could not be argued that immigration control should  be  outweighed  in
    the proportionality balance.

Analysis

14. The grounds asserted in particular that the  appellant's  evidence  was
    that the trigger incident was that of Jacqueline Bowen's  death,  which
    occurred in July 2017, and after that date she became afraid  and  then
    claimed asylum on 15th January 2018.

15. The judge, however, made a careful analysis of all  the  evidence  when
    reaching his/her conclusions and made a series of  adverse  credibility
    findings.

16. The judge observed in relation to the  asylum  interview  that  it  was
    'difficult to follow the connection between various sentences  said  by
    her' [the appellant] during her interview 'and  to  identify  to  which
    incident she was relating' during the  questioning  and  it  was  noted
    'there were a number of  incidents  seemingly  rolled  into  a  lengthy
    narrative' and 'sometimes her lengthy answers  appeared  to  relate  to
    more than one incident/ occasion' [10].  Clearly the judge did not find
    the interviewing officer was responsible for the lack of clarity in the
    interview.

17. The judge recorded [11] that when she left Jamaica there was a peaceful
    relationship with the neighbours and she then described  the  death  of
    her brother in 2009 but it was hearsay that the neighbours  (the  Bowen
    family) were responsible.  The judge noted at [12] that there was  more
    clarity in the appellant's witness statement of December 2019.  In that
    statement she stated that there were rumours that the  neighbours  (the
    Bowen family) killed her brother in 2009 and the had tension  escalated
    between her family and the Bowen family.  However, there was no further
    incident until 2014, and when asked in  her  interview  when  the  next
    incident was, she described  'the one in the shop'.   The  judge  found
    that it was put to her that the shooting of the little boy in the  shop
    was a "very significant event".  The appellant thought this occurred in
    2014 [13].

18. As the judge recorded at the outset of the appeal her main argument was
    that her life would be at risk  because  of  gang  warfare.   That  had
    occurred prior to 2018.  It is quite clear however that the judge found
    at [15] that in her appeal statement the appellant had stated that  her
    "main problem started  in  October  2014  regarding  her  son's  bike".
    Indeed that can be found at the fourth  paragraph  of  the  appellant's
    statement.  Further, the judge was fully aware that the  appellant  was
    residing in the United Kingdom illegally at  the  time  when  her  main
    problem started in October 2014. In other words  she  would  have  been
    prompted to claim asylum then.

19. It was open to the judge to find that the appellant had "developed" her
    evidence not least at paragraph 18 the  judge  found  that  "The  whole
    incident is related in a confusing manner in interview" and  the  judge
    states "Although I entirely accept what Mr Mahmood says about the  onus
    being upon the interviewer to clarify details which are not  clear,  it
    is for the appellant to set out her own claim."  That is correct.   The
    judge made specific criticisms of the appellant's  evidence  not  least
    that she had made no mention in her interview  that  her  daughter  had
    gone to the police and given a statement  [18]  and  this  detail  only
    arose after the refusal letter.  The judge also gave sound reasons  for
    rejecting her explanation as to why she persistently  referred  to  the
    boy who was shot as a little boy when at the time he was 18 or  20  and
    nor could she give details as to the time  in relation to the  shooting
    of the boy - 'she now says specifically in October 2014 albeit she  was
    unable to give any month to the incident ,  stating  at  her  interview
    that it was around 2015'. The judge also found as her appeal developed,
    she was able to  identify  more  precisely  when  this  occurred.   The
    appellant in relation to this referred to a newspaper report but  there
    was no newspaper report produced [18].  Nor had the appellant  produced
    evidence from her family members who were there [18].

20. A further incident occurred not 'six months later' when a  shooting  of
    one Steven Blake  occurred  and  someone  was  badly  injured  and  the
    appellant's son was blamed and, then, a  year  later  another  incident
    occurred, and a cousin  of  the  said  Blake  was  said  to  have  been
    murdered.  That murder she said  was  blamed  on  her  son.  The  judge
    recorded at paragraph 19, that the appellant "said that as a result  of
    this a serious gang war broke out" and "a lot of people started to move
    out of the area as it was not safe."  The timeline from  her  statement
    is that this took place at the latest in 2016.

21. The judge then recorded that there were yet two further incidents  with
    shooting of Jacqueline Bowen the mother of Steven Blake  in  July  2017
    for which her son Renoy Reid was arrested and then the murder  of  Jody
    Reid (her daughter's stepmother) murdered by Steven Blake  in  revenge.
    Her daughter's stepmother Jody Reid went to the local shop and was shot
    when coming back.  The appellant asserted this was simply  because  she
    was the appellant's daughter's stepmother [20] and [21].

22. Critical to this incident  is  the  media  report  that  the  appellant
    provided dated 4th July 2017 headed "Bus Shot at Funeral: Woman Killed"
    and this reports the death of a female passenger the deceased being one
    Jacqueline Bowen and related to a gang feud.  In conjunction with  this
    was an attorney's letter dated 5th February 2018 in which the  attorney
    confirms that he acts for Renoy Reid in two criminal matters.

23. The judge  at  paragraph  24  makes  various  points  about  these  two
    documents.  First, in relation to the media account the  appellant  did
    not know the surname at interview of the woman Jacqueline Bowen said to
    have been killed and nor was she sure how old the woman  was,  and  her
    account appeared to depend on a telephone conversation  and  "The  only
    evidence aside from her assertions and suggestions about what  happened
    (as the judge found) is that contained in the newspaper report  and  in
    the solicitor's letters".

24. Further, the media report provided by the  appellant  with  her  appeal
    notice dated 7th September 2018 identified that the two  men  named  as
    wanted for the murder were other than her son Renoy Reid who said to be
    sought for the  murder  of  Jacqueline  Bowen.   The  two  people  were
    unconnected  to  the  appellant.   Thus  the  media  report  dated  7th
    September 2018 did not reflect the appellant's account in  relation  to
    the July 2017 incident.   Simply her son was not named in the report.

25. The judge also found that the advocate's letter of  5th  February  2018
    predated the newspaper report and in cross-examination,  the  appellant
    accepted that the letter did not identify the victim  or  victims  that
    Renoy Reid was said to have killed.  Contrary to the grounds of appeal,
    this does not support the appellant's account in the manner claimed. It
    is also relevant that whoever the victim or family is  referred  to  in
    the letter dates, the two matters are said to be connected in that they
    relate to the 'same individual and or his  family'  but  crucially  one
    matter evidently dates from 2016.  The letter  was  thus  defective  in
    whom it identified but also defective in terms of the dates given.

26. The judge found at [25] that this letter did not identify the person or
    persons whom Renoy Reid is said to have killed (thus not supporting the
    appellant's timeline of an incident in July 2017) or a connection  with
    the death of Jacqueline Bowen and secondly the letter from the advocate
    predated in February 2018 the media report.  Since that time, the judge
    found the appellant had provided no up-to-date information  as  to  the
    legal situation in Jamaica and it was not credible that she  would  not
    have been able to obtain further information about whether her son  was
    still facing charges and thus details  of  those  charges.   The  judge
    found against her on the basis of her lack of effort to clarify all  of
    this which affected the credibility of her claim.

27. At paragraph 29 the judge also observed  that  the  appellant  had  not
    obtained further information from her family  members  and  found  that
    this absence damaged her credibility as did the examples given that the
    appellant had effectively "developed" her story  since  the  interview.
    For example when she was asked who shot  the  "little  boy  during  the
    incident over the bike" in interview she said she did not know.

28. Albeit corroboration is not expected  in  asylum  appeals,  where  that
    evidence can be reasonably obtained, and it  has  not  been,  that  may
    weigh against an appellant's credibility and that is the position here.
     It was open to the judge to find that the  only  extraneous  evidence,
    save for the appellant's rather confused assertions, was based on  that
    contained in the newspaper report and the advocate's letter which  were
    found to detract rather than assist the  claim.    That  as  the  judge
    cogently found damaged the appellant's credibility [32].

29. At the hearing before me Mr Mahmood attempted to  introduce  a  further
    letter dated July 2020 in which the advocate identified Blake's mother,
    but this evidence was not before the judge and  in  my  view  does  not
    assist the appellant in any event against the backdrop of the  findings
    by the judge which were comprehensive.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the
    further advocate's could have reasonably been provided  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal and it  was  not.  Belated  production  does  not  assist
    particularly in the light of the various findings made by the judge.

30. In relation to the delay  of  asylum  claim,  as  the  judge  found  at
    paragraph 32 the appellant claimed that in 2014 or  2015  the  problems
    became very serious with the neighbours albeit she made  no  claim  for
    the asylum until 15th January 2018.  She was asked in interview why she
    had not claimed asylum at the time when she  found  out  her  life  was
    being threatened in Jamaica and she in fact stated that when she  found
    out her son was locked up that she was very stressed and just  focusing
    on that.  The judge considered that but weighing that against the  lack
    of information about her son since the advocate's letter of 2018, found
    that her failure to make her claim at an early opportunity damaged  her
    credibility. That finding was open to him.

31. The judge clearly at paragraph 33 stated  that  there  was  a  lack  of
    credible evidence  to  make  any  connecting  link  between  her  son's
    situation and the appellant herself and that she  had  not  established
    that any of the other incidents recounted by her happened  in  the  way
    she described and that there is with any link to her.  It may have been
    that someone by the name of Jacqueline Bowen died having been shot  but
    there was "no established link between the event and the appellant".

32. It was open to the judge to  find  that  the  appellant  had  belatedly
    provided a manufactured and embellished  account  in  order  to  obtain
    leave to remain in the United Kingdom.

33. Dealing with the grounds directly, the judge found it was the  lack  of
    clarity from the appellant herself during her asylum  interview  rather
    than poor  questioning  which  caused  the  confusion.   The  appellant
    clearly acknowledged the defects  in  the  evidence  by  attempting  to
    produce clarificatory letters after the promulgation of  the  decision.
    There  was  a  multitude  of  credibility  findings  made  against  the
    appellant and in relation to the delay in  claiming  asylum  the  judge
    also noted at [32] that the appellant had made numerous applications on
    human rights grounds since her entry  to  the  UK  in  September  2002,
    stated her problems became very serious in 2014/2015 but made no  claim
    for asylum until January 2018.  She was specifically  asked  why  there
    was a delay and she stated that she was focussing on her son but as the
    judge recorded 'this reason  does  not  hold  water  when  taking  into
    account the absence  of  any  information  about  her  sone  since  the
    Advocate's letter of February 2018'.  That  finding  was  open  to  the
    judge who approached the aspect of damage to credibility  after  having
    considered  his  other  findings  which  significantly  undermined  her
    account.

34. As Mr Mahmood conceded, no Article  3  breach  was  relied  on  at  the
    hearing and the judge cannot be criticised for any failure to  consider
    that.

35. In relation to Article 8, contrary to Mr Mahmood's initial submissions,
    the appellant at the date of the hearing and decision in  January  2020
    had not resided in the United Kingdom for 20 years.  Indeed  there  was
    no evidence that she had resided consistently  in  the  United  Kingdom
    since her entry in March 2001.  The judge considered her claim  through
    the lens of paragraph 276ADE finding that she had spent  her  first  27
    years in Jamaica, spoke the language and had family there.

36. Her sister in the UK was not a British citizen but  as  the  judge  had
    already remarked, no member of family attended to give evidence on  the
    appellants behalf and indeed she gave evidence that  she  did  not  see
    them very often and she had not spoken to her sister about the  appeal.
    In sum, the judge did not accept that the only family  member  left  in
    Jamaica was her son and that there may be hardship  in  her  relocation
    after a lengthy period of time in the UK, but  she  showed  herself  as
    being able to adapt.

37. As Mr Avery submitted the medical evidence that was taken into  account
    by the judge and that both the  conditions  from  which  the  appellant
    suffered Lupus and high  blood  pressure  were  treatable  in  Jamaica.
    Those factors were taken into account and even so, when looking through
    the lens of Section 117B, the judge noted that little weight was  given
    to her private life as it was formed when she was here  without  lawful
    leave except her  initial  period  until  2002.   The  judge  therefore
    unarguably  considered  the  medical  condition   of   the   appellant,
    considered the policy of the Secretary of State  as  explained  through
    the Immigration Rules and took into account the personal  circumstances
    of the appellant when  striking  a  fair  balance  between  the  public
    interest in maintaining fair immigration control, and  an  individual's
    right to private/family life.  In  effect  the  judge  found  that  the
    decision was not disproportionate and, on the evidence, factored in  by
    the  judge  the  appellant  had  disclosed   no   unjustifiably   harsh
    circumstances on her return to Jamaica.

38. As such I find the challenge to the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Thew, who considered the  appeal  comprehensively,  is  merely  a
    disagreement with the judge's  findings  and  sound  conclusions.   The
    decision of Judge Thew will stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed      Helen Rimington                              Date  27th  January
2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

