
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06311/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Tribunal  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 7 August 2017                         |On 20 September 2017              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     GSE
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Mr Jussab instructed by Bond Adams LLP Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr Kotas Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS

Background


     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Andrew promulgated on 25 April 2017 in which  the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on all grounds.

     2. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan born on [  ]  1985.  The
        appellant entered the United Kingdom on 30 March 2000. A claim  for
        asylum was refused and an appeal against that refusal dismissed. On
        8  September  2003,  the  appellant  married  a  British   citizen.
        Applications for leave to remain on  the  basis  of  marriage  were
        refused including a refusal to grant leave due to  the  appellant's
        criminality. Following reconsideration, the appellant  was  granted
        indefinite leave to remain on 24 May 2010.  On  29  June  2011  the
        appellant submitted an application for naturalisation as a  British
        citizen which was refused on 1 June 2012 due to his character.

     3. On 9 September 2013, the appellant was convicted at St Albans Crown
        Court possessing a  controlled  drug,  Class  B  (cannabis/cannabis
        resin), possession of a false or improperly obtained  another's  ID
        card,  driving  while  disqualified  and  using  a  vehicle  whilst
        uninsured, for which the appellant was sentenced to one  month  and
        one day's  imprisonment  and  disqualified  from  driving.   On  25
        September 2013, a decision was made not to pursue deportation and a
        warning letter sent to the appellant.

     4. On 9 March 2015, the appellant was convicted at Warwick Crown Court
        of committing an act or series of acts with intent to  pervert  the
        course of justice and driving whilst disqualified for which he  was
        sentenced on 27 April 2015 to a total of eight months imprisonment,
        ordered to pay a victim surcharge of  �80,  and  disqualified  from
        driving for two years. On 7 May 2015, a decision was  made  not  to
        pursue deportation and a second warning letter sent  the  appellant
        on 21 August 2015.

     5. On 1 February  2016,  the  appellant  was  convicted  at  Leicester
        Magistrates Court of affray and on 26 February 2016  was  sentenced
        by a judge sitting at Leicester Crown Court to  one  year  and  six
        months imprisonment. On 25 May 2016, a decision was made to make  a
        deportation order which was made on 27 May 2016. The appeal  before
        the Judge was against that decision on the basis the appellant  was
        asserting that one of the exceptions to deportation set out in  the
        Borders Act 2007 was applicable.

     6. The Judge clearly considered the evidence with the required  degree
        of anxious scrutiny. It is shown that at the outset of the  hearing
        the  appellant's  representative  sought  an  adjournment  as   the
        appellant and his wife had recently separated,  the  appellant  had
        some contact with  the  children  but  that  there  was  no  formal
        arrangement in place and that enquiries needed to be made as to the
        current level of contact. The Judge refused the request noting  all
        members of the appellant's family who were  to  facilitate  contact
        were  in  court  and  able  to  give  evidence  although  a   short
        adjournment was permitted to allow the  appellant's  representative
        to take instructions in relation to the contact  issue.  The  Judge
        further notes that the appeal had been adjourned  from  30  January
        2017 as the appellant had been released on  bail  and  the  nearest
        hearing centre was Birmingham which necessitated the  appeal  being
        relisted.

     7. The Judge sets out findings of fact  at  [23-49]  of  the  decision
        under challenge which can be summarised in the following terms:

             a. The appellant and his wife separated in early April 2017 as
                a result of the appellant's affair.  The  appellant's  wife
                did not accept she should accept the appellant's conduct as
                evidenced by the lack of a signature on her  statement  and
                non-attendance at the hearing. The Judge found at the  date
                of the hearing the appellant could not be said  to  have  a
                genuine and subsisting relationship with his  wife  because
                of the separation [25].

             b. The Judge noted evidence of three contact  occasions  since
                separation.  Letters  from  the  children   were   in   the
                respondent's bundle although the Judge was  unable  to  say
                when  they  were  written  and  cannot  be  indicative   of
                children's feelings now, following separation [26 - 27].

             c. The respondent accepted  it  would  not  be  reasonable  to
                expect the children to go to Afghanistan. The other  family
                member prepared to care for the children  is  their  mother
                [28].

             d. The Judge was unable to find it would be unduly  harsh  for
                the children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  the
                appellant, on the evidence [29].

             e.  The  Judge  had  no  evidence  showing  the   effect   the
                appellant's deportation upon the children including nothing
                to  show  their  wishes  and   feelings;   supporting   the
                conclusion the Judge was unable to be satisfied it would be
                unduly harsh for the  children  to  remain  in  the  United
                Kingdom without the appellant [30].

             f. The  Judge  finds  the  appellant  has  not  been  lawfully
                resident in the United Kingdom for most of his  life  [31],
                cannot be  socially  and  culturally  integrated  into  the
                United Kingdom, has no respect for the criminal laws of the
                United Kingdom as demonstrated by his  offending  behaviour
                and no respect for the immigration laws as evidenced by the
                complete disregard of warning letters sent to him [33].

             g. The assertion by the appellant he no longer speaks Dari was
                not found credible for the reasons given at [33].

             h. It was not found there would be very significant  obstacles
                for the appellant if returned to Afghanistan as he is aware
                of the culture and customs having lived there for the first
                15 years of his life, he has some work  experience  in  the
                United Kingdom, he had an education in the United  Kingdom,
                although there have  been  "vague  referrals"  to  risk  on
                return no evidence has been adduced to show  the  appellant
                would be at real risk on return, the appellant is  in  good
                health with no evidence  to  show  to  the  contrary  [34].
                Leading to a finding the appellant  does  not  fall  within
                paragraph 399A [35].

             i. Considering article 8 ECHR, the Judge  reminds  herself  of
                the need  to  conduct  a  balancing  exercise  and  of  the
                sentencing judge's remarks [36 - 38]. The Judge  noted  she
                could not ignore the fact the appellant  has  had  previous
                warning letters which he ignored [39].

             j. The Judge was satisfied the appellant continues to  show  a
                medium risk of reoffending as assessed in the OASys report.
                The Judge noted a protective factor against reoffending was
                the appellant's wife which has been removed as a result  of
                their separation [40].

             k. Other than the appellant's  assertion  that  was  no  other
                evidence the appellant was no longer drinking. Neither  the
                appellant's brothers nor sister-in-law who  it  is  claimed
                were close to him were aware of his  drinking  or  criminal
                behaviour, casting doubts upon the claimed closeness of the
                family unit and the appellant's brothers being a protective
                factor [41].

             l. In relation to Section 55 and the  best  interests  of  the
                children,  there  was  no  evidence  in  relation  to   the
                appellant's nephews and nieces. The best interests of those
                children are to remain with their respective parents in the
                United Kingdom [42]. The appellant's own children live with
                their mother as they  have  done  throughout  their  entire
                lives. There has been some contact  since  separation.  The
                children are British citizens  and  in  good  health.   The
                children will continue with their schooling and  the  Judge
                had nothing other than vague assertions  by  the  appellant
                and his family that their schooling will be affected in any
                way by the departure  of  the  appellant  from  the  United
                Kingdom. There was no independent evidence to show how,  if
                at all, the children will be affected if the  appellant  is
                deported [43].

             m. The Judge accepts that if the appellant is deported he will
                not see the children as their mother is likely not to allow
                the children to visit him in Afghanistan.  Some contact can
                be maintained by electronic means [44].

             n. The Judge finds  the  ideal  situation  would  be  for  the
                children to be brought up by both parents but this  is  not
                going to happen as a result of the separation. In  view  of
                the appellant's complete disregard for the criminal laws of
                the United Kingdom he is unlikely to be a good influence on
                the children, that offending must outweigh theirs  and  the
                appellant's own interests [45].

             o. At [46] the Judge sets out the factors weighing against the
                appellant  and  at  [47]  the  factors  in  favour  of  the
                appellant before concluding at [48] "when I weigh all these
                matters together I am satisfied that the  balance  tips  in
                favour of the  respondent  and  in  particular  because  of
                deportation  of  foreign  criminals  being  in  the  public
                interest.

     8. The appellant sought permission to  appeal  which  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the grounds it was said
        to be  arguable  the  failure  to  grant  an  adjournment  arguably
        amounted to an error of law. The  application  is  opposed  by  the
        Secretary of State in the Rule 24 letter dated 29 June 2017.

Error of law


     9. The appellant asserts the refusal of  the  adjournment  application
        deprived him of a fair hearing. The appellant sought to rely on his
        own evidence and the evidence of his wife on the issue of the  best
        interests of the three children yet  the  appellant  and  his  wife
        separated two weeks before the hearing  and  the  appellant's  wife
        failed or refused to attend  the  hearing.  The  appellant  asserts
        there was insufficient evidence for  the  Judge  to  make  a  sound
        finding on the best interest of the children to allow  a  just  and
        fair disposal of the appeal. The matter should have been  adjourned
        for post separation evidence to be  obtained  in  relation  to  the
        children.

    10. Mr Jussab also asserts the Judge's assessment of the best interests
        of the children is flawed as these are central to the assessment of
        the article 8 and overall  proportionality  decision.  It  is  also
        asserted the failure of the Judge to assess the best  interests  of
        children first renders the  Judge's  findings  regarding  the  best
        interests  of  the  children  flawed  which  in  turn  renders  the
        assessment of article 8 and the  proportionality  balance  exercise
        flawed. It is stated in  his  skeleton  argument  that  the  Judges
        assessment of the best interests comes at paragraphs 42 to 45 after
        the Judge's conclusions on whether it will be unduly harsh for  the
        children to remain in the United  Kingdom  without  the  appellant,
        which appears at paragraphs 29 and 30.

    11. It is also argued the Judge erred in stating the first  matter  she
        had to consider was whether the appellant had a genuine  subsisting
        relationship with the three British daughters yet failing to answer
        the question before going on to consider whether it will be  unduly
        harsh for the children to leave the United Kingdom.  It  is  stated
        the failure of  the  Judge  to  answer  the  question  renders  the
        findings on the best interests of children and thus the  assessment
        of the proportionality balancing exercise incomplete and unsafe.

    12. Before the Upper Tribunal Mr Jussab submitted the  adjournment  was
        sought to enable the appellant to  obtain  further  evidence.  When
        asked what evidence the appellant was proposing to get  he  advised
        it was witness statements  from  other  sources  together  with  an
        expert report from a social worker or child psychologist  regarding
        the impact of separation  on  the  children.  When  asked  why  the
        evidence was not obtained  before  11th  of  April  2017  and  what
        efforts were made to instruct a social worker  the  Upper  Tribunal
        was advised that the first effort made was post  hearing  after  20
        April 2017. When asked why a social workers report was required the
        Upper Tribunal were advised it was because  the  children's  mother
        would not be able to assist and that  the  expert  report  will  be
        obtained even if the wife did come  along.  In  relation  to  other
        evidence it was not shown who the evidence was required from or why
        it was not available by 20 April  2017.   The  Upper  Tribunal  was
        given the clear impression  this  was  a  proposal  to  permit  the
        appellant to embark on a fishing expedition  to  see  what  may  be
        available to support his case rather than  identifying  a  specific
        issue relating to the needs of the children that may have benefited
        from expert evidence.

    13. It is important to note the chronology of events  which  shows  the
        decision under challenge was made on 27 May 2016,  the  appeal  was
        lodged on 13 June 2016, the case was listed for a  case  management
        review hearing, on 30 December  2016  the  matter  was  listed  for
        hearing on 30 January 2017 at Newport, on 19 January 2017 a request
        for change of venue was made by the appellant,  on  23  March  2017
        directions were issued notifying the change of venue  to  20  April
        2017 at Birmingham. There has clearly be sufficient time  prior  to
        the appellant and his wife separating for  the  appellant  to  have
        obtained all the evidence upon which he was seeking to rely for the
        purposes of establishing his case.

    14. The Judge noted that the adjournment was sought  because  enquiries
        needed to be made in relation to current levels of contact [17]. It
        was also noted by the Judge that the persons who were to facilitate
        contact were present  in  court  and  that  they  could  give  oral
        evidence in relation to this aspect, which they  did.  Accordingly,
        it is not made out why, on the point the adjournment was sought, it
        was necessary for there to be an adjournment. The Judge  gives  the
        matter appropriate  consideration,  including  granting  additional
        time to the appellant's representative to take further instructions
        on the contact issue. No arguable procedural error material to  the
        decision to dismiss the appeal is made  out  by  reference  to  the
        principles of fairness in the decision by the Judge to  refuse  the
        adjournment application.

    15. Mr Jussab took two further points, the first relates to section  55
        claiming there is no reference to section 55 at the proper point in
        the determination as it should have come first  and  be  a  primary
        issue.  The second point is that although raising the  question  of
        whether there is a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  the
        children there is nothing in the determination to  show  that  this
        question had been specifically answered.

    16. In relation to section  55  point  it  is  important  to  read  the
        decision  as  a  whole.  The  Judge  clearly  considered  the  best
        interests of the children, for example at [45]  and  [47A]  of  the
        decision under challenge. The Judge noted the lack of  evidence  of
        the impact of  the  appellant's  removal  upon  the  children,  the
        appellant's criminality and disregard  of  warnings  given  by  the
        respondent about the impact of future  criminal  conduct  upon  his
        liability for deportation. I find the Judge clearly considered  the
        best interests of the children  which  are  not  the  determinative
        factor. It is not made out the Judge  gave  the  same  insufficient
        weight. The Judge was clearly required to factor this element  into
        the proportionality assessment which the Judge  arguably  did.  The
        weight given to these matters was for the Judge.

    17. In relation to the question the Judge is asserted to have posed but
        not  to  have  answered,  I  find  it  can  be  inferred  from  the
        determination that the Judge must have accepted there was a genuine
        subsisting relationship with the children as otherwise there  would
        have been no need for her to have  considered  the  impact  on  the
        children and their best interests in relation  to  the  deportation
        decision.

    18. I find no arguable legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal has been made out.

Decision

    19. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.

    20. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.








Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal Hanson

Dated the 19 September 2017












