
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06668/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral decision given following hearing         |On 22 January 2020            |
|On 5 December 2019                            |                              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                    ms t
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Sobowale, Counsel, instructed by Rodman Pearce
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Cameroon who  was  born  in  1979.   She
    claims to have arrived in the UK in 2004 having left Cameroon some  two
    years or so earlier and then  travelled  to  Germany.   She  apparently
    claimed asylum in that country, which claim was refused in 2004 and she
    then travelled to the UK.  In April 2011 she made  an  application  for
    leave to remain on the basis of her human  rights  which  was  refused.
    Having been detained in May 2016, she alleged that  she  had  been  the
    victim of torture, whereupon she was released from  detention.   Having
    then been refused leave to remain  following  a  further  human  rights
    application and her appeal against this decision  having  been  refused
    before a First-tier Immigration Judge  in  October  2017,  she  claimed
    asylum in October 2017.

 2. This application also was refused  in  May  2018  and  the  appellant's
    appeal against that refusal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    Boylan-Kemp MBE in a decision and reasons promulgated on  29  May  2019
    following a hearing at Nottingham Justice Centre on 11 April 2019.  The
    appellant now appeals against that decision, leave having been  granted
    by Upper Tier Tribunal Judge Sheridan on 23 September 2019.  The  basis
    upon which permission was granted was  that  at  paragraph  32  of  her
    decision (which concerned the risk which might be faced by a  returning
    Anglophone to Cameroon) the  judge  had  referred  to  the  absence  of
    country guidance concerning the risk faced by Anglophones  in  Cameroon
    and had referred to the conflict as being "two-sided".  The  judge  had
    stated at follows at paragraph 32:

         "I note that there is no country  guidance  on  this  issue,  which
         indicates to me that the perceived risk to Anglophones in  Cameroon
         is not viewed at  present  as  being  significant  by  the  British
         government.  The objective evidence  before  me  demonstrates  that
         there are difficulties in Cameroon but that this is two-sided,  and
         that the focus of the attacks is more often schools or is  targeted
         at separatists as opposed to being random violence that places  all
         Anglophone's at risk".

 3. The appellant's claim is that she is an Anglophone from Cameroon,  that
    her daughter has  been  specifically  threatened  within  that  country
    insofar as the appellant had heard gunfire while she had  been  talking
    to her daughter and that her daughter had been treated as a refugee  in
    school.  She also claimed to have independent  secessionist  views  but
    had not attended demonstrations because she did not want to be involved
    in sur place activities which might bring her to the attention  of  the
    authorities in  Cameroon  which  might  be  recorded  by  the  Cameroon
    authorities and used against her in the event that she returned to that
    country.

 4. In  support  of  her  claim  and  in  particular  with  regard  to  the
    conversations that she claimed  to  have  had  with  her  daughter  the
    appellant stated that she had had emails from a friend, Yvette, who had
    helped her contact her  daughter  and  obtain  documents  to  Cameroon.
    However, she refused to allow the  Tribunal  to  view  these  documents
    apparently due to the "personal and intimate" nature of their  contents
    (see paragraph 20 of the First-tier Tribunal decision).   As  is  well-
    known to practitioners in this  jurisdiction,  evidence  such  as  this
    would be kept confidential by the Tribunal and I note that at the First-
    tier Tribunal (as in this Tribunal) the decision was and is anonymised.
     Furthermore, the appellant was represented by Ms  Rutherford,  who  is
    well-known to this Tribunal as being an experienced and  able  advocate
    who would have advised the appellant, consistent with her duties, as to
    the importance of disclosing all material such as  these  emails  in  a
    case in which, if the appellant was genuine about her  fears  could  be
    vital in preventing her being returned to a country where she would  be
    seriously at risk.   Unsurprisingly,  the  judge  did  not  accept  her
    evidence and did not believe that she held the  views  she  claimed  to
    have held or even that she had a daughter in Cameroon.   These  adverse
    credibility findings are clearly sustainable in light of  the  evidence
    which was before the judge.

 5. Accordingly, what the case boiled down to was whether or not, given  an
    absence of credible personal information,  the  return  of  a  possible
    Anglophone to Cameroon, in circumstances where that person had been  in
    the UK for eleven years, would give rise to an arguable risk on return.



 6. I say at the outset, and Mr Avery on behalf of the respondent does  not
    seek to persuade the Tribunal otherwise, that the fact that there is no
    country guidance with regard to the perceived risk  to  Anglophones  in
    Cameroon, does not mean that there is necessarily not a risk.  This may
    or may not be regarded as being significant by the  British  government
    but what any judge needs to do in these circumstances in the absence of
    country guidance, is to consider whatever evidence is put before him or
    her.  It is accepted on behalf of the respondent that there is violence
    within Cameroon and that certain Anglophones  within  Cameroon  may  be
    subject to considerable violence.  There is certainly evidence  that  a
    number of people have been killed and  also  that  a  great  number  of
    people have been displaced.

 7. However, it is accepted on behalf of the appellant, as  it  has  to  be
    that it cannot at present be said that  every  Anglophone  returned  to
    Cameroon would be  at  risk.   Although  hundreds  of  homes  had  been
    "torched" in Mr Sobowale's words and civilians  have  been  killed  and
    very many people have  been  displaced,  nonetheless  there  are  areas
    within Cameroon where  returning  Anglophones  can  go  which  are  not
    currently areas where Anglophones are attacked.  Mr Sobowale  suggested
    that if returned the appellant would have  to  go  to  an  area  within
    Cameroon under French control but he acknowledged that by virtue of the
    fact that there was an area or  areas  within  Cameroon  to  which  the
    appellant could return, he could not argue that her case could  succeed
    under 15(c) on the basis of the risk of indiscriminate  violence.   The
    highest he could put the appellant's case was that  that  may  lead  to
    trouble later because there may be suspicions  as  to  the  appellant's
    beliefs.

 8. The next difficulty that the appellant has  in  establishing  that  any
    error within the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  was  material  is
    that Mr Sobowale was forced to concede, when asked if he could point to
    any evidence to the contrary, that there was  no  evidence  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal (and none before this Tribunal either) supporting a
    contention that any returning national of Cameroon is questioned at the
    airport as to whether or not he or she has Anglophone views.   Even  if
    (which the judge did not accept), the appellant had  views  which  were
    not those of the government and which she could not be expected to  lie
    about, there is no basis upon which it could be said that she would  be
    asked what these views are.

 9. Accordingly, although the absence of  country  guidance  or  a  country
    guidance decision does not necessarily mean  that  there  cannot  be  a
    risk, even had the judge  analysed  all  the  background  material  put
    before her in very great detail, she would still have  been  unable  to
    find, on the basis of this material, that this appellant  would  be  at
    risk on return.  In light of the  adverse  credibility  findings  which
    were (given the appellant's  refusal  to  allow  the  Tribunal  to  see
    material which she claimed to be relevant to her case) inevitable,  her
    case was incapable of success.  Any risk is  entirely  speculative  and
    unsupported by evidence.

10. In these circumstances, there was no material error in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal's decision because on the basis  of  the  evidence  which  was
    before her, and in light of her credibility findings, this appeal could
    not have succeeded.

11. It follows that this appeal must be dismissed and I so find.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
dismissing  her  appeal  against  the  respondent's  decision  refusing  her
asylum, is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Date: 14 January 2020

