
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal no: PA/06336/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|At                                            |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|on    23.04.2018                              |On 26.04.20180               |

Before:
                            Upper Tribunal Judge
                                John FREEMAN
Between:
                                 Kamsan [S]
                                                                   appellant
                                     and


                                                                  respondent
Representation:
For the appellant:  Philippe Bonavero (counsel instructed by Gurney Harden,
Ashford)
For the respondent: Mr Tom Wilding

                            DECISION AND REASONS

       This is an appeal, by the , against the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge  Madeleine  Colvin),  sitting  at  Taylor  House  on  1
    December 2017, to  an asylum and human rights appeal by a Tamil citizen
    of Sri Lanka, born 1993. The appellant had arrived on 28 September 2011
    on a student visa, valid till 2014; but on  28  February  2012  he  was
    arrested in possession of false documents on his way to France, he said
    because he had been advised to claim asylum there,  for  which  he  was
    sentenced soon after to 12 months' imprisonment.  Following  notice  of
    intention to deport in April, he claimed asylum  on  7  May.  This  was
    refused, and the decision served with a deportation order on  13  April
    2013.

 2. In November 2013 the appellant gave evidence for the prosecution at the
    trial of those responsible for the illegal movement of him and  others.
    The five accused convicted received sentences of over 23 years  between
    them, and a detective-sergeant in the case wrote to the appellant on 31
    January 2014, saying this:


         'I hope you are satisfied with the sentences that have been passed,
         and I would like to take this opportunity to  thank  you  for  your
         support throughout this investigation.  Without  brave  individuals
         such as yourself,  it  is  sometimes  very  difficult  to  get  the
         perpetrators of these crimes brought to justice.'

 3. At the hearing of the appellant's appeal on 16  June  2014,  the  judge
    queried the circumstances under  which  the  authorities  had  put  the
    appellant forward as a witness of truth at the  trial,  but  apparently
    not accepted his account of his own history. That led to  the  decision
    under appeal being withdrawn and reconsidered; meanwhile the  appellant
    applied to the Criminal Cases Review Commission for his  conviction  to
    be reviewed, but they refused. On 3 June 2016 a fresh decision was made
    on his asylum claim, but to the same effect  as  before,  the  decision
    under appeal in this case.

 4. The judge allowed the appeal on three grounds: the Convention  risk  on
    return for the appellant, both from the Sri Lankan authorities and from
    the people-movers  and  their  associates;  and  the  'very  compelling
    circumstances' which she found on the deportation appeal, arising  from
    the risk from the people-movers and the circumstances in which he  came
    to face it. As it was agreed before me that this added nothing  to  the
    protection claim on that basis, I need say no more about it.

 5. The judge said a good deal about the appellant's claim  for  protection
    from the people-movers, and I shall come back to it. On the  risk  from
    the authorities, the relevant country guidance was to be  found  in  GJ
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG  [2013]  UKUT  319  (IAC),  to
    which the judge referred rather briefly at 13. This is the  potentially
    relevant part of the judicial head-note:


         (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of  persecution
             or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka, whether  in  detention
             or otherwise, are:


             (a)    Individuals who are, or are perceived to be,  a  threat
             to the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state  because  they
             are, or are perceived to have a significant role  in  relation
             to post-conflict Tamil separatism within the diaspora and/or a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.


             ...


             (d)    A person whose name appears on  a  computerised  "stop"
             list accessible at the airport, comprising  a  list  of  those
             against whom there is an extant court order or arrest warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

 6. This appellant's history in Sri  Lanka  was  limited,  on  the  judge's
    findings at paragraph 8, to this:


         "His father and his cousin had indirect involvement with  the  LTTE
         and  as  a  result  his  family  were  known  to  the  Sri   Lankan
         authorities. On a regular basis  he  would  be  approached  by  the
         authorities who would ask him for information about the  LTTE.  One
         day in September 2009 after a bomb blast he  and  his  father  were
         arrested and detained by CID police. He was ill-treated during  the
         detention before he was released and  later  his  father  was  also
         released. His brother was abducted from school in February 2011 and
         has not seen his brother since then.


         His family feared that the same would happen to him and they  found
         an agent to take him to the UK by  obtaining  a  student  visa  and
         paying a bribe to pass through the airport. It was mentioned by the
         CID officer at the airport that there was a record on  him  on  the
         system."

 7. There is no possible basis on which that  history  could  lead  to  any
    Convention risk under paragraph 7 (a) of the guidance in GJ.  So far as
    7 (d) is concerned, Mr Bonavero argued that  the  appellant  must  have
    been on a 'stop' list for the police officer to say what he did to  him
    at the airport in 2011, and there was no evidence that  this  state  of
    affairs had changed.

 8. However, there is nothing whatsoever to  explain  why  this  appellant,
    released in 2009 and not troubled since by  the  authorities,  whatever
    might have happened to his brother, should have been on a  'stop'  list
    in 2011, without any steps having been taken to pick him up from  home,
    where he had been living all along. It is on the  other  hand  entirely
    possible that the police  officer  mentioned  the  record  against  the
    appellant merely as a ruse to shake down someone who  could  afford  to
    travel to this country as a student for a bribe, in which he succeeded.
    At paragraph 35, the judge quite uncritically  accepted  the  inference
    invited by Mr Bonavero, who did not refer me to any further material to
    justify her decision on this point, which must be set aside.

 9. So far as the claimed risk from non-state agents, in the  form  of  the
    people-movers and their associates, was concerned, it is  easy  to  see
    why the judge was sympathetic to the appellant. He had done his best to
    co-operate with the law enforcement authorities in  this  country,  and
    been rewarded by having the details of his asylum  claim  disclosed  to
    those defending the men against whom he had given evidence. This should
    never have happened, at least without an application to the trial judge
    to authorize it, on which the appellant should have had an  opportunity
    to be heard.

10. I have carefully considered what the judge said on  this  part  of  the
    appellant's claim. Clearly she was fully entitled to accept at 31  that
    he had a 'genuine concern' on this point, in other words a subjectively
    justified claim: the question is whether on her findings some objective
    justification was shown for it. Mr Bonavero invited me to conclude that
    there was, on the basis  that  the  appellant's  family's  history  and
    general whereabouts would have been disclosed  with  the  rest  of  his
    claim, and that the people-movers formed, according to  a  Home  Office
    press release at the time of  the  trial  (see  30)  an  'international
    organised crime gang' for whom revenge would  have  been  easy  on  his
    family or him.

11. Mr Wilding however pointed out that the judge had made  no  attempt  to
    deal with the question of whether the  intelligence  available  to  the
    people-movers would have made the details of his return known to  them;
    or whether he would have been able to  enlist  the  protection  of  the
    authorities against them, once returned. It also seems (see the judge's
    36) that the appellant's family had meanwhile moved to India.

12. The judge herself recognized at 31 that more needed to  be  said  about
    the appellant's 'genuine concern' about the people-movers, and promised
    to return to it. However, as it turned out, she did no more than make a
    general reference to the submissions on his behalf on  this  point,  in
    the last sentence of 35, and to say at 36 that she had  accepted  them,
    without giving any further reasons for that.

13. This was not giving the losing side any proper explanation of why  they
    had lost, the single most essential component of any judicial decision,
    and so was wrong in law. That is not to exclude the possibility of  the
    appellant succeeding on this point, in a  properly  reasoned  decision;
    nor to cast any doubt on the judge's credibility findings  on  it.  For
    those reasons, the judge's decision is set aside; but there will  be  a
    further hearing at which she will be able to reconsider  the  non-state
    agents protection claim only. The Home Office may  wish  to  reconsider
    their own decision in advance of that, in view of what I have  said  at
    9, and at least offer the appellant some form of discretionary leave to
    remain; but that is up to them.

Home Office appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Further hearing on non-state protection claim only, before Judge  Colvin  at
    Hatton Cross
                               [pic]                                (a
                                   judge of the Upper Tribunal)
                                                         Date: 26 April 2016
