
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06851/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated:      |
|On 1 March 2021                      |On 09 March 2021                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                               Ardit Mazrreku
                            [NO ANONYMITY ORDER]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Pokhunduth V Thoree, solicitor with Thoree & Co
solicitors
For the respondent:    Ms Alexandra Everett, a Senior Home Office
Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission from the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    on 23 June 2016 to refuse his further submissions of 15  November  2015
    on international protection and human rights grounds and to certify the
    further submissions as clearly unfounded pursuant to section  94(1)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (as amended).

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Albania.  He came to the  United  Kingdom
    age 15 as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking  child.   The  basis  of  his
    claim is that there  is  a  blood  feud  between  his  family  and  the
    Bardhoshi family, and that the Bardhoshis murdered  his  uncle  Skender
    Mazrreku.

 3. This appeal has an unfortunate history.  For the reasons I now set out,
    the Upper Tribunal has no jurisdiction in this appeal and nor  did  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  It was only at  today's  hearing  that  this  was
    recognised and accordingly, the appeal must be dismissed.

Background

 4. The appellant was born in Albania on 21  May  1998.   He  came  to  the
    United Kingdom on 23 April 2014, age 15, having left Albania three days
    earlier.  He claimed asylum on arrival, but on 11  December  2014,  the
    respondent refused his protection claim.  As the appellant was a minor,
    the respondent granted him discretionary leave until 21  November  2015
    as an unaccompanied asylum-seeking child.  On 15 November 2015,  before
    that leave had run out, the appellant  applied  for  further  leave  to
    remain.

 5. On 14 January 2016,  the  respondent  made  certain  enquiries  of  the
    British Embassy in Tirana concerning the factual  matrix  relied  upon,
    and  the  Embassy  replied  on  8  February  2016,  dealing  with   the
    appellant's family circumstances.  The most significant  point  in  the
    Embassy letter is that the appellant's uncle, Skender Mazrreku, who  on
    his account had been murdered, was recorded as resident in  Durres  and
    alive.  The Embassy confirmed that Skender Mazrreku  had  not  murdered
    anyone from the Bardhoshi family, with whom the appellant claims  there
    is a blood feud, and also that according to their records, there was no
    problem between the appellant's family and the Bardhoshis.

 6. On 23 June 2016, the respondent refused to grant any further leave  and
    certified the claim as clearly unfounded.  The  appellant  should  then
    have made a judicial review application to challenge the lawfulness  of
    the certificate, if he considered that he ought to be  granted  an  in-
    country right of appeal.  He did not do so and instead he  launched  an
    in-country appeal before the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. The respondent's bundle which was supplied to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and the Upper Tribunal contains two copies  of  the  11  December  2014
    decision, which carried a right of appeal which the appellant  did  not
    need  to  exercise,  as  discretionary  leave  had  been  granted.   It
    contained no copy of the decision  of  23  June  2016,  which  was  the
    decision under challenge.

 8. Neither the appellant's solicitors nor the First-tier Tribunal  noticed
    the omission or the  section  94  certificate.   The  First-tier  Judge
    proceeded to give a full in-country decision on the appeal, of which he
    was not lawfully seised.

 9. I have found a mini-bundle on the file which comprises  copies  of  the
    appellant's family record in Albania, extracted  on  19  January  2016;
    his personal certificate, bearing the same date; a letter  in  Albanian
    dated 20 January 2016 from the Ministry of  Internal  Affairs,  General
    Directorate  of  Civil  Status  (not  translated  into  English);  and,
    crucially, the 23 June 2016 refusal letter.    There is no  index,  but
    the mini-bundle bears a pencilled date of 31 January 2020, the date  of
    the First-tier Tribunal hearing.  It seems likely that this mini-bundle
    was handed up at the hearing.

10. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.   He did so significantly
    out of time, partly by reason of the Covid-19 pandemic in 2020.   Upper
    Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith, who granted permission,  did  not  notice
    the section 94 certificate and granted permission on all grounds.

11. When the appeal came before  me  today,  I  asked  Ms  Everett  if  the
    decision of 23 June 2016 on the Upper Tribunal  file  was  the  correct
    one.  She agreed that it  was  and  that  the  decision  was  certified
    clearly unfounded.  That being the case,  the  Upper  Tribunal  has  no
    jurisdiction to hear an appeal from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge, who also  had  no  jurisdiction  to  hear  an  appeal  from  the
    respondent's decision.

12. It remains open to the appellant  to  seek  to  challenge  by  judicial
    review out of time the section 94 certificate in  the  respondent's  23
    June 2016 decision.  If a judicial review  is  to  be  considered,  the
    appellant will need to satisfy an Upper Tribunal Judge that there is  a
    proper reason to extend time.  In considering  that,  any  judge  would
    have to take account of the error in the Secretary  of  State's  bundle
    and the effect of the Covid-19 pandemic as to delay.

13. This appeal is dismissed.

DECISION

14. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

    The First-tier Tribunal had no jurisdiction and neither does the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This appeal is therefore dismissed.



Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:     1 March
2021
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



