
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/06982/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 5th April 2019                  |On 18 April 2019                   |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                         MR MIRAN ABDUL KARIM FARAJ
                        (No anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr J Chaudry, Latta & Co, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision by Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Peter Grant-Hutchison allowing an appeal on
    protection and human rights grounds.  The appellant before the First-
    tier Tribunal, Mr Miran Abdul Karim Faraj, is hereinafter referred to
    as "the claimant".

 2. The claimant is a national of Iraq.  He is a Sunni Muslim of Kurdish
    ethnicity.  He originates from the vicinity of Kirkuk.  He claims to
    have left Iraq because of a fear of a Shia militia, which targeted his
    family and sought to seize his family's land.  In 2012 his uncle was
    killed by this militia and the claimant has no surviving male
    relatives.

 3. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the Judge of the
    First-tier Tribunal arguably erred by not giving adequate reasons to
    support the findings on credibility, risk on return and internal
    relocation.

 4. It was contended in the application for permission to appeal that the
    judge failed to identify a reason recognised by the Refugee Convention
    for the claimant's fear.  It is pointed out in the grant of permission,
    however, that at paragraph 11 of the decision the judge specified the
    Convention reason as a fear by the claimant as a Sunni Muslim of Shia
    Muslims who were using threats to force the claimant and his family to
    vacate their land and leave their village.  Mrs O'Brien rightly
    acknowledged this was a fear based on ethnicity, or race, but it might
    also be characterised as a fear based on religion.

Submissions

 5. At the hearing before me, Mr Chaudry began by raising two preliminary
    issues.  The first of these was that new evidence in the form of
    country information was lodged with the application for permission to
    appeal but no application was made under rule 15(2A) in respect of the
    new evidence.  In response Mrs O'Brien observed that the new evidence
    comprised published documents.  She would not, however, seek to rely on
    this new evidence before the question of whether the First-tier
    Tribunal erred in law was decided.  I consider that Mrs O'Brien's
    approach was the proper one in these circumstances.

 6. The second issue raised by Mr Chaudry arose from paragraphs 14-15 of
    the application for permission to appeal.  Here it was contended that
    the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal had been asked to depart from the
    relevant country guideline cases, in particular because the situation
    in Kirkuk province no longer met the threshold for a real risk of
    serious harm in terms of Article 15(c), but instead the judge made an
    unsubstantiated and inadequately reasoned finding to allow the appeal
    on asylum grounds. Mr Chaudry submitted that at the hearing before the
    First-tier Tribunal it was not argued on behalf of the Secretary of
    State that the judge should depart from the country guidance on the
    application of Article 15(c).  It was accepted that the outcome of the
    appeal depended upon credibility.

 7. In response Mrs O'Brien stated that she did not have the Presenting
    Officer's note of the hearing.  The Presenting Officer was Mr Wright,
    not Mr Mullen as erroneously recorded in the decision.

 8. I note that the Presenting Officer's submission at the hearing before
    the First-tier Tribunal was recorded by the judge at paragraph 7 of his
    decision.  At paragraph 7(g), in particular, the Presenting Officer is
    recorded as relying upon the country guideline decision in AAH (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212.  There is no
    suggestion that the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal was asked to
    depart from the country guidance.

 9. I asked Mr Chaudry for his response to a point raised in the first
    paragraph of the application for permission to appeal, where it is
    contended that the judge failed to resolve an apparent conflict in the
    claimant's evidence over whether he feared Kurdish Peshmergas or the
    Shia militia known as Al-Shabi.  According to the respondent these
    organisations were enemies and would not have colluded to force the
    claimant off his farm, although the judge appeared to have recorded at
    paragraph 6(e) that this was the appellant's evidence at the hearing.

10. Mr Chaudry responded that the claimant's evidence had always been that
    it was the Shia militia he feared, as set out at paragraph 10 of the
    witness statement.  The reference by the judge in paragraph 6(e) to the
    appellant having been accused of killing a man who was a Peshmerga was
    an error by the judge and did not originate from anything said by the
    appellant.

11. For the Secretary of State Mrs O'Brien relied on grounds of the
    application for permission to appeal, subject to acknowledging that the
    judge did not err by failing to specify a Convention reason for the
    claimant's fear of persecution.

Discussion

12. Starting with the first ground of the application for permission to
    appeal, it is alleged that the judge did not make clear findings and
    give adequate reasons for finding that the claimant has a well-founded
    fear of persecution.  In this regard I have accepted that the judge
    specified the claimant's fear as a Sunni Kurd was of Shia Muslims.  I
    also accept the submission by Mr Chaudry, who was present at the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal, that the reference in the
    decision to Peshmerga was an accidental lapse by the judge and was not
    part of the claimant's evidence.  The judge accepted that there were
    certain discrepancies in the claimant's evidence, as identified in the
    first ground of the application, but nevertheless was entitled to find
    for the reasons given that the claimant had a genuine fear of
    persecution.

13. The second ground concerned broadly whether the judge erred in finding
    that the claimant would be unable to obtain a CSID.  The Secretary of
    State contends that the judge did not adequately consider whether the
    claimant might obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy or from the
    relevant authorities in his home Governorate, or whether he could
    return to the IKR without a CSID.

14. Here it is important to note that, having particular regard to the
    expert evidence provided by Dr Fatah, the judge accepted that the
    claimant is at risk of persecution in his home area and would not have
    adequate protection there.  In response to a submission for the
    Secretary of State, the judge accepted that it was strange that the
    claimant should have left his CSID card at home but accepted
    nevertheless that the claimant's evidence was broadly credible.  The
    judge accepted Dr Fatah's evidence that the claimant did not have the
    documentation required to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy.  The
    claimant has no surviving male relatives who could assist him in
    obtaining a CSID in Iraq.  The possibility of returning to IKR is
    considered in the succeeding paragraph.

15. The third ground of the application was a challenge to the judge's
    findings on internal relocation.  The main findings by the judge in
    relation to this are set out at paragraphs 16 and 17 of the decision.
    The judge found that it would be unduly harsh to expect the claimant to
    relocate to IKR and this finding is supported by appropriate reasons.
    The judge also gave adequate reasons, relying on the country guidance,
    for finding that relocation without a CSID to any other part of Iraq,
    including Baghdad, would also be unduly harsh.

16. It is contended in the fourth ground that the judge did not have regard
    to the relevant country guidance on internal relocation and that the
    security situation in Iraq has improved.  It is clear from the judge's
    decision that he sought to follow the case law in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA
    Civ 944 and AAH.  The suggestion that he did not amounts to no more
    than a disagreement with the application by the judge of the country
    guidance to the claimant's particular circumstances.  In following the
    country guidance cases the judge did not err in law.

17. It has already been observed that there is no indication that at the
    hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the judge was asked on behalf of
    the Secretary of State to depart from the country guidance.  The
    Presenting Officer's submission, as recorded by the judge, indicates
    specific reliance by both parties on AAH.  It is not an error of law
    not to consider an argument which is not advanced, particularly when
    that argument is of the degree of importance as departing from country
    guidance.  Overall the contentions expressed in the application for
    permission to appeal amount to little more than a disagreement with the
    judge's findings.  These findings were based on the evidence and
    submissions before the Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.  Based on
    these the judge made findings which were open to him and which were
    supported by valid and adequate reasoning.  The judge did not make an
    error of law in reaching his decision.

Conclusions

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

19. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal allowing the appeal shall
    stand.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make n anonymity direction.  I have not
been asked to make such a direction and I see no reason of substance for
doing so.


M E Deans   15th April 2019
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
