
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/06052/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House               |          Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 4 October 2018                  |          On 18 October 2018             |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                    m A M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton (Counsel) instructed by Brighton Housing
Trust
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born on 31 July 2000.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 28 September 2017  clandestinely  and  claimed
    asylum the same day.  The basis of his claim  is  that  he  is  Kurdish
    Sorani speaking from the small village of Ashkran  and  then  lived  in
    Harzna.  He stated that the majority of  the  people  in  his  village,
    including his brother Awara,  were  smugglers  and  that  he  began  to
    accompany his brother on smuggling trips from about the age of  12  and
    13.  The smuggling would  be  over  the  border  into  Iraq  and  would
    generally be oil or gas and in return they would bring  back  clothing,
    walnuts, almonds and makeup.  The  Appellant  stated  that  whilst  his
    family home was searched many times and goods found and seized  by  the
    authority, nobody was arrested.  However one late afternoon two members
    of the Pasdaran forced their way into the family home and called to him
    by name.  The Appellant escaped through a back window to avoid what  he
    believed would be his arrest as a consequence of his belief that one of
    the locals had informed on him.  He was given a lift from  his  village
    to Sardasht and thereafter fled Iran.

 2. The Appellant's asylum application was refused in a decision  dated  24
    April 2018.  He appealed against that  decision  and  his  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara  on  13  June  2018.   In  a
    decision and reasons promulgated on 10 July 2018, the  judge  dismissed
    the appeal on the  basis  she  rejected  the  Appellant's  credibility;
    attached no weight to the expert report from  Sheri  Laizer  and  found
    that the Appellant would not otherwise be at risk  on  return  to  Iran
    whether due to his illegal exit or his ethnicity.

 3. Permission to appeal was sought in time essentially on  three  grounds.
    One, that the judge erred in her approach to  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's claim at [41] to [43], not only in  failing  to  apply  the
    applicable guidance in respect of the assessment of a claim by a  minor
    but also in making her assessment without reference to  the  background
    evidence or indeed the Appellant's evidence and  her  conclusions  were
    based on erroneous assumptions about how the Pasdaran would  choose  to
    act.  It was further asserted that the First-tier  Tribunal  reached  a
    perverse conclusion in that having accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence
    that he carried his birth certificate with him at all times, as he  did
    not have a birth ID card, that it damaged his credibility that  he  had
    it with him when the Pasdaran raided his  home.   Secondly,  the  judge
    erred in her treatment of the country expert evidence on the basis that
    it was based on the applicant's account  and  in  so  doing  the  judge
    erroneously failed to take  into  account  the  fact  that  the  expert
    commented on the context to the appeal, in particular the  ubiquity  of
    smuggling by Kurdish groups  in  the  Appellant's  area  of  Iran,  the
    actions of the Pasdaran in the area and the  likely  treatment  of  the
    Appellant if returned.  And thirdly, the judge misdirected  herself  in
    respect of the evidence relating to whether the  Appellant  would  face
    prosecution or persecution if returned to Iran at  [48],  this  finding
    being based on the Respondent's CIG regarding smuggling in Iran.  In so
    doing the judge failed  to  take  into  account  the  evidence  of  the
    disproportionate nature of the  treatment  of  Kurdish  people  in  the
    criminal justice system and the background evidence, e.g. the  2017  US
    State Department Report that:

         "The  Iranian  government's  application  of  the   death   penalty
         disproportionately  affected  ethnic  minorities.    In   pre-trial
         detention authorities reportedly repeatedly  subjected  members  of
         minority ethnicities and religious groups to more  severe  physical
         punishment including torture than other prisoners regardless of the
         type of crime for which the authorities accused them".

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Doyle on the basis:

         "3.  Between [32] and [38] the Judge correctly prepares himself  to
             deal with the evidence of a minor.  Between [41] and [43]  the
             Judge sets out three reasons  for  rejecting  the  appellant's
             evidence, but it is arguable that all the Judge says  is  that
             he does not believe the appellant.

         4.   At [45] the Judge deals with  the  country  expert  report  in
             arguably superficial terms.  It is arguable that the  decision
             is not adequately reasoned.  The grounds raise arguable errors
             of law.  Permission to appeal is granted."

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing before me I heard submissions from Mr Eaton on behalf of
    the Appellant, who sought to rely on the grant of permission to  appeal
    by Judge Doyle.   Mr  Eaton  submitted  that  the  judge's  credibility
    findings were solely predicated on the  proposition  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would be more interested in the Appellant's brother than in
    the Appellant himself.  However, it was always the Appellant's evidence
    that he did not know what happened to his brother who was  not  present
    when the Iranian  authorities  came  to  the  family  home.   Mr  Eaton
    submitted that the judge had ignored the key issue that the brother was
    not there at that time.  The only other finding of fact in relation  to
    credibility is that at [43] having accepted that the  Appellant  always
    carried his identity document with him, this was not a reason  to  find
    the  whole  claim  was  not  credible  particularly  in  light  of  the
    Appellant's evidence that he always carried this  document.   Mr  Eaton
    submitted that the credibility findings were clearly inadequate.

 6. In relation to ground 2, Mr Eaton submitted that Judge Doyle had neatly
    summarised the points.  In the expert evidence of  Sheri  Laizer  there
    were specific points that corroborated  the  Appellant's  evidence  but
    these had not been addressed by the judge.  The Appellant  is  a  minor
    and whilst at [32] onwards the judge at some length  set  out  specific
    guidance on the assessment of claims by a minor she did not apply  this
    in practice.  It is clear from that guidance  that  where  a  minor  is
    involved more  weight  should  be  put  on  the  background  supporting
    evidence.

 7. In relation to ground 3, Mr Eaton submitted that the judge goes  on  to
    find even if the Appellant were telling the truth he would be  at  risk
    of prosecution rather than persecution,  although  she  does  not  give
    reasons as to why  she  reaches  this  conclusion.  In  any  event,  he
    submitted that she erred in failing to consider this through the  prism
    of the background evidence set out at [13] to [15] of  the  grounds  of
    appeal.   He  submitted  there  had  been  a   wanton   disregard   for
    international standards of  fairness  and  in  order  to  have  a  fair
    assessment it was necessary to look at the specific treatment of ethnic
    minorities  and  the  pre-trial  conditions  in  Iranian  prisons.   He
    submitted that even if the Appellant was likely to be prosecuted rather
    than persecuted on return there was a clearly arguable Article 3 breach
    as a consequence of the prison conditions that a young Kurd would face.
    However the judge erroneously made no finding on this point at all.

 8. In his submissions Mr Tufan sought to rely on the decision in  Gheisari
    v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2004] EWCA  Civ  1854  at
    [14] in support of the adequacy of the judge's findings on credibility,
    which provides as follows, per Lord Justice Sedley:

         "What in the end in my view and it is a view I have come  to  after
         much hesitation saves the adjudicator's decision from a  deficiency
         of reasons, which is Mr O'Donnell's ground of attack  upon  it,  is
         the single passage that I have quoted, ending: 'His evidence  lacks
         the ring of truth.'   This,  I  am  prepared  on  consideration  to
         accept,  goes  beyond  simply  echoing  the  Secretary  of  State's
         incredulity.  It expresses, however laconically, the  adjudicator's
         own evaluation of the veracity of the  account  that  he  has  been
         given.  That was his task.  Although for much of this appeal I  was
         of the view that he had failed to perform it, I am prepared in  the
         end to accept,  slender  though  it  is,  that  it  represents  his
         independent judgment on the critical matter upon which the issue of
         risk to the appellant hinged, namely whether  he  had  indeed  been
         arrested, ill-treated and liberated as he claimed.  The adjudicator
         had recorded the father's tragic history but in the absence of  any
         weight placed on it by the appellant's own  advocate,  he  was  not
         obliged  to  bring  it  explicitly  back  into  the  account   when
         explaining his rejection of the appellant's story."

 9. I also note Lord Justice Sedley continued as follows at paragraph 15:

         "I wish only to add that such jejune decision-making is not  to  be
         regarded as a model of any kind.  As Mr. Grodzinski  accepts,  more
         needed to be said by reasoning if this decision was to  be  visibly
         sound.  But, for the reasons that I have  given,  the  appeal  must
         fail."

10. Mr Tufan queried the reason why the Appellant  would  go  on  smuggling
    expeditions carrying his identity documents. He submitted  the  judge's
    negative credibility findings are set out quite fully at [41]  to  [43]
    and the Appellant had been found not credible and that  was  a  finding
    open to the judge to  make.   Mr  Tufan  submitted  that   [46]  raises
    credibility issues in relation to the expert and that was open  to  the
    judge to make such findings.  He did not accept that  the  judgment  in
    Mibanga [2005] EWCA Civ 367 was engaged as the expert proceeded on  the
    basis that the Appellant's account is  credible.   Mr  Tufan  submitted
    that the judge had looked at the background evidence in  the  CPIN  and
    concluded that the Appellant would not be at risk (see [53] and [54] of
    the judge's decision).  The Appellant has no profile in Iran and in his
    submission the judge has done enough.

11. There was no reply by Mr Eaton on the Appellant's behalf.

12.  I reserved my decision which I now give with my reasons.

     Findings and reasons

13. In relation to the first ground, the judge found inter alia as  follows
    at [40]:

         "40. The  appellant  claims  to  be  of  interest  to  the  Iranian
             authorities as a result of smuggling.  I have  considered  the
             appellant's claim in the round and find that  his  account  to
             have come to the attention of the  Iranian  authorities  as  a
             result of his activities as a smuggler is not credible.

         41.  Firstly, whilst the appellant is from an area where  smuggling
             is rife, I find that the appellant's claim to  have  succeeded
             in escaping from the authorities on numerous occasions when he
             was crossing the border during the hours of  darkness,  whilst
             smuggling goods, does not sit well with  his  claim  that  the
             authorities were subsequently able to identify  him  and  call
             him by name when he  claims  they  attended  his  family  home
             shortly before his departure from Iran.   The  appellant  does
             not claim to have ever come face to face with the Pasdars  and
             he does not claim to have ever been identified by them in  the
             past whilst undertaking smuggling trips.  Whilst the appellant
             suggests that a person from the village may have  informed  on
             him thus leading to the authorities' interest, I find that  it
             is not credible that the appellant's brother  would  not  also
             have been identified to the authorities given the  appellant's
             claim that he was involved in smuggling  goods  together  with
             his brother.  I am fortified in my view as  a  result  of  the
             fact that the  appellant's  claim  is  that  his  brother  was
             involved in smuggling for significantly longer than he was.

         42.   Secondly,  whilst  the  appellant  also  suggests  that   the
             authorities are more interested in the youngest member of  the
             family, thus explaining the lack of interest in his brother, I
             find that this suggestion does not however sit well  with  the
             authorities' actions in simply confiscating the goods that the
             appellant claims were found at his  family  home.   I  do  not
             accept that the authorities would have waited for an informant
             to tell them about the appellant if in  fact  the  authorities
             had already found smuggled goods  at  the  appellant's  family
             home on numerous occasions.  I find that  if  the  authorities
             wanted to make an example out of the youngest  member  of  the
             family, then they would have done so on the numerous occasions
             when they attended the family home and confiscated goods.

         43.  Thirdly, I do not accept that the appellant was able to  leave
             his family home in the manner  described  shortly  before  his
             departure from Iran when  he  says  the  Pasdar  attended  his
             family home and called out his name.  This is because I do not
             find credible that on hearing his name being called  out,  the
             appellant would have had sufficient time to locate  his  birth
             certificate, given the fact that the  visit  was  unannounced.
             Despite the appellant's claim that he always carried his birth
             certificate on him because he did not have  an  ID  card,  his
             claim is that he was at home when the Pasdar  arrived  and  he
             would not therefore have had  his  birth  certificate  on  his
             person.  I find the appellant's  ability  to  have  his  birth
             certificate in his possession suggests that his departure from
             Iran was planned.

         44.  I therefore do not  find  the  appellant's  written  and  oral
             evidence to be a  truthful  or  accurate  description  in  his
             activities and  circumstances  prior  to  his  departure  from
             Iran."

14. I find that the judge  erred  in  her  assessment  in  the  Appellant's
    credibility for the following reasons:

      1) Firstly, whilst it is the case at [32] through to  [39]  the  judge
         correctly directed herself in respect  of  the  assessment  of  the
         credibility of a minor with reference to paragraphs 350 to 352X  of
         HC 395, the Respondent's asylum policy guidance,  UNHCR  guidelines
         2009 in respect of children, and AA Afghanistan [2012]  UKUT  00016
         (IAC) and DS (Afghanistan) [2011] EWCA Civ 36  when  assessing  the
         Appellant's claim,  it  is  not  apparent  that  she  applied  that
         guidance to her assessment.

      2) Secondly, the judge's reasoning at [41]  and  [42]  is  essentially
         based on speculation  as  to  the  motives  and  behaviour  of  the
         persecuting authorities i.e. the Iranian Pasdaran.  As a  minor  it
         is not possible for the Appellant or indeed the  Tribunal  to  know
         why previously the Pasdar simply raided the Appellant  and  others'
         homes and confiscated goods whereas  on  this  particular  occasion
         they attended the family home in order to detain the Appellant.  An
         answer to this may perhaps be found in the expert report  of  Sheri
         Laizer, given that her evidence was that the  authorities  are  now
         cracking down  on  smuggling.   The  judge  failed  to  assess  the
         Appellant's evidence on this particular  issue  in  light  of  that
         expert evidence.

      3) Thirdly, the finding at [43] is confused and contradictory.  Having
         apparently accepted the Appellant's evidence that  he  carried  his
         birth certificate on him at all times, the judge then rejected  his
         evidence that he had it on him because he was at home.   There  was
         no evidential basis to suggest that  the  Appellant  only  had  his
         birth certificate on him when he was out of  the  family  home  and
         therefore no evidential basis for the judge to find it not credible
         that the Appellant had it on him when  he  was  at  home  and  thus
         planned his departure from Iran.

15. In relation to the second ground of  appeal,  I  find  that  the  judge
    failed to give adequate and sufficient reasons for rejecting the expert
    report.  I find  that  the  judge  failed  to  assess  the  Appellant's
    credibility in light of all the evidence, including the expert  report,
    which  not  only  provided  general  corroborating  support   for   the
    Appellant's claim but also, as Mr Eaton submitted,  addressed  specific
    points which I find should have been properly  considered.   The  judge
    says this in relation to the expert at [45]:

         "I have considered the expert report prepared by Sheri  Laizer.   I
         find however that this does  not  take  the  appellant's  case  any
         further.  This is because all  the  report  does  is  confirm  that
         smuggling is common in the appellant's home area.  I  further  find
         that the report  proceeds  on  the  premise  that  the  appellant's
         account is one that  is  credible.   I  find  that  the  fact  that
         smuggling occurs in the appellant's home area and the fact that the
         authorities are now cracking down on it does not automatically lead
         to the conclusion that the appellant's account is credible.  Indeed
         if it were the case that the  expert  report  could  be  viewed  as
         substantiating the appellant's account, I find that the  conclusion
         that the authorities are cracking down on  smuggling  does  not  in
         fact sit well with  the  appellant's  claim  that  the  authorities
         attended  his  family  home  on  numerous  occasions   and   simply
         confiscated the goods that they found  there,  without  taking  any
         further action against the appellant or his family."

16. I find the judge erred in her assessment not only for the  reasons  set
    out above but in stating that all the report does is confirm  smuggling
    is common when it is clear that the report does quite a lot  more  than
    that.  The report, which is at page 172 of the Appellant's bundle,  and
    is dated 8 June 2018, makes a number of points, but in  particular  the
    conclusions provide as follows:

         "1.  I do not consider that the correct tests have been applied  to
             assess the manner in which  the  lifestyle  of  rural  Iranian
             Kurds is dictated by  the  difficult  economic  and  political
             conditions that force many Kurds - young and old  alike  -  to
             resort to smuggling.

         2.   I consider M A M very likely engaged in  smuggling  given  the
             area in question and his family's economic status.

         3.   Kurdish smugglers face very high  risks  of  being  killed  or
             captured on a random basis.

         4.   Dissidents and individuals that fall under  the  suspicion  of
             the Iranian authorities face high  risks  of  torture,  unfair
             trial and death.  Kurdish ethnicity and origins from  villages
             bordering the KRI may lead to an imputed opinion of  providing
             support to Kurdish rebel groups or even as acting couriers for
             them, not just as smugglers.  Interrogation itself poses  high
             risks.

         5.   Iran's intelligence, security and cyber intelligence  capacity
             is one of the most sophisticated and is  used  in  service  of
             Iran's political objectives."

17. I find that the judge's conclusions in respect of the expert report  at
    [45] are contradictory and unsustainable.

18. In respect of the third ground of appeal, the judge states at [47]:

         "Even if I were to accept that the appellant came to the  attention
         of the authorities in Iran as a result of smuggling,  I  find  that
         this would not place  the  appellant  at  risk  of  persecution  on
         return."

    However there are no reasons provided as to why the judge  has  reached
    this conclusion, or at [49] in respect of the risk to the Appellant  on
    the basis of his Kurdish ethnicity.  The judge made  reference  to  the
    country information and guidance in respect of Iranian smugglers  dated
    April 2016 and the CIG in respect of Kurds and Kurdish political groups
    dated July 2016.  However there was a substantial  bundle  of  evidence
    submitted on behalf of the Appellant which included not only the expert
    report but background documents from  a  number  of  different  sources
    relating to the risks to Kurdish nationals in Iran as well as to  those
    who were involved in smuggling.  I find that the judge's conclusions in
    respect of risk are flawed, not only as a  result  of  her  failure  to
    consider the background evidence as a whole but  also  as  set  out  in
    ground 3, in finding that if the Appellant were at risk of  prosecution
    then that would not in itself be persecutory or in breach of Article 3,
    in light of the very poor prison conditions and the ill-treatment meted
    out to members of the Kurdish minority.

19. For the reasons set out above I find material  errors  of  law  in  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Manyarara.  I set  that  decision
    aside and remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the  First-tier
    Tribunal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 15 October 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
