
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06675/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24 April 2018                              |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    C. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Selway, Brar & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Angola, who entered  the  UK  illegally,
    and then claimed asylum on 15 November 2013. That protection claim  was
    refused on 23 June 2017, when the Respondent concluded that she had not
    told the truth about who she was, or how she had travelled from  Africa
    to the UK - the passport she claimed  was  not  her  own,  having  been
    identified as genuine and as legitimately issued to  her.   Her  appeal
    against that refusal came  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  at  North
    Shields on 9 November 2017, when it was heard  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Head Rapson. The  appeal  was  dismissed  on  all  grounds  in  a
    decision promulgated on 20 November 2017.

 2. The Appellant's application for permission to  appeal  was  granted  by
    First  tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  on  29  December  2017.  That
    application offered no challenge to the dismissal  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence upon her experiences in Angola, and upon her identity, and how
    she had travelled to  the  UK  as  untrue.  In  the  circumstances  the
    decision to dismiss the asylum  claim  is  unchallenged,  and  must  be
    confirmed.

 3. There are two grounds to the application for permission to appeal. Both
    concern the position of the Appellant's infant daughter, who  was  born
    in the UK with sickle cell anaemia, a condition that was diagnosed when
    she was six months old.

 4. Mr Selway declined to advance the ground that  advanced  the  complaint
    that the Judge had "failed to give any consideration to s55" because he
    considered it to be unarguable, since the Judge had indeed done so.

 5. Mr Selway did not advance a complaint that  the  Judge  had  failed  to
    consider  whether  the  child's  health  entitled  her  to  Article   3
    protection. The Judge had concluded that she was not so  entitled.  She
    had concluded in the light of the medical evidence that the  child  was
    not in the final stages of a terminal illness, and that  the  Appellant
    had not established that her  child  would  be  unable  to  access  the
    medical treatment she required in Angola, or, that he  condition  would
    rapidly deteriorate upon removal to Angola [91]. None of those findings
    were challenged in the grounds. It is  not  therefore  open  to  me  to
    interfere  with  them.  I  reject  as  unfounded  Mr  Selway's  closing
    assertion that the grounds implicitly include  a  challenge  that  such
    findings were not borne out by the evidence; that is  an  assertion  of
    perversity,

 6. Instead, as set out in the grounds, Mr Selway  advanced  the  complaint
    that the Judge had failed to consider the  Appellant's  own  Article  3
    claim properly. It was argued that the effect  upon  the  Appellant  of
    being placed in a position where she  would  be  forced  to  watch  her
    infant daughter's health collapse, to the point  that  she  would  die,
    engaged the Appellant's own Article 3 rights; CA [2004] EWCA Civ 1165.

         "26. It seems to me obvious simply as a matter of humanity that for
         a mother to witness the collapse of her newborn child's health  and
         perhaps its death may be a kind of suffering far greater than might
         arise by the mother's confronting the self-same fate  for  herself.
         There is no perversity in the approach taken by the Adjudicator."

 7. This is not an argument that was raised in the skeleton  argument  that
    Mr Selway prepared and placed before the Judge, and he accepts that  he
    provided neither the Respondent nor the  Judge  with  a  copy  of  this
    decision during the hearing. Indeed he accepts before me  that  he  was
    unable to even provide the citation  for  the  authority  that  he  now
    relies upon at the time, and, that he advanced this  argument  only  at
    the conclusion of his  closing  submissions,  with  a  citation  to  be
    provided after the conclusion of the hearing. It is not  at  all  clear
    how an argument that is now  said  to  be  the  central  focus  of  the
    Appellant's case developed so late, and in such a haphazard fashion. Be
    that as it may, I accept that the argument was advanced to the Judge.

 8. There is however a fundamental difficulty with the complaint  that  the
    Judge failed to deal with the argument, which Mr Selway was not willing
    to engage with. For the argument based upon CA to be able  to  succeed,
    the Judge had to have accepted the claim  that  the  Appellant's  child
    faced a real risk of the requisite collapse in health  and  death  upon
    removal. It is not enough to assert merely that the undisputed evidence
    is that an estimated 12,00  children  are  born  each  year  in  Angola
    suffering from the condition, and  that  an  estimated  half  of  these
    children die as a result of the condition before attaining the  age  of
    5. In this case the unchallenged finding is that this child  would  not
    be one of them, because the Appellant  would  be  able  to  access  the
    necessary medical treatment her daughter required [91].

 9. That finding was not perverse (even had such an assertion  been  raised
    in the grounds) because Angola launched a  Sickle  Cell  Initiative  in
    2011 to tackle the issue, which is funded to  at  least  2020,  through
    which an effective drug is provided  to  children  with  the  condition
    (donated to the programme by  the  manufacturer).  The  Judge  did  not
    accept that the Appellant would be returned to Angola  with  an  infant
    child, destitute, and unable to care  for  that  child,  or  unable  to
    access the medical treatment that either she or her child required. She
    was in my judgement right not to have done so. The Appellant was  found
    to have lied about her lack of  contact  with  mother  and  four  adult
    siblings in Angola [46], so the proper inference to be drawn is that in
    truth she would enjoy access to family support  upon  return.  She  was
    found to have lied about being trafficked as claimed, and faced no real
    risk of being trafficked in the event of return  to  Angola  [57].  She
    faced no risk of harm as one perceived to be,  or  to  be  related  to,
    someone associated with opposition or separatist  politics  in  Angola.
    She would also have the benefit of the aid  and  resettlement  packages
    available  to  those  who  return  voluntarily,  which  would   provide
    financial support for medical treatment and for the establishment of  a
    business.

10. In the circumstances, although it formed no  part  of  the  Appellant's
    case before the Judge, or today, the Appellant also gained  no  benefit
    from the principles explored in Akhalu (health claim: ECHR  Article  8)
    [2013] UKUT 400, and, SQ (Pakistan) [2013] EWCA  Civ  1251.  The  lower
    threshold test for a child in an Article 3 health case is  not  met  on
    the Judge's unchallenged findings.

11. In the circumstances, and notwithstanding the terms in which permission
    to appeal was granted, I therefore dismiss the  Appellant's  challenge,
    and confirm the decision to dismiss the appeal on all grounds.

12. The anonymity direction previously made is continued.


Notice of decision

The decision promulgated on 20 November 2017 did not involve the  making  of
an error of law sufficient to require the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The
decision of the First tier Tribunal to dismiss  the  appeal  is  accordingly
confirmed.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 25 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes

