
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/06601/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 December 2018                     |On 21 February 2019                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  abdul [r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr Khan, instructed by Maya Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant Abdul [R] was born on 4 February 1980 and  is
    a male citizen of Bangladesh.  He appealed against a  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 30 April 2018 refusing his application  to  remain  in
    the United Kingdom on the grounds of long  residence.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Povey) in a decision promulgated on 4 July 2018 allowed
    the appeal.  The Secretary of State now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At [14], the judge wrote:

         "It was not in issue the appellant was in  the  UK  from  at  least
         September 2008 when he submitted his first unsuccessful application
         for leave to remain.  It was also not in dispute the appellant made
         a number of unsuccessful applications and submissions between  then
         and his current application, submitted on  1  November  2017.   The
         appellant has never had any  immigration  status  in  the  UK,  has
         absconded in the past and has worked illegally.  He only  submitted
         his now abandoned international protection claim  in  the  face  of
         removal directions."

 3. I was told that the appellant  withdrew  his  international  protection
    claim on the morning of the First-tier Tribunal hearing.

 4. At [15]:

         "The appellant's poor immigration history  would  not  prevent  him
         meeting the Immigration Rules if, as he claimed, he has been in the
         UK continuously for  over  twenty  years.   Given  the  appellant's
         conduct  outlined  above,  his  credibility  is  somewhat  damaged.
         However, those factors do not impugn his witnesses, each of whom  I
         found to be plausible, credible and consistent."

 5. The judge went on to examine the evidence of  the  witnesses  including
    the appellant's elder brother (Mr Hamid), another brother  (Mr  Khalik)
    and a Mr Uddin regarding whom the judge wrote at [18]:

         "Mr Uddin's evidence was particularly compelling.   He  was  a  man
         with whom the appellant lived from 1996 until  2000.   He  recalled
         meeting the appellant off a coach in  Coventry  and  confirmed  his
         friendship with Mr Ali (who has since passed away).   His  evidence
         was not materially challenged in cross-examination  and  I  had  no
         reason not to accept it."

 6. The judge concluded at [19]:

         "Given the consistent and compelling evidence  of  the  appellant's
         witnesses, I  found  the  appellant  established  to  the  required
         standard that he had been in the UK  continuously  at  least  since
         1996."

 7. In the grounds of appeal,  the  Secretary  of  State  quotes  from  the
    Presenting Officer's note of the First-tier Tribunal hearing:

         "The appellant's oral evidence was  that  he  had  lived  with  his
         eldest brother since 2007 until now and in all  that  time  he  had
         only lived a few months spent with his younger brother in  Rochdale
         when he had a girlfriend.

         The elder brother's evidence differed he at least  spent  two-three
         years with his younger brother.

         Finding the younger brother said he has never lived with him.   The
         appellant and elder brother  could  also  not  provide  details  of
         exactly what was said but convinced them that  they  were  brothers
         after thirteen years of not seeing each other, taking into  account
         that those thirteen years the appellant would have changed a lot as
         the appellant would have aged from 13-14 to 27."

 8. At the Upper Tribunal hearing, Mr Khan who appeared for  the  appellant
    (before the First-tier Tribunal), did not dispute the accuracy  of  the
    Presenting Officer's note of evidence.  Further, following the grant of
    permission, a direction had been given for the  Presenting  Officer  to
    produce her Record of Proceedings and a statement.  I have a  statement
    from Ms Wallace, the Presenting Officer before the First-tier Tribunal.
     I also have her handwritten notes  of  evidence  which  are  helpfully
    legible.

 9. I reserved my decision.

10. There seems to be little doubt that the witnesses who  appeared  before
    the First-tier Tribunal  impressed  the  judge.   However,  there  were
    serious limitations in their evidence which  the  judge  may  not  have
    fully appreciated.  First, their evidence should have been assessed  on
    the basis that the judge had not found the appellant himself, who had a
    very poor immigration history, to  be  a  credible  witness.   To  that
    extent, the witnesses were incapable of giving  corroborative  evidence
    of the appellant's account because that account  was  unreliable.   The
    witnesses are able  to  prove  particular  facts  of  which  they  have
    personal first-hand knowledge; for example, they have been able to tell
    the judge about particular periods of time during which  the  appellant
    had lived with them.  However, it is necessary  for  the  appellant  to
    prove that he has lived in the United Kingdom for  twenty  years.   The
    mere fact that he may have spent four years during that  period  living
    with a brother or friend fails to prove what he is required  to  prove.
    Secondly, in the light of Ms Wallace's evidence and  her  note  of  the
    hearing, I am not satisfied that the cogency  and  consistency  of  the
    witness's evidence was as  strong  as  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    states in his decision.  Given that Mr Khan was unable to tell me  that
    Ms Wallace's note of  evidence  is  inaccurate,  I  am  satisfied  that
    problems of consistency in the evidence of the witnesses have not  been
    adequately considered by the judge.

11. In light of the above, I consider that this is an appeal which needs to
    be reheard de novo.  The next Tribunal is likely to hear evidence  from
    a number of witnesses. In consequence, it is better that what may prove
    to be a lengthy fact-finding exercise is undertaken in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Although I direct that none of the findings of fact  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal shall stand, Ms Wallace's  statement  and  note  of
    evidence do stand as a record of what was said by the witnesses at  the
    First-tier Tribunal hearing.  Her statement and note may, therefore, be
    put in evidence at the next  hearing,  if  either  party  considers  it
    necessary.  The First-tier Tribunal will also  need  to  consider  what
    evidence, if any, the appellant may be  able  to  adduce  in  order  to
    address any gaps in the 20 year narrative.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  4  July
2018 is set  aside.   None  of  the  findings  of  fact  shall  stand.   The
attention of the parties is drawn to what I have  said  above  at  paragraph
[11] regarding the evidence which  the  First-tier  Tribunal  will  need  to
consider when it remakes the decision.  The appeal is returned to the First-
tier Tribunal (not Judge Bovey) for that Tribunal to remake the decision.



No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane                    20 February 2019

















