
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06377/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House               |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 17th December 2018                   |On 25th January 2019                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SAINI


                                   Between

                                   S.J.S.
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Attendance excused
For the Respondent:    Attendance excused


                     DECISION BY CONSENT AND DIRECTIONS

Pursuant to Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
and by the consent of the parties the following order is made:

      i) Upon the parties' agreement that the decision of the First-tier
         Tribunal promulgated on 27th June 2018 discloses a material error
         of law, it is hereby ordered by consent as follows.

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal Judge made errors of law in relation to the
         complaints made in the Grounds of Appeal drafted by Counsel for the
         Appellant in the following respects as agreed by the Respondent in
         his Rule 24 response dated 12th December 2018 from Mr S Kotas
         (Senior Presenting Officer):

      a) In refusing the request the adjourn the First-tier Tribunal failed
         to consider the issues in line with the principles laid down in
         Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT 418, and failed to note
         that the test is one of "fairness".  The judge also failed to note
         the compressed timescales for listing the appeal following the
         refusal, which was material to the fair adjudication of this issue.
          Finally, the judge's reasoning is circular in terms of the refusal
         to adjourn to obtain medical evidence because there "was no
         evidence at all".  Logically, there cannot be any evidence until it
         is produced but that does not negate the fact that an adjournment
         can be sought to obtain medical evidence, albeit that it is not in
         existence at the time the adjournment application is made.

As a consequence of the above agreed errors, the decision is set aside in
its entirety and is remitted to be heard by a differently constituted
bench.

The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is therefore allowed.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside for legal error by
consent.

Directions

I make the following directions for the continuation and remitted hearing
that is to shortly follow before the First-tier Tribunal:

      1) The appeal is to be remitted to Hatton Cross.

      2) No interpreter is required.

      3) There is no indication at present as to the number of witnesses
         that may be called.

      4) The time estimate given is three hours.

      5) No special directions have been requested, however, for the sake of
         completeness, if there is insufficient time for the Appellant to
         produce the medical evidence previously mentioned at the hearing
         before the First-tier Tribunal, an application should be made in
         writing in advance of the hearing date to secure any necessary
         adjournment.

      6) Anonymity direction maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 14 January 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Saini
