
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06202/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 May 2019                       |On 11 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK
                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FROOM


                                   Between

                                     AHK
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms U. Dirie, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and background

 1. This appeal comes back before the Upper Tribunal following a hearing on
    27 September 2017 before  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bagral  ("the
    DUTJ") following which she concluded that the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge ("the FtJ") promulgated  on  31  January  2017  was
    marred by error of law such as to require its decision to be set  aside
    and for the decision to be re-made in the Upper Tribunal.  The  hearing
    before us was for the re-making of the decision.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia, born in 1967. He came to the  UK
    in November 2010 as a spouse and first claimed asylum in  October  2013
    but that claim was rejected  and  his  appeal  was  dismissed.  Further
    submissions were treated as a fresh claim for asylum but that claim was
    also rejected. His appeal was dismissed by the FtJ.

 3. His fresh claim for asylum is based on his  religion,  as  a  Christian
    convert. The DUTJ noted that the FtJ accepted that the appellant was  a
    genuine Christian convert but found that he would not  be  at  risk  of
    persecution on return to Somalia on account of his religion  and  would
    not be at risk of destitution and relocation to an IDP camp.

 4. The DUTJ concluded that there was merit in the argument  on  behalf  of
    the appellant that the  FtJ  failed  to  consider  the  impact  of  the
    appellant's conversion to Christianity and the discrimination which  he
    accepted existed against Christians, upon the  appellant's  ability  to
    access support from his family and  gain  employment  so  as  to  avoid
    destitution.

 5. The DUTJ further concluded that the availability of family support  and
    the prospects for employment were pertinent  to  the  FTJ's  conclusion
    that the appellant would not find himself at risk of mistreatment in an
    IDP camp. The FtJ had relied on a finding in his previous  appeal  that
    he would have access to family support but  the  DUTJ  noted  that  the
    issue of the appellant's conversion to Christianity did not feature  in
    that earlier  appeal.  Thus,  the  DUTJ  concluded  that  it  had  been
    incumbent on the FtJ to consider whether the  earlier  finding  settled
    the issue of family support in the light of the appellant's claim  that
    he would be ostracised from his family and clan members.

 6. The DUTJ further concluded that the FTJ's decision was  legally  flawed
    for its failure to consider the impact of  societal  discrimination  on
    the appellant's employment prospects. The contention on behalf  of  the
    respondent relying on the FTJ's finding that the appellant would  adopt
    a low profile on return, did not detract from the error on the part  of
    the FtJ.

 7. The DUTJ identified the issue to be determined at the re-making hearing
    as being that of risk on return, with the finding that the appellant is
    a genuine Christian convert being a preserved finding.

    Submissions

 8. The parties agreed that the appellant's return  to  Mogadishu  involved
    the question of internal relocation, given that the FtJ in effect found
    that the appellant's home area  was  Somaliland  (which  was  also  the
    background to the appeal in 2014).

 9. The parties further agreed that it was open to the appellant  to  argue
    before us that he  would  be  at  risk  of  persecution  on  return  to
    Mogadishu in the light of the grounds upon which permission  to  appeal
    was granted, the issue of family support and that  the  DUTJ  expressly
    stated that risk on return required to be determined.

10. We referred the parties to Secretary of State for the Home Department v
    Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442. In the  light  of  that  decision  Mr  Walker
    submitted that the appellant  was  not  able  to  meet  the  Article  3
    threshold. However, it was accepted on behalf of  the  respondent  that
    the appellant is a person who comes within [408] of MOJ &  Ors  (Return
    to Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] UKUT 00442 (IAC) in the  light  of  his
    particular circumstances. Thus, it was further conceded that  it  would
    be unduly harsh to  expect  him  to  relocate  to  Mogadishu  and  that
    therefore the appeal fell to be allowed on Refugee Convention grounds.

    Conclusions

11. In the light of the fact that the appeal on Refugee Convention  grounds
    was conceded on behalf of the respondent, we are able  to  express  our
    conclusions briefly.

12. The Skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant refers, amongst  other
    things, to the report of Mary Harper dated 14 November  2016  in  which
    she cites background  evidence  indicating  that  there  are  very  few
    Christians and Christian converts in Somalia, with Sunni Muslims making
    up 99% of the population and  the  remainder  being  Shia  Muslims  and
    Christians.  She  refers  to  strong  societal  discrimination  against
    Christians. Most examples of harassment  and  harm  to  Christians  are
    related to Al Shabaab, yet she cites other information  to  the  effect
    that other Somalis would shun and harass any Somali they knew to  be  a
    Christian.

13. The appellant's skeleton argument cites other  background  material  in
    support of  the  argument  that  Christians  are  subject  to  societal
    discrimination and persecution in Somalia.

14. The FtJ found that there was a risk of persecution in  other  parts  of
    Somalia but not in Mogadishu where Al Shabaab are not present and where
    the evidence falls short of showing that  the  societal  discrimination
    amounts to persecution.

15. It is nevertheless argued on behalf of the appellant that he  would  be
    forced to lie about his religion in order to remain safe  and  that  he
    would inevitably face questions if he is seen not to be practising  the
    Islamic faith. The FtJ referred to evidence that there are no  churches
    in Mogadishu.

16. We were directed to the appellant's witness statement dated 10 May 2019
    in which he refers to his isolation from the Somali  community  because
    of his conversion, in the area of the UK where he lives. He states that
    he has one brother and one sister in Mogadishu and that his parents are
    both dead. His family in Mogadishu have rejected  him  because  of  his
    conversion. He states that  he  would  be  unable  to  find  employment
    because no-one would employ him.

17. A psychiatric report dated  13  May  2019  from  Dr  Naresh  Buttan,  a
    consultant psychiatrist, states, in summary, that the appellant suffers
    from an Adjustment Disorder-Mixed Anxiety and Depressive  Reaction  and
    Harmful use of alcohol (the latter diagnosis conforming to ICD10  Code:
    F10.10). His depression is in the moderate  severity  range,  and  with
    mild to moderate anxiety.

18. The report further refers to the appellant being unable to support  and
    care for himself as he is struggling with low mood,  anxiety,  feelings
    of helplessness and worthlessness, and is socially isolated.

19. At para 407 of MOJ & Ors, the pertinent aspect of the country  guidance
    for the purposes of the appeal before us says this:

         "...

         h.   If it is accepted that a person facing a return  to  Mogadishu
         after a period of absence has no nuclear family or close  relatives
         in the city to assist him in  re-establishing  himself  on  return,
         there  will  need  to  be  a  careful  assessment  of  all  of  the
         circumstances. These  considerations  will  include,  but  are  not
         limited to:

             (i)  circumstances in Mogadishu before departure;

             (ii) length of absence from Mogadishu;

             (iii)     family  or  clan  associations  to  call   upon   in
             Mogadishu;

             (iv) access to financial resources;

             (v)  prospects of  securing  a  livelihood,  whether  that  be
             employment or self employment;

             (vi) availability of remittances from abroad;

             (vii)    means of support during the time spent in the  United
             Kingdom;

             (viii)   why his ability to fund the journey to  the  West  no
             longer enables an appellant to  secure  financial  support  on
             return.

         Put another way, it  will  be  for  the  person  facing  return  to
         Mogadishu to explain why  he  would  not  be  able  to  access  the
         economic opportunities that have been  produced  by  the  "economic
         boom", especially as there is evidence to the effect that returnees
         are taking jobs at the expense of those who have never been away."

    And then at [408]:

         "It will, therefore, only be those with no clan or  family  support
         who will not be in receipt of remittances from abroad and who  have
         no real prospect of securing access to a livelihood on  return  who
         will face the prospect of living  in  circumstances  falling  below
         that which is acceptable in humanitarian protection terms."

20. However, in Said, Burnett LJ said [28]:

         "I am unable to accept that if a Somali national were able to bring
         himself within the rubric of para 408, he  would  have  established
         that  his  removal  to  Somalia  would  breach  article  3  of  the
         Convention.  Such  an  approach  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         domestic and Convention jurisprudence ..."

21. In the light of Said, the appellant is unable to succeed in this appeal
    on Article 3 grounds.  However,  it  was  accepted  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent that it would be unduly harsh to expect him to  relocate  to
    Mogadishu. The appellant has been absent from Somalia  since  2010.  He
    would have no family or clan associations to call upon in Mogadishu in
    the light of his conversion to Christianity. He would have no access to
    financial resources, and the prospects of his  securing  a  livelihood,
    whether that be employment or self employment, are poor given his  lack
    of connections and his mental state. He would not  have  available  any
    remittances from abroad.

22. The question of whether the appellant would  actually  be  at  risk  of
    persecution in Mogadishu as a Christian  convert  was  not  pursued  on
    behalf of the appellant in the light  of  the  respondent's  concession
    that his appeal succeeded on Refugee Convention grounds in terms of the
    undue harshness of internal relocation.

23. Accordingly, we allow the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds  on  the
    basis that it would be unduly harsh to expect the appellant to relocate
    to Mogadishu, he having a well-founded fear of persecution in his  home
    area on account of his religion.

24. We have not found it necessary to explore  the  issues  arising  in  HJ
    (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC
    31 in terms of  whether  the  appellant  would  live  discreetly  as  a
    Christian, given that his conversion is already known to his family and
    would in any event be discovered in his failure to practise the Islamic
    faith.

25. Similarly, neither party took us to any of the  well-known  authorities
    on  the  meaning  of  undue  harshness  in  the  context  of   internal
    relocation,  there  being  no  dispute   but   that   the   appellant's
    circumstances would fall within that concept on return.

26. As regards Article 8, it was agreed on behalf of the appellant that  it
    was not open to him to argue that his appeal should succeed on  Article
    8 grounds. We note what the FtJ said at [49] of  his  decision,  namely
    that on behalf of the appellant it was not argued that  his  return  to
    Somalia would breach his Article 8 rights and that the matter  was  not
    raised in the appellant's  skeleton  argument  before  the  FtJ  or  in
    submissions.

27. In those circumstances, we do not need to give further consideration to
    Article 8. However, we should say  that  had  Article  8  been  pursued
    before us we consider that there would have been a powerful argument in
    favour  of  the  proposition  that  there  would  be  very  significant
    obstacles to the appellant's integration on return given  his  personal
    circumstances as set out above.

    Decision

28. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law.  Its decision having been set aside, we re-make  the
    decision by allowing the appeal on Refugee Convention grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Upper   Tribunal   Judge    Kopieczek                               08/07/19



