
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06823/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ                               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 October 2017                         |On 01st November 2017            |
|Extempore judgement                        |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE McWILLIAM


     Between

                                     MA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Sesay,Duncan Lewis & Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan and he was born on 8 July  1988.
     He made a claim for asylum which the  Respondent  refused  on  6  July
    1017.  The Appellant appealed and his appeal was dismissed by Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Housego in a decision promulgated on 10  August
    2017, following a hearing on 8 August 2017.  Permission to  appeal  was
    granted by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Scott Baker  on  25  August
    2017.

2.   The Appellant's account, very much  summarised,  is  that  is  a  Sunni
    Muslim. His father was a scholar, imam and former member  of  Jamaat-e-
    Islami.  The Appellant used to accompany his father around the  country
    visiting mosques. Proscribed  terrorist  organisations  issued  threats
    against his father as they perceived him to have  liberal  views.   His
    father then became a schoolteacher.  The Appellant was  groomed  to  be
    his father's successor. His views were more liberal than those  of  his
    father.  The Appellant became sympathetic to the Shia  sect  of  Islam,
    although he did not convert. He made speeches and  recited  poems.   He
    was deemed to be an apostate by religious extremists.

3.        In  2008  or  2009  he  suffered  a  brain  haemorrhage  which  he
    attributed to living in fear. He was admitted to Lahore Mental Hospital
    where he remained for six months. He suffered from  memory  loss.   His
    evidence was that in 2010 he was tortured, dragged along the ground and
    hit on the head.  He was warned not to contact the  police.   In  2010,
    whilst listening to a speech by a Shia scholar, there was  an  incident
    involving gunfire, but the Appellant was saved by his father.   It  was
    at this time that his parents decided that the Appellant  should  leave
    Pakistan. The Appellant's evidence was that he had links in the UK with
    Shia Muslims, but that he respected all faiths. He came to the UK as  a
    student in 2010.

4.   The Appellant returned to Pakistan in 2011.  He  returned  to  see  his
    father on  his  return  from  a  pilgrimage  to  Mecca.   However,  the
    Appellant was kidnapped for 24 hours, during which time he was  beaten.
    His father died in 2012 and his mother told the Appellant that  he  had
    been poisoned. She received an anonymous threatening phone  call.   The
    Appellant could not return to attend his father's  funeral  because  of
    the threats. When his father died he was  told  that  the  perpetrators
    were still after him.

5.       The Appellant's family was  known  in  Pakistan.   The  Appellant's
    evidence was that he could not go anywhere in Pakistan because he would
    go to Shia Majlis and would not stay quiet.  He would recite poems  and
    he would be identified. Although the Appellant is Sunni,  he  wanted  a
    united Islam and in the  view  of  the  extremists  this  made  him  an
    apostate. He will continue to speak publicly about this.  If he went to
    Shia gatherings this would put him, a  Sunni,  at  risk.   He  made  an
    asylum claim on 22 May 2017 whilst in detention.

6.   In cross-examination the Appellant stated that he had  been  told  that
    tissues were dead down the left side of his body, but he had  lost  any
    documents relating to this.  The Appellant was asked about  his  memory
    loss directly by the judge.  He said that he forgot things and  he  had
    forgotten things.  He was asked how he recited poems and he stated that
    this was because he repeated them and because they were written.

7.     The judge recorded (at paragraph 48.1)  that  there  was  no  medical
    evidence of a brain haemorrhage or memory loss. The judge recorded  the
    Appellant's evidence in respect of sur place  activities.  He  had  not
    been to a mosque, but he had been to  someone's  home  in  Peterborough
    with a friend.  There was no witness statement  from  the  friend  who,
    according to the Appellant, had been ill for the last two  weeks.   The
    judge recorded that there was no supporting statements. The Appellant's
    evidence was that people were willing to give statements in support  of
    his appeal but there had not been enough time to gather such  evidence.



8.   The judge made findings as follows;

         "78. The appellant provided no  medical  evidence  to  support  his
             contention that he suffers from memory loss, and his  evidence
             was given in a clear and focused way with  no  difficulty  and
             recollection.  There is no evidence of  a  brain  haemorrhage.
             The appellant claims to have physical difficulty down his left-
             hand side, but there is no medical evidence of it (and nor was
             it apparent in the hearing).  The challenge to his credibility
             based on failing to mention a very serious physical attack  is
             not to be explained by  memory  loss.   This  was  the  single
             biggest assault upon him, and if it were genuine it would have
             been remembered.  This was a subsequent embellishment  to  his
             claim.


         79.  The appellant provided no evidence of any  religious  activity
             during his seven years  in  the  UK.   That  he  had  been  to
             someone's house in  Peterborough  on  a  few  occasions,  that
             person not giving any form of evidence it is not supportive of
             the appellant's credibility.


         80.  The profile of his father increased  throughout  the  hearing.
             It appeared that he commenced as an imam, then became  someone
             of district importance, and then became an Islamic scholar  of
             national importance, such that he had  travelled  to  all  the
             major cities of Pakistan, with such renown that the appellant,
             as his son, could not pass unnoticed in any of them.   As  the
             Home Office Presenting Officer  pointed  out,  such  a  person
             would have a profile on the internet, or there would  be  some
             other means of showing his renown.  This is a  tale  that  has
             grown in the telling.


         81.  Further, the appellant said that he ceased  to  travel  around
             with his father at the age of 12 or 13  when  his  father  had
             given up that role.  That would have been some 17  years  ago,
             and the idea that he might be recognised now is fanciful.  The
             appellant also asserted but it was  his  role  to  assume  his
             father's position.  However, he described his father as having
             a  PhD  and  a  national  Islamic  scholar  reputation.   Such
             positions are not passed on by inheritance.


         82.  The account that his father was murdered by being poisoned  by
             members of SSS or LeJ while he was entertaining  them  at  his
             home, so causing a heart attack has  a  very  high  degree  of
             implausibility and I reject it.


         83.  S8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants)  Act
             2004 and JT (Cameroon) v SSHD [2008] EWCA Civ  878  our  (sic)
             not determinative of a claim, but they are  relevant  to  this
             claim.  The appellant made an application  which  was  refused
             with no  right  of  appeal.   Nevertheless,  he  submitted  an
             appeal.  It was struck out on 15 November 2013.  He was served
             with removal papers on 21 January 2014 but still did not claim
             asylum.  He was encountered working illegally,  and  detained,
             but even  then  did  not  claim  asylum  until  after  removal
             directions were set a week later.


         84.  It is not credible that the appellant would,  as  he  said  he
             did, mention his fears to a whole series  of  representatives,
             and that none of them put in a claim for asylum for him.   The
             present representative put this down to  unscrupulous  lawyers
             or unqualified representatives  making  money  from  those  in
             need.  This appellant would have been  remarkably  unlucky  to
             have found so many poor advisers.


         85.  I asked the representative several times whether  he  had  any
             submissions concerning  the  period  2013  to  2017  when  the
             appellant was knowingly in the country illegally, but none was
             forthcoming, for the simple  reason  that  the  appellant  was
             knowingly  an  overstayer.   His   screening   interview   was
             conducted  in  English  and  he  has  some  knowledge  of  the
             language.  I do not believe that any person who  has  been  in
             the UK the last four years has not heard of asylum, and gained
             no understanding of what it is about.  The  answers  given  by
             the appellant to questions I asked of  him  in  an  effort  to
             understand his case were  deeply  unimpressive.   He  was  not
             truthful.


         86.  Claims based on the health of the appellant are  misconceived.
             There is no medical evidence of anything seriously amiss  with
             the Appellant.  Insofar as he may need mental health treatment
             it is available in Pakistan, but I am not  satisfied  that  he
             needs it.  The evidence about memory loss was in evidence, and
             not apparent from his evidence given  in  the  Tribunal.   The
             case of N cited in the decision, and GS India means an Article
             3 claim cannot succeed.


         87.  I note the letter of concern from the Helen Bamber  foundation
             (sic) at A1:75 - 77, and while anything from  that  foundation
             must be  accorded  considerable  respect,  I  note  that  this
             expresses a prime facie the view only (sic), and is  based  on
             the report of the appellant.  The weight to be  given  to  the
             letter from the Helen Bamber foundation (sic) depends upon  my
             assessment of his credibility.  I have not found him  credible
             and so the letter does not have greater weight.


         88.  I note the appellant has some scars  to  his  hand  consistent
             with his account that he grabbed the  knife  of  an  attacker.
             There are any number of ways such  scars  could  be  obtained,
             street violence being one of them.  There was no detail  given
             to this accountant as to how the attacker  desisted  once  the
             knife had cut the appellant's hand.  I do not  find  as  (sic)
             the accounts as to how the scars were obtained to be credible.
              The appellant offered no explanation as  to  how  he  escaped
             this asserted attack."

9.   The Appellant saw Dr Sayed on 6 July 2017 who concluded in his Rule  35
    report the following:-

     "On examination he has some scars  which  may  be  due  to  the  attack
         described.  He claims he has been depressed since  the  attack  and
         suffered a brain haemorrhage in 2009 - just prior  to  the  attack.
         He feels this was  due  to  the  stress  of  being  threatened  and
         harassed."

10.  There was also  before  the  judge  a  letter  from  the  Helen  Bamber
    Foundation of  29  June  2017.  This  was  a  letter  to  Duncan  Lewis
    Solicitors and the letter states as follows:-

     "In our clinical opinion,  formed  following  expert  multidisciplinary
         consideration of  the  available  information  listed  above,  this
         appears to be a  prima  facie  case  of  torture  or  other  cruel,
         inhumane or degrading  treatment.   Your  client  reports  to  have
         suffered both physical and psychological symptoms as  a  result  of
         mistreatment and, in our view, this should be further assessed by a
         medico legal expert as soon as possible".

11.  There was as a matter of fact no medico-legal expert  report  produced.
    The letter from the Helen Bamber Foundation and the Rule 35 report  was
    the totality of independent evidence before the judge. Mr Sesay's  view
    is that it supported the evidence of the Appellant that he had a  brain
    haemorrhage in 2009 and that he has memory loss. In  addition  that  he
    has scarring resulting from an attack.

12.  Mr Sesay's main challenge to the assessment  of  the  evidence  by  the
    judge is that the judge did not consider the evidence of  the  Rule  35
    report.  I do not accept this.  It is clear the judge was aware of  the
    existence and the content of the Rule 35 report (see paragraphs 11  and
    88).  The judge was clearly aware, on a proper reading of paragraph 88,
    that the Appellant had scars to his hand  as  concluded  by  Dr  Sayed.
    There is no specific mention (at paragraph 88) of the Rule  35  report;
    however, I am satisfied that the judge took it into  account.  At  very
    best the report was evidence of scarring and  established  a  causative
    link with an attack. The judge  accepted  the  scarring,  but  rejected
    causation as asserted by the Appellant.   Furthermore,  the  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that there may be other causes of  scarring  other
    than the account given by the Appellant, in the light of  the  evidence
    before him and the absence of an Istanbul  Protocol  compliant  report.
    The findings were open to the judge.

13.  Mr Sesay argued the judge erred, at paragraph 78, when concluding  that
    there was no evidence of memory loss, in  the  light  of  the  Rule  35
    report. I disagree.  The Rule 35 report does not, on a proper  reading,
    corroborate the Appellant's evidence of memory loss.  Furthermore,  the
    judge was entitled to conclude that there is no  medical  evidence  "of
    anything seriously amiss with the Appellant." The Rule  35  report  was
    evidence the Appellant told Dr Sayed that he had suffered a haemorrhage
    and  that  he  was  depressed.  It   was   not   independent   evidence
    corroborating  the  Appellant's  evidence  that  he  had  had  a  brain
    haemorrhage and suffered memory loss and depression.  In the absence of
    supporting evidence the judge was manifestly entitled  to  attach  very
    little weight to what the Appellant told Dr Syed and to  conclude  that
    there was no evidence of memory loss.

14.  Although not specifically raised by Mr Sesay,  I  have  considered  the
    assessment of the letter from the Helen Bamber Medical  Foundation  and
    the findings of the judge at paragraphs 87. I have  considered  whether
    the judge assessed this evidence in the round.  Having  considered  the
    very limited probative value of the evidence before the judge  and  the
    lack of a medico-legal report in respect of mental health, neurological
    problems and causation  of  scarring,  I  conclude  that  there  is  no
    material error  of  law.  There  were  problems  with  the  Appellant's
    evidence (including the significant delay in claiming asylum)  and  the
    judge made a number of adverse credibility findings which as  a  matter
    of fact have not been challenged.

Notice of Decision

15.  For all of the reasons that I have given there is no material error  of
    law and the decision of the judge  to  dismiss  the  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds is maintained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed        Joanna McWilliam                        Date 31 October 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam



