

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                   Appeal Number:
PA/06755/2017




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House              |          Decision & Reasons      |
|                                  |Promulgated                       |
|On 17 January 2018                |          On 12 February 2018     |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANUELL

                                   Between

                                  Mr M B I
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T N Hussain, authorised representative (Raiyad
Solicitors) For the Respondent:  Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS




      Introduction


      1.    The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
           Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro  on  10  November  2017   against   the
           determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Robertson  who  had
           dismissed the appeal of the Appellant against the refusal of his
           international protection claim.  The decision  and  reasons  was
           promulgated on 31 August 2017.
      2.    The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh, born on 10  September
           1988.  He had claimed asylum on 6 January 2017,  having  entered
           the United Kingdom as a Tier 4 (General) Student Migrant as long
           ago as 4 February 2010.  His immigration history  is  summarised
           at [3] of Judge Robertson's decision.   The  Appellant  asserted
           that he was at risk on return because of his sexual orientation.
            His sexual orientation had been  accepted  by  the  Respondent.
           Judge Robertson found that the Appellant would  live  discreetly
           on return to Bangladesh because he wished to hide his  sexuality
           from his parents: see [28] of the  decision  and  reasons.   The
           appeal was accordingly dismissed.


      3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge O'Garro because it was
           held arguable that the judge had erred in  her  approach  to  HJ
           (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.  The Appellant had also  stated  that  he
           would live discreetly for fear of persecution.  A rule 24 Notice
           in letter form had been served by the  Respondent  opposing  the
           appeal.




      Submissions


      4.    Mr Hussain for the Appellant relied on the  grounds  of  onwards
           appeal and grant.  In summary, he submitted that the  judge  had
           become confused.  At [30] the judge had expressly found that the
           Appellant would not live openly in Bangladesh because of fear of
           physical harm.  There was no dispute about  country  conditions.
           HJ (Iran) had  not  been  applied  correctly,  because  if  that
           question were answered affirmatively as the judge had done,  the
           appeal succeeded.  The  decision  and  reasons  was  unsafe  and
           should be set aside and the appeal reheard.


      5.    Mr Clarke for the Respondent submitted the judge had found as  a
           fact that the Appellant's reason for not living openly  was  his
           unwillingness to reveal his orientation to  his  parents.   That
           finding was open to the judge.  The  onwards  appeal  should  be
           dismissed.




      Material error of law finding


      6.    The tribunal finds that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  erred
           materially, such that the decision and reasons must be set aside
           and remade.   Perhaps  for  understandable  reasons,  the  judge
           focussed on the Appellant's  claim  that  he  was  unwilling  to
           reveal his orientation to his parents, which must  be  virtually
           unavoidable at some stage given his age alone. Nevertheless  the
           Appellant said that  he  was  afraid  of  upsetting  them.  That
           assertion led the judge to the conclusion that this was the main
           reason why the Appellant would  live  discreetly  on  return  to
           Bangladesh.   But  the  judge  overlooked   her   other   highly
           significant finding that the Appellant also feared the community
           and violence: see [30] of the  decision  and  reasons.   In  her
           detailed study of the country background evidence, the judge had
           concluded that the Appellant would indeed be  at  real  risk  of
           harm if he led an openly gay life: see [27].


      7.    The judge inadvertently slipped into material error  of  law  of
           law by not giving sufficient recognition  to  the  dual  reasons
           which the Appellant put forward: he feared his community as well
           as not wanting to upset his parents.  That error can readily  be
           corrected, as there was no challenge to the judge's general fact
           finding in a full and carefully  written  decision.   Hence  all
           findings of fact stand, save that it must be  accepted  and  the
           tribunal finds that the Appellant fears  his  community  and  so
           would not, because of that fear, live openly as  a  gay  man  in
           Bangladesh.  His appeal succeeds.




      DECISION


      The appeal is allowed


      The making of the previous decision involved the making of a  material
      error on a point of law.  The decision  is  remade  and  the  original
      appeal is allowed.

      Signed                                  Date: 8 February 2018




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
