

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/06690/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 23rd of March 2018                     | On 13th April 2018              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WOODCRAFT

                                   Between

                               MR MASHUK MIAH
                          (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


              DECISION AND REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

The Appellant

   1. The Appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on 1st of July 1977.  He
      appeals against  a  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Farrelly sitting at North Shields on 10th of August  2017.  The  Judge
      dismissed on the papers the Appellant's appeal against a  decision  of
      the Respondent dated  29th  of  June  2017  to  refuse  to  grant  the
      Appellant international protection.


   2. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom in 2004 with entry  clearance
      as an overseas domestic worker.  He  made  a  number  of  unsuccessful
      applications thereafter before finally applying for asylum in  January
      2016. It was the refusal of this application in June  2017  that  gave
      rise to the present proceedings.


   3. The Appellant's claim was that he came from a political family who had
      supported the Bangladesh National Party (BNP) and had been  threatened
      by supporters of the rival party, the Awami League. He also claimed to
      have taken part in demonstrations in the United Kingdom. The Judge was
      not satisfied that the Appellant's claim was true being  significantly
      influenced by the circumstances under which the claim was made  namely
      that the Appellant was about to be removed.


   4.  The  Appellant  appealed  against  this  decision  arguing  that  any
      inconsistencies could be explained because he had a tendency to forget
      things when under pressure such as when  he  was  interviewed  by  the
      Respondent. The current plight of BNP activists in Bangladesh was  not
      understood.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
      Parkes on 16th of November 2017  who  found  it  arguable  that  Judge
      Farrelly had taken brevity  too  far  in  this  case.  There  were  no
      explicit findings on the consistency of the Appellant's accounts,  the
      sur place claim barely obtained a mention at [14]  and  there  were  a
      number of typing errors which did not inspire confidence. It  did  not
      follow that the Appellant would eventually succeed  but  the  decision
      merited further consideration. The Respondent did  not  reply  to  the
      grant of permission.


   6. When the matter came before me counsel for the Appellant  argued  that
      the Judge was wrong to  find  at  [10]  that  the  Appellant  was  not
      mentioned on a number of documents from Bangladesh such as  the  First
      Information Reports in the Appellant's bundle. In fact, the  Appellant
      was mentioned on each of them. For the Respondent it was conceded that
      [10] was not entirely clear. I indicated at the close  of  submissions
      that I found there was a material error of law and that I would  remit
      the case back to  the  First-tier  to  be  reheard  with  no  findings
      preserved. There were no objections to this course of  action.  I  now
      give my reasons for this course.

Findings

   7. The difficulty in this case was that the Judge was  dealing  with  the
      matter on the papers. It is not entirely clear why the Appellant opted
      to have his case determined on the papers, the box requesting a  paper
      hearing was ticked on  page  3  of  Form  IAFT-5.  The  assessment  of
      credibility was inevitably going to be an important part of  the  case
      which would normally require the Appellant to give oral testimony  and
      be cross  examined  thereon.  Although  there  was  reference  to  the
      Appellant being  nervous,  there  appears  to  be  no  medical  reason
      advanced as to why  the  Appellant  was  not  prepared  to  give  oral
      evidence. The case at 1st sight might not appear to be strong  but  it
      still required careful analysis even if it was to  be  dismissed.  The
      Appellant had a poor immigration record and the Judge's  finding  that
      the Appellant's  claim  for  protection  was  only  made  because  the
      Appellant was about to be removed was  one  potentially  open  to  the
      Judge on the evidence.


   8. The difficulty was that that appears to be the only reason  the  Judge
      found as to why he rejected the appeal. The analysis at  [10]  of  the
      documentation  from  Bangladesh  did  not  fully  explain   what   the
      difficulties with the documents might be.  The  sur  place  claim  was
      rejected in one sentence at [14]: "The  suggestion  he  took  part  in
      demonstrations in the United Kingdom has not been developed". Arguably
      more needed to be said about that aspect of the claim if it was to  be
      rejected.


   9. I have some sympathy for the position that the Judge found himself  in
      given the unusual course of events  surrounding  this  appeal.  Unless
      there is strong medical evidence  indicating  that  the  Appellant  is
      unable to attend to give evidence, it will be  essential  for  him  to
      attend to be cross examined on his account on  the  next  occasion.  I
      therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and  remit
      the matter back to the First-tier to be  reheard  by  any  Judge  save
      Judge Farrelly, with no findings  of  fact  preserved.  The  Appellant
      should file and serve a detailed statement at least 14 days before the
      next hearing setting out his case including his reasons why he delayed
      making an asylum claim for so long.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
    law and I have set it aside. I direct that the matter be remitted  back
    to the First-tier to be reheard.

Appellant's appeal allowed to that limited extent

I make no anonymity order as there is no public policy reason for so doing.


Signed this 5th of April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed this 5th of April 2018


.......................................................
Judge Woodcraft
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
