
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06184/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision Promulgated                 |
|On 1 June 2018                       |On 19 June 2018                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                 CN CAMEROON
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar (counsel instructed by AC Gilead
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of CN, a citizen of Cameroon born  16  August  1982,
    against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  27  July  2017
    dismissing his appeal against the refusal of his asylum claim.

 2. The Appellant's asylum claim was based on his gender preference. He had
    become aware of being gay aged around 15, when kissed by another  male;
    he increasingly began to have feelings for other boys. As such  conduct
    was illegal in Cameroon one had to hide one's sexuality. His family and
    friends there had become aware  of  his  sexuality  because  it  became
    apparent via social media postings and his  effeminate  appearance  and
    gait, and his paternal  uncle  had  threatened  to  kill  him  when  he
    returned to Cameroon  when  his  father  became  ill  and  died  around
    December 2014. The Appellant had been open about his sexuality since he
    came to the UK. He had been in a relationship in this country with SAM,
    a  recognised  refugee  whose  claim  was  based  on  his  own   gender
    preference, who he had met in 2015.

 3. The immigration history provided by the Respondent sets  out  that  the
    Appellant was granted a Tier 5 entry clearance on  16  July  2009,  and
    entered the UK on 23 August that year; he was subsequently  granted  an
    extension of leave until 30 June 2012, and further  extensions  in  the
    International Agreement sub-category of  Tier  5  until  7  July  2015;
    however further applications were  refused.  On  19  December  2016  he
    claimed asylum, that claim being refused on 14 June 2017, because there
    was an inconsistency in his evidence of how his gender preference  came
    to light in Cameroon, the emails he provided did not back up his  claim
    to have used the website A for A prior to  2017,  and  he  had  claimed
    asylum late, some time after his last arrival in the UK on  21  January
    2015. In any event he had not personally experienced  any  problems  in
    Cameroon, including during the period when  he  went  back  during  his
    father's illness and death from late 2014 to the start of 2015.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal considered the Appellant's evidence, and  found
    his credibility wanting, because

      a)  His  evidence  generally  gave  the  impression  of  having   been
         exaggerated;

      b) He could not remember the name of the man with whom he said he  had
         been in a relationship for some six months at the age of 15;

      c) He had remained in Cameroon for a  significant  period  before  his
         last return to the UK without coming to harm;

      d) There was very little concrete evidence of same-sex activity before
         the Appellant claimed asylum, which suggested that the more  recent
         material was concocted;

      e) There was no  evidence  of  his  trips  to  meet  his  partner  SAM
         notwithstanding that on their own account they must have met up  on
         many occasions;

      f) The Appellant's witness knew  very  little  about  the  Appellant's
         immigration history, such as when he  was  served  with  notice  of
         illegal entry, and nor  did  he  appear  to  know  much  about  the
         Appellant's problems with his family or of the details given on his
         social media profile.

 5. Accordingly the First-tier Tribunal did not accept that  the  Appellant
    was LGBTi and his international protection claim thus  inevitably  fell
    away.

 6. I should summarise the grounds of appeal of 23 August 2017,  which  are
    very densely drafted and often fail to properly engage with the  nature
    of the appellate jurisdiction.  They  additionally  take  a  number  of
    irrelevant points: for example, given the Appellant's credibility as  a
    gay man was  not  accepted,  questions  of  risk  of  return,  internal
    relocation, the role of discretion and the HJ (Iran) principle were all
    simply irrelevant. Broadly speaking, it was argued that

      a) The decision was full of typographical errors  and  attributed  the
         wrong gender pronoun to the Appellant repeatedly;

      b) There were errors as to the date when the Appellant  returned  from
         Cameroon on the last occasion: this was January 2015, not May 2015,
         contrary to repeated references by the First-tier  Tribunal;  there
         was also an  error  as  to  the  circumstances  of  his  return  to
         Cameroon: this was to visit his sick father, who then died,  rather
         than for the original purpose of attending his father's funeral;

      c) The evidence of SAM, about the Appellant's visits to him and  their
         experiences at gay clubs,  was  potentially  corroborative  of  the
         Appellant's gender preference but no finding had been made on it;

      d) There was in fact extensive evidence from the Adam 4  Adam  website
         showing that the Appellant joined it on 3 November 2012.

 7. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal  on  29  January  2018,
    raising a particular concern that anxious scrutiny may  not  have  been
    applied to the case, given that evidence relevant  to  the  Appellant's
    membership of the gay dating site had been overlooked.

 8. At the original hearing of this appeal before the Upper Tribunal, Judge
    Gill adjourned the proceedings and made directions that both sides were
    to provide  the  best  available  summary  (backed  by  their  original
    contemporaneous notes) of the oral evidence that had been given  before
    the judge below. In the event neither side found it necessary to  refer
    to this material.

 9. Mr Tufan pragmatically accepted that there whilst he was instructed  to
    defend the appeal, there was no real answer  to  the  stronger  of  the
    grounds of appeal, in particular with respect to the website issue  and
    some of the mistakes as to dates. Mr Gajjar relied on  his  grounds  of
    appeal in the light of that stance.

Findings and reasons

10. In the light of Mr Tufan's realistic stance, I can be relatively  brief
    in my disposal of this appeal.

11. I accept there are clear material errors of law in the decision  below.
    It is axiomatic that asylum appeals require  anxious  scrutiny.  It  is
    difficult to be confident that such scrutiny has been applied here.

12. There are a series of factual errors. Whilst some are relatively minor,
    others are  more  significant.  For  example  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    attributes significant weight to the time that the Appellant last spent
    in Cameroon, but appears to have been under a false  impression  as  to
    the date that he actually left  the  country.  It  is  clear  that  the
    perception that there was no corroborative evidence  of  the  Appellant
    having been active on a dating website prior to  2017  weighed  heavily
    with the First-tier Tribunal; but that is  simply  wrong,  there  being
    documentary  evidence  to  that  effect  self-evidently  in   evidence.
    Although the earlier material is referenced  by  the  Tribunal  at  one
    point, its conclusions are inconsistent with its existence.

13. Furthermore, notwithstanding that there was oral evidence from SAM that
    occupies a full two paragraphs of  the  decision  below,  there  is  no
    finding on his credibility. Yet his  evidence  was  potentially  highly
    relevant, as the Appellant's claimed partner, to the Appellant's gender
    preference. The oral evidence of a witness of fact who  gives  material
    evidence regarding the credibility of an  asylum  seeker's  claim  must
    receive specific and reasoned assessment.

14. Given the requirement to afford anxious scrutiny to asylum appeals  and
    the fact that credibility was the central question  on  the  appeal,  I
    accordingly find material errors of law in the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal to have been established. The appeal must be re-heard.




    Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law.

    The appeal is remitted for hearing afresh.


[pic]
Signed:  Date: 11 June 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes
