
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06474/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 31st of January 2020                       |On 5th of February 2020       |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    MKSM
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms F Shaw of Counsel, instructed by Sultan Lloyd
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on 15 October 2019,  in  which  the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims dated 24 June 2019 was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Iran, born on 10 April 2002, who arrived
    in the United Kingdom in 2018 as a minor  and  claimed  asylum  on  the
    basis that he would be at risk on return  as  a  Kurdish  person  whose
    parents and sister had been killed  in  connection  with  his  father's
    support of the KDP.

 3. The Respondent refused the application the basis that  the  Appellant's
    claim was not credible, he had no significant profile nor  would  there
    be any perception of any such profile and the Appellant would not be at
    risk on return to Iran on the basis of his ethnicity or otherwise.  The
    Appellant's removal would not be disproportionate interference with his
    right to respect for private and family life contrary to Article  8  of
    the European Convention on Human Rights.

 4. Judge Fox dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated on 15  October
    2019, on the basis that the Appellant's claim was not considered to  be
    credible and that there was a lack of supporting evidence for  it.   In
    accordance with  the  country  guidance,  it  was  concluded  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return to Iran, nor  would  there  be
    any disproportionate interference with his right to respect for private
    and family life.

The appeal

 5. The Appellant appeals on nine grounds  as  follows.   First,  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal failed to give sufficient reasons  as  to  why  the
    Appellant's second written statement was of 'limited  probative  value'
    and  further  failed  to  have  sufficient  regard  to  that  evidence.
    Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal failed to make any clear findings  on
    the Appellant's claimed sur place activities,  rejecting  these  for  a
    lack of corroboration and that the evidence that  was  put  forward  in
    support of the claim was of 'limited probative  value'.   The  findings
    that  were  contained  in  the  decision  lacked  sufficient   reasons.
    Thirdly, that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to apply  the  country
    guidance in BA (Demonstrators in Britain -  risk  on  return)  Iran  CG
    [2011] UKUT 36 (IAC) when assessing the Appellant's risk from  his  sur
    place activities.  Fourthly, that the First-tier Tribunal had failed to
    have proper regard to the Appellant's  age  and  failed  to  apply  the
    relevant presidential guidance on vulnerable witnesses.  Fifthly,  that
    the First-tier Tribunal had failed to explain why the  Appellant  would
    know what was going on at his family home, a 4-5  minute  bike  journey
    away on the outskirts of the village.   Sixthly,  that  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  as   to   why   the
    identification of the authorities at the family home  was  speculative.
    Seventhly, that the First-tier Tribunal applied the wrong  standard  of
    proof in looking for certainty of the source of information about  what
    happened to the Appellant's family.  Eighthly, there was  an  error  of
    fact in the First-tier tribunal's decision and a irrational  conclusion
    in finding an inconsistency about the identity of KDP members  and  the
    Appellant's fathers decision  not  to  join  the  Peshmerga.   Finally,
    overall that the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  was  irrational,
    with reasoning which was difficult to follow and lacking in  structure.
    The decision showed that the evidence was not been assessed as a  whole
    and the conclusion was lacking a proper evidential basis.

 6. In her Rule 24 reply, the Respondent accepted that the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contained material  errors  of  law  such  that  it
    should be set aside and remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de
    novo hearing.  In particular, the Respondent agreed that the references
    to  evidence  having  'limited  probative  value'   were   inadequately
    explained; that it was impossible to ascertain what weight, if any  was
    given to the Appellant's second witness statement and there was a  lack
    of  application  of  the  guidance  on  vulnerable  witnesses  to   the
    Appellant's evidence.  Further, the Respondent agreed that there was  a
    lack of clear findings  as  to  the  Appellant's  sur  place  activity,
    focusing on why the Appellant may have attended  demonstrations  rather
    than whether he did and whether he would be at risk on return for  this
    reason in accordance with the country guidance.

Findings and reasons

 7. In the circumstances set  out  above,  where  the  Respondent  properly
    accepts that the First-tier Tribunal materially erred in law for  most,
    if not all of the reasons set out in the original  grounds  of  appeal,
    and where I fully agree that there were errors of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal as identified by the Appellant and  accepted
    by the Respondent, the parties consented to a decision without  reasons
    pursuant to Rule 40(3)(b) of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.  As such no further reasons are given in  writing  for  the
    decision to find a material error of law and set aside the decision  of
    the First-tier  Tribunal.    On  the  basis  that  the  errors  of  law
    concerned assessment of the Appellant's  credibility,  no  findings  of
    fact can be preserved and it is appropriate to remit the appeal to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for a de novo hearing.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Birmingham  hearing
centre) to be heard do Novo by any Judge except Judge Fox.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]             Date 3 February 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
