
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06838/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5th April 2019                             |On 29th April 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                   Mr s m
                         (ANONYMITY direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Fraczyk (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    J J Maxwell, promulgated on 22nd December 2017, following a hearing  at
    Stoke-on-Trent on 5th December 2017.  In the determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Afghanistan, and was born on  2nd
    February 2002.  He was at the date of the hearing, and remains today, a
    minor.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  7th
    July  2017,  refusing  his  claim  for  asylum  and  for   humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he comes from a well-known
    political  family  in  Afghanistan,  whereby  his  father  was  closely
    involved in the promotion of a strong candidate, namely Mr Daudzai, for
    the presidency of Afghanistan, which led to the family  being  targeted
    by rivals and  others,  including  the  Appellant  being  targeted  for
    kidnapping himself.  The present situation now is that his  father  has
    passed away, and his uncle, who was a prominent  figure  in  the  Armed
    Forces has also died.  He is not therefore, in a position to seek,  and
    to avail himself, of protection in Afghanistan, were he to be returned.

The Judge's Determination

 4. The judge made it quite clear that, "in general terms, I am prepared to
    accept much of  what  the  Appellant  says  about  his  experiences  in
    Afghanistan".  This involved the fact that he came from "a wealthy well
    connected and politically orientated family", and  that  the  Appellant
    had himself been subject of kidnapping (paragraph 40).  The judge  also
    had regard to objective evidence, principally a report  from  Dr  David
    Seddon,  who  confirmed  that  Mr  Daudzai  was  "a  well-known  Afghan
    politician who is believed to be a strong candidate for the  presidency
    of Afghanistan", and that  having  considered  the  Appellant's  family
    circumstances, he was of the view  that  the  Appellant's  father,  "is
    therefore  undoubtedly  from  a  wealthy  and  powerful  family   close
    connection to some of the most important politicians in the country; it
    is entirely plausible that  he  has  been  and  remain  close  to  Omar
    Daudzai" (paragraph 23).

 5. However, the judge dismissed the appeal essentially for  reasons  that,
    given that the Appellant's family was so well connected in Afghanistan,
    they would be able to provide him  with  the  necessary  protection  in
    Kabul, where the Appellant's elder  brother  was  a  commander  in  the
    Afghan Army in any event.

Grounds of Application

 6. The grounds of  application  state  that,  given  that  the  judge  had
    accepted much  of  the  Appellant's  account  (at  paragraph  40),  the
    conclusions reached by him were irrational for the  following  reasons.
    First, the judge failed to give  due  consideration  to  the  level  of
    protection previously available to the Appellant, when his  father  and
    uncle were alive, but now would  no  longer  be  conceivably  available
    given that they had died.  Second, that the Appellant's brother  is  in
    the Afghan Army,  but  the  judge  wrongly  assumed  that  he  will  be
    available and have the resources to protect the Appellant.  Third, that
    the Appellant has a brother in the UK, who had gone to Afghanistan  for
    a brief period, for the purposes of the funeral of his father, and  the
    judge was wrong to have assumed that the brother would now be  able  to
    accompany the Appellant also  to  Afghanistan,  in  the  event  of  the
    Appellant being  removed.   Finally,  the  judge  did  not  accept  (at
    paragraph  42)  the  threats  from  the  Taliban  specifically  to  the
    Appellant on the basis that the Appellant had  failed  to  produce  the
    threatening letters.  However, this fails to have  due  regard  to  the
    Appellant's age and the fact that the letters were never  addressed  to
    the Appellant, but to his family members.

 7. On 10th May 2018, permission to appeal was granted only on the specific
    basis that the changed circumstances and the death of  the  Appellant's
    uncle and father may well  now  mean  a  lack  of  protection,  to  the
    appropriate level, for the Appellant, although the  absence  of  "night
    letters", which the judge had referred to, may also be  argued  by  the
    Appellant on appeal.

Submissions

 8. At the hearing before me on 5th April 2019, Mr  Fraczyk,  appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, provided a very helpful skeleton argument, and
    proceeded to summarise the essential grounds of challenge.  These  were
    that, given that the judge had stated that "I  am  prepared  to  accept
    much of what the Appellant says about his experiences  in  Afghanistan"
    (paragraph 40), this must  be  taken  to  assume  that  the  judge  had
    accepted  the  fact  that  the  Appellant's  uncle  had  been  murdered
    (paragraph 45); the fact that the Appellant himself had been  kidnapped
    (paragraph 16), the fact that the Appellant's brother and the Appellant
    were shot at (paragraph 18), and the fact that a bomb had  been  placed
    on the brother's vehicle (paragraph 19).   Indeed,  the  Appellant  was
    almost successfully kidnapped from the national army base himself  (see
    paragraph 19).  All these facts, submitted Mr Fraczyk, must be taken to
    have been accepted by the judge when he stated that he was "prepared to
    accept much of what the Appellant says".

 9. Second, the fact that the Appellant  was  targeted  in  two  kidnapping
    attempts, putting him into jeopardy directly and  specifically,  was  a
    matter that the judge glossed over, when he stated that  the  Appellant
    had not been specifically targeted, in a politically  motivated  manner
    (paragraph 40).  Third, the judge wrongly assumed that the  same  level
    of protection would be available  to  the  Appellant  upon  return  now
    (paragraph 43), but this is an unsafe assumption, given that,  although
    the Appellant has a brother in the Afghan Army, the family's power  and
    influence  essentially  arose  from  the   Appellant's   father   close
    association with Mr Daudzai, and the father was now dead.  The possible
    loss of power  and  influence  will  affect  the  level  of  protection
    afforded to the Appellant (paragraph 43).

10. Finally, in reliance upon  the  well-known  decision  in  Bagdanavicius
    [2004] 1 WLR 1207, where Auld LJ had stated  in  the  Court  of  Appeal
    that,

         "Notwithstanding systemic sufficiency of state  protection  in  the
         receiving state, a claimant may still have a well-founded  fear  of
         persecution if he can show that its authorities know  or  ought  to
         know of circumstances particular to his case  giving  rise  to  his
         fear, but are unlikely to provide  the  additional  protection  his
         particular circumstances reasonably require" (paragraph 55),

    the judge had failed to approach the level of  risk  to  the  Appellant
    from this standpoint.

11. For his part, Mr Mills, appearing  as  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer, on behalf of the government, submitted that  it  was  accepted
    that the Appellant had been specifically targeted  on  account  of  his
    father's political activities.  It was accepted  that  the  father  had
    died and the uncle had been killed.  However, what this  would  suggest
    is that the Appellant would not now himself be at  risk.   The  judge's
    conclusions were not wrong.  The judge was aware that  the  father  had
    died (through natural causes involving a heart attack),  and  that  the
    uncle, who was an army officer, had been killed.  The judge also  noted
    that the Appellant's brother was a commanding  officer  in  the  Afghan
    Army.  It was not unreasonable  of  the  judge  to  conclude  that  the
    brother  could  provide  him  with  protection.   The  judge   properly
    acknowledges that the father was no longer there.  However, it remained
    the case that the family itself was  wealthy  and  was  well  connected
    (paragraph 40).  Indeed, the brother in the UK had actually  gone  back
    to Afghanistan to attend to the father's funeral, and this demonstrated
    that this was a family that could call upon resources in Afghanistan to
    ensure their safety.

12. In reply,  Mr  Fraczyk  submitted  that  the  family  history  to  date
    demonstrated,  that  even  at  the  time  when  the  father,  who   was
    acknowledged to be well connected with Mr Daudzai  was  alive,  attacks
    were taking place on  the  family.   Furthermore,  the  possibility  of
    revenge on the family continued to remain.  The  Appellant  had,  after
    all, been kidnapped at one stage from an army base.  This  demonstrated
    that he was not safe anywhere.  One must  not  forget  that  there  was
    ongoing family involvement with the Afghan government here.  Therefore,
    there was a continued risk.

No Error of Law

13. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  I come  to  this
    conclusion,  notwithstanding  Mr  Fraczyk's  commendable   efforts   to
    persuade me otherwise, and his detailed but succinct skeleton  argument
    before me.  My reasons for so concluding are as follows.

14. First, this is a case where the judge had concluded that,

         "There is no evidence to suggest  that  the  first  kidnapping  was
         politically motivated  and  it  seems  to  have  been  foiled  with
         relative ease; indicating how well connected his family  is,  being
         able to alert checkpoints with sufficient speed and with sufficient
         authority to ensure the apprehension of the  kidnapper  before  any
         real harm could be done.  His family were able to  take  him  to  a
         place of safety to live amongst the military ..." (paragraph 40).

15. Second, where  the  shooting  of  the  brother's  vehicle  took  place,
    together with the  placing  of  a  bomb  in  that  vehicle,  the  judge
    concluded, as was open to him  to  so  conclude,  that,  "there  is  no
    evidence to suggest that the Appellant was in any way a target,  indeed
    given his brother's rank and position in the Afghan Army,  it  is  more
    likely than not that he is the target".

16. Third, the judge then concluded, in a manner which  is  most  important
    even now after the demise of the father and the uncle, that "the family
    is wealthy enough to have him escorted by security guards to  and  from
    school" (paragraph 40).

17. Fourth, the judge observed how "the  Appellant's  brother  is  able  to
    return to Afghanistan", and that this was done "without apparent let or
    hindrance;  let  alone  being  the  subject  of  any  form  of  attack"
    (paragraph 41).

18. Fifth, in relation to the night letters,  the  judge  was  entitled  to
    conclude that "there is no evidence before  me  to  explain  why  these
    letters were not produced and I find this significantly undermines  the
    claim".

19. Sixth, the judge also was entitled to conclude that he found that  "the
    Appellant has failed to prove, even to the lower standard, such letters
    were sent to his family or that they require him to join  the  Taliban"
    (paragraph 52), thereby dealing with  Mr  Fraczyk's  point  before  me,
    namely, that the judge overlooked the fact that the letters  were  sent
    to the family, and not to the Appellant.

20. Seventh, and no less importantly, the judge was clear that,

         "This is not an instance  where  a  young  boy  would  be  sent  to
         Afghanistan to fend for himself in a strange city where he  has  no
         family or connections but rather the Appellant would be returned to
         his family; a family who have demonstrated the ability  to  protect
         him in the past and who are able to rally the Afghan authorities to
         their assistance if needed".

21. Eighth, although Mr Fraczyk submits otherwise before  me,  without  any
    evidence to that effect, the judge had concluded  that,  "there  is  no
    evidence that this level  of  protection  would  not  continue  if  the
    Appellant were to be returned to Kabul now and I  find  will  be  safer
    there for him than most of those who live there" (paragraph 43).

22. Finally, the judge drew attention to how it was that this  was  a  case
    where "in particular his brother who serves in the Afghan Army, had the
    resources to meet  him  at  the  airport  and  take  him  home  safely,
    doubtless accompanied by guards as seems to have been the case  in  the
    past" (paragraph 44).

23. For all these reasons, the judge gave ample reasons for concluding that
    the appeal could not succeed and there is no error in the determination
    that is material.

Notice of Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

25. An anonymity direction is made.

26. This appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th April 2019

