
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
pa/06634/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     |      Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6 December 2017                       |      On 9 January 2018             |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                    mr AP
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Physsas, instructed by Montague Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Although this is an appeal by the Secretary of State  I  refer  to  the
    parties as they were in the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The Appellant,  a  national  of  Turkey,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State dated  30th  June
    2017 to refuse his application for asylum.  In a  decision  promulgated
    on 17th  August  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Pears  allowed  the
    Appellant's appeal.   The  Secretary  of  State  now  appeals  to  this
    Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan on
    18th September 2017.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claimed  to  have
    arrived in the UK on 31st December  2016  and  claimed  asylum  on  7th
    January 2017.  The Appellant claims that  he  is  an  ethnic  Kurd.  He
    claims that he was at a friend's wedding when an explosion  took  place
    nearby. He says that he ran from the wedding in the  direction  of  the
    explosion and was stopped by fifteen to twenty police officers who beat
    him because he says they knew  he  was  Kurdish  and  believed  he  was
    responsible for the explosion.  He was detained  for  two  days  during
    which time he was interrogated and beaten.   However  he  was  released
    after someone else took responsibility for  the  bomb.   After  he  was
    released his details were taken but he was not charged and did not have
    to sign any documents.   He  remained  in  Turkey  between  August  and
    December 2016 without any problems with  the  authorities.   He  claims
    that he was perceived by the authorities as being a  supporter  of  the
    PKK.

 4. In the reasons for refusal letter the Secretary of State accepted  that
    the Appellant is a Turkish national  and  of  Kurdish  ethnicity.   The
    Secretary of State accepted that the Appellant had given  a  consistent
    and reasonably detailed account  of  the  explosion  in  Turkey  and  a
    subsequent arrest and release and this part of  the  Appellant's  claim
    was accepted.  However the Secretary of State did not accept  that  the
    Appellant would be perceived by the authorities as being a supporter of
    the PKK.  The Appellant claims that he left Turkey illegally and  would
    face issues on return to Turkey on that basis.  However  the  Secretary
    of State did not accept that he would face any difficulties  on  return
    because he holds a Turkish identity card which he could show  upon  his
    return and he was released by the  Turkish  authorities  and  faced  no
    further issues and it was not accepted that he left Turkey illegally.

 5. In considering the appeal the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  set  out  the
    guidance in the country guidance case of IK (Returnees - Records - IFA)
    Turkey CG [2004] UKIAT 00312 and highlighted a number of paragraphs  in
    that decision  at  paragraph  17  of  the  decision.   The  judge  also
    considered the  background  information  in  the  Home  Office  country
    information note of August 2017.  In making his findings at  paragraphs
    42 to 49 the judge noted the elements of  the  Appellant's  case  which
    were accepted by the Secretary of State noting  at  paragraph  42  that
    even on his own case the Appellant was released, there was  no  warrant
    for his arrest, that he remained in Turkey between August and  December
    of 2016 without problems and he was able to leave Turkey without issue.
     The judge questioned the Secretary of State's assertion  at  paragraph
    18 of the refusal letter that the Appellant could  re-enter  using  his
    identity card saying that that did not mean that the Appellant did  not
    exit illegally [44].  The judge concluded that the  Appellant  did  not
    have a valid passport, having been  supplied with one by an  agent  and
    that was not his own, and that, while he might be entitled to return to
    Turkey, he would have no evidence of his legal exit  [45].   The  judge
    applied  the  guidance  in  IK  noting  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    arbitrarily detained and ill-treated because he was a Kurdish  male  in
    an area where a bomb had gone off and that on his return to Turkey as a
    failed asylum seeker aged 18 with Kurdish ethnicity from Gaziantep  who
    was suspected in August 2016 of  planting  a  bomb  and  who  was  then
    detained and ill-treated and fled the country as accepted by  the  Home
    Office and who had been absent from Turkey for a period of about  eight
    months who had no passport and no evidence of legal exit would  be  "at
    real risk of being transferred on his arrival at Istanbul  Airport  for
    enquiries by the anti-terror police or possibly by MIT and be at a real
    risk of material ill-treatment" [49].

 6. In the Grounds of Appeal the Secretary of State contends that the judge
    had failed to consider that the Appellant  would  not  be  a  political
    prisoner as he was mistreated along with  many  others  after  a  local
    incident years ago and in addition he was not pursued.  It is contended
    that the appellant is not wanted by the police and  if  he  returns  he
    will face questions about departure.  It is contended  that  the  judge
    erred in finding that the Appellant  left  illegally  and  furthermore,
    even if it were accepted that he had, there is  no  reason  to  believe
    that the Appellant would receive a prison sentence, he may just  get  a
    fine and even if he did get a short sentence the prison conditions  for
    non-political inmates are generally of international standard.

 7. In granting permission First-tier Tribunal Judge Chohan  considered  it
    arguable that the judge erred in finding that the Appellant would be at
    risk due to his illegal exit from Turkey and considered it unclear what
    weight the judge attached to other parts of the Appellant's in relation
    to residing in Turkey between August and December  2016  and  the  fact
    that there was no arrest warrant.

Error of Law

 8. At the hearing before me Mr Richards conceded that what was put forward
    in the Grounds of Appeal was not entirely accurate.  He  accepted  that
    at paragraph 49 the judge did not find that the Appellant would  be  at
    risk on return just on the basis of his illegal exit.  He accepted that
    the judge considered that the Appellant's return to Turkey  as  someone
    who had exited illegally may lead to him coming to the attention of the
    authorities and being referred to anti-terror police or the MIT and  he
    accepted that this part of the grounds was not arguable.

 9. However he submitted that the judge had made a material error of law in
    that he failed to appreciate that the Appellant was never  arrested  in
    the sense defined in the case in IK.  In his submission  the  Appellant
    had never been arrested and brought before a  court  in  terms  of  the
    guidance set out in IK. He  contended  that  the  Appellant's  previous
    arrest and mistreatment was simply in the context of someone who was in
    the wrong place at the wrong time and that he was released when someone
    else confessed to the crime.  In these circumstances the Appellant  was
    able to reside in Turkey thereafter without  any  difficulty.   In  his
    submission the judge did not acknowledge this in his findings therefore
    the judge had not adequately reasoned why the Appellant would  come  to
    the attention of the authorities upon return in circumstances where  he
    had previously been exonerated.   He  submitted  that  this  inadequate
    reasoning renders the judge's conclusion wrong in law.

10. In my view it is cleat that the judge took into account the  fact  that
    the Appellant was released, that there was no warrant for  his  arrest,
    that he remained in Turkey between August  and  December  2016  without
    problems and was able to leave Turkey without issue  [42].   There  has
    been no challenge to the  judges  finding  at  paragraph  45  that  the
    Appellant left using a false passport and accordingly he would have  no
    evidence of his legal exit from Turkey.

11. There is no challenge to the paragraphs of IK relied upon by the  judge
    in paragraph 17 of the decision where he cited paragraphs 79 to  86  of
    the decision in IK.  Ms Physsas highlighted the parts of  the  guidance
    relied upon by the judge  which  are  in  bold  in  the  extracts.   In
    particular she highlighted paragraph 79  where  the  judge  noted  that
    returnees at Istanbul Airport had to present themselves to  immigration
    control booths staffed by the border police and, dependent on the  view
    taken by the border policemen, the returnee will either be  allowed  to
    proceed through the terminal without further ado or be  transferred  to
    the police station attached to the airport for further questioning  and
    that there was no real risk during this period of questioning  of  ill-
    treatment.  The Tribunal went on to say:

         "However  if  as  a  result  of  information  derived   from   such
         questioning or from any further enquiries undertaken by  them,  the
         police decide to transfer a returnee for further enquiries by anti-
         terror police or possibly by MIT, it will during this third  phrase
         of the process that the prospect of material ill-treatment arises".

    At paragraph 82 of the decision in IK the Tribunal said;

         "Thus if a returnee is travelling on a  one  way  emergency  travel
         document (and no failed asylum seeker will be returned to Turkey by
         the British government without appropriate  travel  documentation),
         or if there is no border control record of illegal  departure  from
         Turkey, then there is a  reasonable  likelihood  that  he  will  be
         identifiable as a failed asylum seeker and could  be  sent  to  the
         airport police station for further investigation."

12. At paragraph 84 of IK the Tribunal cited the CIPU report and said  that
    the nature of questioning at the airport involves questions as to as to
    the reasons and period of exit from  Turkey,  reasons  for  the  asylum
    application and reasons for any refusal of the asylum application among
    other matters.  At paragraph 85 the Tribunal set out  the  Home  Office
    position noting that a person who does  not  have  valid  documents  is
    likely to be questioned in order  to  establish  his  identity  and  an
    individual who is thought to have left on false documents is likely  to
    be questioned about how and from whom he obtained  them.   I  asked  Mr
    Richards whether he wished to rely on any other guidance in IK  and  he
    did not.

13. I accept the submission from Ms Physsas that the guidance in IK set out
    by the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not indicate that a returnee will
    only be questioned if  he  was  subject  to  an  arrest  warrant.   The
    guidance cited above and relied on by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is
    broad enough to indicate that someone in the Appellant's  circumstances
    who is returning having exited the country illegally is at real risk of
    being transferred to enquire on his arrival  at  Istanbul  Airport  for
    enquiries by the anti-terror police or possibly MIT  and  would  be  at
    real risk of ill-treatment as found by the judge at paragraph 49.  This
    is clearly the guidance  the  judge  had  in  mind  when  reaching  his
    conclusions at paragraph 49.  I also accept Ms Physsas' submission that
    the conclusions of the judge at paragraph 49 were largely based on  the
    matters already accepted by the Secretary of State.  The judge properly
    considered the Appellant's profile upon return in the  context  of  the
    guidance in IK.  There is no challenge to the judge's findings of fact,
    indeed the judge did not significantly depart from the matters accepted
    by the Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal letter.

14. Mr Richards submitted that paragraph 49 is incomplete in that the judge
    failed to consider that the  Appellant  had  been  exonerated  and  had
    remained in Turkey  after  his  release  and  that  his  reasoning  was
    therefore incomplete.  However as indicated above it is clear  that  at
    paragraph  42  the  judge  was  very  much  aware  of  the  Appellant's
    circumstances and background as accepted by the Secretary of State.  It
    is equally clear that it  is  on  that  basis  the  judge  reached  the
    conclusion at paragraph 49.

15. It is clear in my view that the judge made findings open to him on  the
    basis of the evidence and on the basis of the matters accepted  by  the
    Secretary of State in the reasons for refusal letter.   The  judge  set
    out an extensive citation from the  country  guidance  case  of  IK  at
    paragraph 17 and the  judge  properly  applied  this  guidance  to  the
    findings in this case.  There was no submission  by  the  Secretary  of
    State that country guidance no longer applies. There was no  submission
    by the Secretary of State as to other guidance in the case of IK  which
    is contrary to the guidance relied on by the judge or that the  country
    guidance was not properly applied by the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

16. In these circumstances I conclude that there is no  material  error  in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

There is no material error in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008
Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 8th January 2018




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.



Signed                              Date: 8th January 2018

