
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06179/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2018                              |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 halmat [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Holt, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, Halmat [A], was born on [ ] 1986 and is a  male  citizen
    of Iraq.  By a decision promulgated on 15 August 2017, I set aside  the
    First-tier Tribunal decision.  My reasons were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant, Halmat [A], was born on  [  ]  1986  and  is  a
         citizen of Iraq.  He arrived in the  United  Kingdom  in  2003  and
         claimed asylum.  His claim was  refused  in  a  decision  dated  21
         September 2004 and the appeal was dismissed on 8 December 2004.  In
         January 2006, the appellant left the  United  Kingdom  and  claimed
         asylum outside the United Kingdom and was returned to the under the
         provisions of the Dublin Convention.  He made an asylum claim which
         was  refused  on  30  March  2007.   The  appellant  made   further
         submissions which were rejected as a fresh claim by the respondent.
          However, subsequent submissions were accepted by the respondent as
         fresh claim. A notice of refusal was issued on 24 May 2016  and  it
         was against that decision that the appellant appealed to the First-
         tier Tribunal (Judge Manchester) which, in a  decision  promulgated
         on 28 March 2017, dismissed the appeal.  The appellant now appeals,
         with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   There are two grounds of appeal.  I shall deal with the second
         ground of appeal first.  Judge Manchester made a number of findings
         of fact which included: that the appellant cannot  be  returned  to
         his home area of Iraq on account  of  the  indiscriminate  violence
         currently existing there; that he cannot be  expected  to  relocate
         permanently to Baghdad as this would  be  unduly  harsh;  that  the
         appellant would be returned to Iraq via Baghdad; that the appellant
         could internally relocate to the KRI (the Kurdistan Region of Iraq)
         and that doing so would not be unduly harsh.  The second ground  of
         appeal records the fact that at [44] Judge  Manchester  found  that
         there was "no reason why the appellant  would  be  unable  to  find
         employment in the KRI".  The judge noted that, whilst the appellant
         is a Kurd, it was not clear that he had family or other individuals
         in the KRI who would be able to assist him upon  his  return.   The
         judge found the appellant did not possess a CSID. Ground 2  asserts
         that the judge's finding with regards employment is equivalent  "to
         a finding [that] the appellant will find employment within 10 days,
         as required by (AA (Article 15(c) CG Iraq [2015] UKUT 0054 (IAC))".
          The Upper Tribunal in AA recorded:

             "A Kurd (K) who does not originate from  the  IKR  can  obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end."

         3.   The grounds of appeal acknowledge the observation made by  the
         Tribunal in AA that there was no evidence that the  authorities  in
         the KRI actively seek to remove Kurds who, having been admitted  on
         a 10 day visa, overstay.  I reject the assertion in the grounds  of
         appeal that the judge has speculated as  to  the  prospect  of  the
         appellant finding employment.  The judge was required to carry  out
         an assessment of the likelihood of the appellant finding employment
         based on all the available evidence. That is exactly what  he  did.
         It would be impossible to find  categorically  that  an  individual
         would be certain to find employment within a specified time period;
         what is required is a reasoned  judgment  based  on  the  available
         evidence.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  take  into  account  the
         appellant's health and youth in assessing whether or not  he  would
         be likely to find employment within a reasonable  period.   I  find
         that the judge did not err in  law  for  the  reasons  asserted  in
         ground 2.

         4.   The first ground of appeal  challenges  the  judge's  findings
         that it was likely that the appellant would be able to travel  from
         Baghdad to the IKR without facing a real risk of harm (it is agreed
         that return from the United Kingdom would be to  Baghdad  Airport).
         Before the First-tier Tribunal, it seems to have been assumed  that
         the journey would be overland.   The judge  acknowledged  that  the
         appellant had no CSID and it was "not clear that he would  be  able
         to obtain [a CSID] reasonably quickly".  The judge was  aware  that
         the appellant would encounter a number of checkpoints en route from
         Baghdad to the KRI but observed that, "... although  the  existence
         of checkpoints by militia is  noted  and  these  may  pose  further
         difficulties in relation to travel, I  do  not  find  it  would  be
         unduly harsh or involve a real risk of serious harm to  expect  him
         to undertake such travel". The judge has  failed  to  say  why  the
         journey could be undertaken safely, that is why  he  believed  that
         the 'further difficulties' would be surmounted. I do  not  consider
         the judge's statement to be a  reasoned  finding  but,  rather,  an
         assertion  unsupported  by  reasoning.   The  judge   should   have
         considered in greater detail the journey which the appellant  would
         have undertaken overland and should have explained why he  believed
         that the appellant would not encounter difficulties  of  a  serious
         nature notwithstanding the fact that he does not possess a CSID.

         5.   The position is further complicated by  the  contents  of  the
         Rule 24 response of the respondent dated 11 May 2017.   The  author
         of the response observes that, "the grounds of appeal are  premised
         in part on the assumption that the appellant would have  to  travel
         by ground to the IKR and that it is clear from AA  that  there  are
         regular flights from Baghdad and no reason has been put forward  as
         to why the appellant would be unable to make use of  these".   That
         Rule 24 response, in turn, has led the the appellant  to  obtain  a
         further report from his expert witness, Sheri Laizer.  Mr Holt, for
         the appellant, invited me to consider that report when  determining
         whether the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law.  I declined to do
         so.   Mr  Holt  submitted  that  the  question  of  the   appellant
         travelling by air rather than overland from Baghdad to the KRI  had
         only arisen after the promulgation of Judge Manchester's  decision.
         The feasibility of such a journey was obviously not  considered  by
         Judge Manchester and I do not  see  its  relevance  to  determining
         whether or not  the  First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  law.   I  am,
         however, concerned that the judge has not given any adequate reason
         to support his finding that the appellant would  not  face  a  real
         risk of serious harm when travelling from Baghdad to the  KRI.   In
         what is otherwise a thorough and carefully reasoned  decision,  the
         judge has erred in law in his treatment of this issue.

         6.   I set aside the judge's decision preserving all  findings  and
         conclusions save those relating to the journey which the  appellant
         would have to undertake from Baghdad to the KRI if he were returned
         to Baghdad Airport.  That issue will be  considered  further  at  a
         resumed hearing before me in Bradford.  I consider  it  appropriate
         that all aspects of the appellant's proposed relocation to the  KRI
         should be considered although the Upper Tribunal will  not  revisit
         the prospects of the appellant obtaining employment should he reach
         the  KRI.   Furthermore,  if  the  respondent  proposes  that   the
         appellant should be returned directly  to  Erbil  from  the  United
         Kingdom, then she should make that clear without delay so that  the
         matter may be addressed at the resumed hearing (in this context,  I
         note that the most recent  country  guidance  (from  the  Court  of
         Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ  944  states  that  returns  of
         those individuals who were not from the KRI will  be  to  Baghdad).
         Likewise, if the respondent proposes that  the  appellant  will  be
         returned first to Baghdad and then by air to the KRI, I am prepared
         to consider the latest report of Sheri Laizer.  That report and any
         other item of evidence upon which either party may seek to rely  at
         the resumed hearing must be sent to the other party  and  filed  at
         the Upper Tribunal at least 10 days before the date fixed  for  the
         resumed hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         7.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which was  promulgated
         on 28 March 2017 is set aside.  All of the  findings  of  fact  are
         preserved save those relating to the  proposed  relocation  of  the
         appellant from Baghdad to the  KRI.   The  issue  of  the  internal
         flight alternative will be considered by the Upper Tribunal  (Upper
         Tribunal Judge  Clive  Lane)  at  a  resumed  hearing  at  Bradford
         following which the Upper Tribunal will remake the decision.

         8.   No anonymity direction is made."

 2. At the resumed hearing, I had evidence in the form of an expert  report
    from Ms S Laiser. The report was not  challenged  by  Mr  Diwnycz,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State.  I note from the report [14]  that
    the appellant would be unable to board a flight in Baghdad to travel to
    the IKR without a passport.  Mr Diwnycz in  his  submissions,  observed
    that there are no international flights into Erbil at the present time;
    all flights connecting to Erbil must  first  arrive  in  Baghdad.   The
    appellant would be provided with a laissez-passer.  To  enable  him  to
    travel to Baghdad.  This document, as Mr  Diwnycz  acknowledged,  would
    not enable the appellant to board a flight in  Baghdad  to  Erbil.   Mr
    Diwnycz also acknowledged that Kirkuk, the appellant's  home  area,  is
    not safe as at the date of the resumed hearing.

 3. In the circumstances, the appellant's appeal is allowed.  As a  Kurdish
    male it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate, even  in  the  short
    term to Baghdad. More particularly, there is no indication when, if  at
    all, he would be able to leave Baghdad and travel to the IKR.   In  the
    light of the expert report and the other evidence before  the  Tribunal
    and given the fact that the appellant would be to Baghdad, I find  that
    he would be at risk there.   His  home  area  remains  unsafe  and  his
    ability to enter the IKR (where, potentially,  he  would  be  safe)  is
    circumscribed his lack of documentation and  his  inability  to  safely
    travel overland. His residence in the United Kingdom may  prove  to  be
    relatively  brief  should  circumstances  in  Iraq  (for  example,  the
    resumption of international  flights  to  Erbil)  alter  but,  for  the
    present, he must remain here.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's  decision  dated  21
September 2004 is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
