
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06282/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 April 2018                             |On 2 May 2018                 |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                     ABC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. T. Shah, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. D. Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by ABC against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
     Judge Cohen, promulgated on 17 January  2018,  in  which  he  dismissed
     ABC's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to  refuse  a
     grant of asylum.


 2. I have made an anonymity  direction,  given  that  this  is  an  asylum
    appeal.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:

         "It is arguable that the Judge has set out an insufficient analysis
         of the Appellant's brother's evidence.   At  paragraph  18  of  the
         decision the Judge refers to the further documentation submitted in
         support of the  appeal  including  a  witness  statement  from  the
         Appellant and a witness statement from the Appellant's brother.  At
         paragraph 42 of the decision the Judge referred  to  the  Appellant
         having been found in his brother's restaurant.  At paragraph 43  of
         the decision the Judge found that it was totally  implausible  that
         the Appellant and his family members would not know about political
         asylum.  The Judge found the Appellant's failure  to  claim  asylum
         until apprehended in  his  brother's  restaurant  to  be  extremely
         damaging.  At paragraph 45 of the decision the Judge refers to  the
         significant  adverse  credibility  findings  which  had  been  made
         against the Appellant herein.  The index to the Appellant's  bundle
         at items 4 and 5 bears the endorsement "excluded" against the names
         of the Appellant's two brothers.  Given the reference by the  Judge
         to the inclusion of at least one statement from one brother  it  is
         arguable that the Judge should have set out a  fuller  analysis  in
         relation  to  that  evidence  before  reaching  conclusions  as  to
         credibility or set out the reasons in  the  decision  for  omitting
         consideration of such evidence."

 4. I  heard  submissions  from  both  representatives  following  which  I
    reserved my decision.


Error of law


 5. It was submitted by Mr. Shah that, even if the  appeal  went  the  same
    way, the failure to give the Appellant his day in court by refusing  to
    hear from his witnesses was a procedural  error  which  amounted  to  a
    material error of law.


 6. I have carefully considered the grounds of appeal and the decision.   I
    am not assisted by the fact that there is no reference  either  to  the
    decision taken by the Judge to exclude the evidence of the  Appellant's
    brothers, and to refuse to hear oral evidence  from  them,  or  to  the
    Judge's request for a shorter handwritten  statement.   The  Record  of
    Proceedings unfortunately does not assist either.


 7. Mr. Clarke stated that the note of the hearing taken by the Home Office
    Presenting Officer indicated that the Judge had said that the  evidence
    of the brothers would not add anything.


 8. As stated in the grant of permission, the index  to  the  copy  of  the
    Appellant's bundle on the Tribunal file states "excluded" next  to  the
    brothers' statements, and indeed these statements are not  included  in
    the Tribunal's copy of the Appellant's bundle.  Although therefore  the
    decision refers to "witness statement  from  the  appellant's  brother"
    [18], there is no copy of this statement on file, and it  is  therefore
    difficult to see how it has been taken into account by  the  Judge,  or
    why he has referred to it.


 9. I find that the appeal had previously been adjourned, one reason  being
    that the Appellant's brothers were not in the country on  the  previous
    date, and they wished to give evidence in support  of  the  Appellant's
    appeal.  They attended the hearing on 20 December 2017.


10. The Appellant was apprehended in  his  brother's  restaurant  when  his
    brother was present.  His brother was not prosecuted in respect of this
    raid.  It was submitted by Mr. Clarke that there was no detail  in  his
    statement about this.  However, it was countered by Mr. Shah that  this
    was not raised as an issue in the reasons for refusal letter,  and  the
    document recording the visit made by the immigration officers was  only
    provided to the Appellant on the day of the hearing.  This is  recorded
    by the Judge at [19] of the decision.  The Judge  made  findings  about
    the visit at [42].  I find that even though the statement did not refer
    to the enforcement visit, the Appellant's brother could have given oral
    evidence on this point.  It would have been for the Judge to decide  on
    the weight to be given to that evidence.


11. At [43] the Judge finds it  implausible  that  the  Appellant's  family
    members would not know about political asylum, but he did not hear from
    those family members who had attended the hearing to give evidence.


12. The Judge has failed to give any reasons in his decision for why he did
    not allow  the  Appellant's  brothers  to  give  evidence,  or  why  he
    considered that their evidence  would  not  be  significant.   This  is
    especially relevant given that his adverse credibility findings  relate
    to matters on which the Appellant's brothers could have given evidence.
     He has referred to the witness statement of one of them,  even  though
    he excluded this statement, and it was not even present in the copy  of
    the Appellant's bundle on file.  I find that he has erred  procedurally
    in his treatment of the Appellant's brothers' evidence.


13. In relation to the Appellant's own witness statement, again  I  am  not
    assisted as there is no  reference  in  the  decision  to  the  Judge's
    request that the Appellant produce  a  shorter  one.   The  Appellant's
    typed statement is in the bundle at pages 14 to 27.  There  is  also  a
    handwritten one on file.   It  was  submitted  by  Mr.  Shah  that  the
    Appellant had not formally adopted the typed one he  had  prepared  for
    the hearing, and the Judge had stated that he was excluding it.   There
    is reference at [18] to "a witness statement from the  appellant",  but
    given that two witness statements were provided, it is not possible  to
    know to which one the Judge is referring.  At [20],  when  setting  out
    the proceedings, there is no reference to the Appellant having  adopted
    any statement.  However, at [33] there is a reference to "paragraph 21"
    of the Appellant's statement which must be a  reference  to  the  typed
    statement in the bundle, as the handwritten statement only goes  up  to
    paragraph 15.  It was submitted by Mr. Clarke that the Judge  therefore
    had taken into account the typed statement.   However,  this  statement
    was not formally adopted by the Appellant, who was told that it was not
    going to be considered.


 14. It was submitted by Mr. Clarke that any procedural irregularities  were
     not material given the findings of the Judge.  First, I find  that  the
     brothers could have given evidence on matters central  to  the  appeal,
     both the activities of the Appellant and  the  enforcement  visit.   It
     would then have been for the Judge to decide the weight to be given  to
     their evidence.  Secondly, where there has been a procedural error,  it
     is a question of fairness.  It is quite possible, as  accepted  by  Mr.
     Shah, that the appeal would go the same way.  However,  in  failing  to
     allow the Appellant to present his case both in excluding the  evidence
     of his witnesses, and in excluding his typed witness statement prepared
     for the hearing, or taking it into account even when he had stated that
     he would not and when it had therefore not  been  formally  adopted,  I
     find that the Judge has materially erred.


 15. I do not therefore need to consider the grounds of appeal any  further,
     given this finding.


 16. I find that the decision involves the making of  a  material  error  of
     law.  I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10  February
     2010, paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be  remitted
     to the First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error  has  been  to
     deprive a party before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or
     other opportunity for the party's case to be put to and  considered  by
     the First-tier Tribunal.  Given that the procedural  errors  mean  that
     the Appellant  has  not  had  a  fair  hearing  before  the  First-tier
     Tribunal, having regard to the overriding objective, I find that it  is
     appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 17. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of  a
     material error of law and I set the decision aside.


 18. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.


 19. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Cohen.



Signed                                  Date 27 April 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

