
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06264/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 25th July 2019                    |On 02nd August 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                    h m a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr F Aziz, acting as agent for First Law
For the Respondent:    Mr A McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Drake (the judge)  of
    the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 27th February 2019.

 2. The Appellant is a male Iraqi citizen born 2nd June  1994.   He  is  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.

 3. He applied for international protection fearing return to his home area
    because of debts that he had accumulated.  He said that  he  had  debts
    exceeding $110,000 and that creditors wanted repayment.

 4. The Appellant was born  in  Gulan,  in  the  province  of  Raniyah,  in
    Sulaymaniyah governorate in the Iraqi Kurdish region.

 5. He is single, and in Iraq lived with his father, three sisters and five
    brothers.

 6. His application for international protection was  refused  on  1st  May
    2018 and he appealed to the FTT.

 7. The judge found the Appellant to be an incredible witness.   The  judge
    described his account as vague and unsubstantiated.  The judge did  not
    accept that the Appellant  had  satisfactorily  addressed  the  reasons
    given for refusal given by the Respondent.

 8. The Respondent's case was that the Appellant's nationality is accepted,
    but it was not accepted that he was in debt as claimed nor that he  had
    received any threats.  It was  not  accepted  that  he  had  a  genuine
    subjective fear of return to Iraq.

 9. The judge found at paragraph 21.7;

         "The statements produced by the  Appellant  attest  to  him  facing
         claims for legitimate debts, but  not  that  he  faced  threats  of
         anything  other  than  legitimate  action  and  certainly   nothing
         amounting  to  provable  threats  infringing  Convention  or  other
         similar rights protected by HP."

10. The appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

11. In summary the Appellant contended that he feared torture  and  inhuman
    treatment from  his  debtors  in  the  IKR.   He  feared  he  would  be
    physically tortured or killed if  he  did  not  repay  his  debts.   He
    contended the judge failed to consider this point.

12. The Appellant contended that the judge relied on a suggestion  made  by
    the Home Office that he  could  relocate  to  Baghdad.   This  was  not
    possible as he can only speak Kurdish Sorani and cannot  speak  Arabic.
    His individual characteristics would not allow him to live in  Baghdad.



13. The Appellant then quoted Annexes A - F from AA v  Secretary  of  State
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944.

14. The Appellant then contended that he did not  have  family  members  or
    friends in Baghdad.  He is from a  minority  community  and  had  never
    previously been to Baghdad and would not  be  able  to  find  lucrative
    employment.  He would be unable to afford adequate  accommodation,  and
    would face a real risk of destitution.

15. It was submitted that the judge had failed to consider the above issues
    and therefore erred in law.

The Grant of Permission to Appeal

16. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Boyes who found  no
    arguable error of law disclosed in the FTT decision.

17. The Appellant renewed his application, and  permission  to  appeal  was
    subsequently granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Steven  Smith  in  the
    following terms;

         "1.  The judge arguably erred  materially  when  finding  that  the
             Appellant could relocate to Baghdad by failing to consider  or
             apply the country  guidance  concerning  the  availability  of
             internal relocation.  The judge touched on the topic  in  high
             level terms  at  [24]  by  highlighting  the  'resilience  and
             intelligence' of the Appellant which has been able to 'get him
             where he is now'.  However,  the  judge  did  not  mention  or
             address any of the criteria contained in the country  guidance
             concerning the feasibility of return or  the  potential  undue
             harshness of internal relocation highlighted in  AA  (Iraq)  v
             Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
             944.  Arguably, the failure to consider these points  infected
             the judge's findings concerning the feasibility  of  returning
             this Kurdish Appellant to Baghdad.

         2.   All grounds may be argued but the above point has the greatest
             merit."

18. Following the grant of permission to appeal directions were issued that
    there should be a  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  ascertain
    whether the FTT had erred in law such that the decision should  be  set
    aside.

My Analysis and Conclusions

19. At the oral hearing Mr Aziz relied upon the  grounds  contained  within
    the application for permission to appeal.  The main point was that  the
    judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  relevant  country   guidance   when
    considering internal relocation to Baghdad.

20. Mr McVeety submitted that there was no  challenge  to  the  credibility
    findings made by the judge, and that the judge had found the  Appellant
    would not be at risk in the IKR.  The Appellant had  not  challenged  a
    finding  by  the  judge  that  any  necessary  documentation  could  be
    obtained, such as a CSID.  The judge had not considered the case law in
    relation to relocation to Baghdad as he had not made a specific finding
    that the Appellant should return to Baghdad.

21. The judge did not apply the country guidance with reference to internal
    relocation.  I do not find this to be a material error of law.

22. This is because the primary finding made by  the  judge  was  that  the
    Appellant would not be at risk at his home area in the IKR.  The  judge
    did not find the Appellant to be a completely credible  witness  giving
    examples at paragraph 21 of factors which damaged his credibility.

23. The judge's conclusion is that the Appellant had  failed  to  discharge
    the burden of proof.  He had failed to provide satisfactory evidence of
    threats.  The judge did not accept that his family would not be able to
    assist him.

24. The judge did not in fact make a  finding  that  the  Appellant  had  a
    reasonable internal relocation option to Baghdad.  This is mentioned in
    the grounds, but I cannot find any reference to the judge  specifically
    referring to  the  Appellant  relocating  to  Baghdad.   The  judge  at
    paragraph 24 stated that the Appellant could  return  and/or  relocate.
    The judge found the Appellant's  own  evidence  indicated  that  he  is
    "purely and only an economic migrant."

25. The judge found in paragraph  29  that  it  would  be  "reasonable  and
    proportionate to expect the Appellant to return to his family  area  in
    Iraq or to some other area when he can speak either  Sorani  or  Arabic
    and be safe there."

26. I do not find that there is any realistic  challenge  to  the  findings
    made by the judge in relation to credibility and risk on return in  the
    Appellant's home area.  All that is said  in  the  grounds  upon  which
    permission to appeal was granted, is that the judge failed to  consider
    that the Appellant would face torture and inhuman  treatment  from  his
    debtors in the IKR.  The judge did not fail  to  consider  that  point.
    The judge considered it and rejected it and gave reasons for so  doing.



27. The judge did not accept that the Appellant's family would be unable to
    help him, and did not accept that they would be unable to provide  copy
    documents.  In fact the Appellant's family did send  documents  to  the
    Appellant from Iraq.  These documents are in the Tribunal file and were
    sent by one of the Appellant's brothers.

28. The Appellant's own account in his screening interview  when  answering
    question  6.3  when  asked  whether  he  intended  to  have  additional
    documents sent from Iraq, was that if anything was needed "I can  bring
    from Iraq."

29. In his substantive asylum interview he was asked at question 60 whether
    he had a CSID card and replied that he did and Iraqi  citizenship.   He
    said that these documents were with his family at home in Iraq.

30. He was then asked at question 64 whether his family were able  to  send
    his passport and ID documents from Iraq and he  said  yes  although  he
    would need some  time  as  it  is  not  easy  from  Iraq,  and  if  the
    interviewer wanted "they can send image from me I can also  do  it  the
    easy way."

31. It is apparent that the Appellant remained in contact with  his  family
    in Iraq and that they sent him numerous documents.  Those  are  on  the
    Tribunal file together with translations.  In the main they  relate  to
    his claim that he owed money.

32. I conclude that the judge has not materially erred in law by failing to
    consider  country  guidance  in  relation  to  internal  relocation  to
    Baghdad.  The judge's findings are that the Appellant is not at risk in
    his home area within the IKR, and that his  family  could  provide  him
    with his CSID and passport, as that is  what  the  Appellant  confirmed
    when he was interviewed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FTT does not disclose a material error  of  law.   I  do
not set aside the decision.  The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.  I make  an
anonymity order because the Appellant has made  a  claim  for  international
protection.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             25th July 2019




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall             25th July 2019

