
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/06326/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 5 November 2018                            |On 18 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                     N S
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms H Short, Counsel instructed by BHT Immigration
Services
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsey, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to Rule 13  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum  Chamber)  Rules
2014.  I continue that order pursuant to Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008: unless the Upper Tribunal or  a  court  directs
otherwise, no report  of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of  publication
thereof  shall  identify  the  original  appellant,  whether   directly   or
indirectly.  This order  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all  parties.   Any
failure to comply with this order could  give  rise  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Behan sitting at Hatton  Cross  who  dismissed  his
    appeal having heard full  oral  submissions  from  the  respondent  and
    sharply curtailed oral submissions followed by written submissions from
    the appellant.

 2. There is a full note in the Record of Proceedings about the  discussion
    which took place between Counsel and the judge  about  this  method  of
    proceeding.

 3. It is patently unfair and improper to allow discursive oral submissions
    from one party and  then  curtail  the  oral  submissions  due  to  the
    lateness of the hour, refusing to reconvene for proper oral submissions
    to be completed.

 4. Unfortunately, there is no alternative but to set this  decision  aside
    and order that it be remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to  be
    fixed with no findings of fact or credibility preserved.

DECISION

 5. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:

   The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error on  a
   point of law.

   I set aside the previous decision.  The decision in this appeal  will  be
   remade in the First-tier Tribunal on a date to be fixed.


Date:         14 December 2018               Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson
                                                 Upper Tribunal Judge
Gleeson



