
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07065/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 September 2018                 |On 20 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BAGRAL


                                   Between

                                  AMJAD [N]
                        ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT made
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr C Cole, Solicitor
For the respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                                ERROR OF LAW

Summary of asylum claim

      1. The appellant claims to be a national of Syria. He contends that he
         has a well-founded fear of persecution in Syria from  State  agents
         and of serious  harm  in  consequence  of  the  prevailing  country
         conditions.



Procedural history

      2. In a decision dated 13 September  2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Buckwell dismissed the appellant's appeal.  Before  Judge  Buckwell
         the respondent disputed the appellant's  nationality;  he  believed
         the appellant  is  a  national  of  Egypt.  The  dispute  over  the
         appellant's nationality was the primary  focus  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal as it was accepted by the respondent that if the appellant
         is a national of Syria his appeal should be allowed.  Both  parties
         adduced expert evidence in support of thier contrary positions. The
         respondent's expert report had been considered and accepted  in  an
         earlier appeal heard by Judge Hillis, and  the  appellant's  expert
         report now adduced before Judge Buckwell disagreed with conclusions
         of the  respondent's  expert.  Judge  Buckwell  properly  took  the
         findings of Judge Hillis as his starting point and  concluded  that
         the appellant's expert report could not override  the  respondent's
         expert report which had been considered fully by Judge  Hillis.  In
         the circumstances, Judge Buckwell concluded that it  would  not  be
         appropriate to prefer the opinions of one expert over the other and
         accordingly found that the appellant had failed to  establish  that
         he is a national of Syria.

      3. The  appellant  applied  for  permission  to  appeal.  The  grounds
         essentially  assert  that  the  decision  of  Judge  Buckwell   was
         inadequately reasoned  and  failed  to  properly  engage  with  the
         appellant's expert evidence.

      4. The Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal on 23 January 2018.



      5. The respondent submitted a rule 24 response dated 12 March 2018  in
         which he submitted that appellant's application for  permission  to
         appeal was not opposed and invited the Tribunal to remit the matter
         to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

Error of law

      6. At the beginning of the hearing Mr Diwnycz confirmed on  behalf  of
         the  respondent  that   the   appeal   was   unopposed   and   both
         representatives agreed that the error of  law  was  such  that  the
         decision needed to be remade completely by the First-tier Tribunal.
         Having  had  regard  to  paragraph  7.2  of  the  relevant   Senior
         President's Practice Statement and the nature  and  extent  of  the
         factual findings required in remaking the decision, I decided  that
         that was the appropriate course.

      7. Whilst uncharacteristic, it is evident  that  Judge  Buckwell  fell
         into error in his approach and  consideration  of  the  appellant's
         expert evidence which was dealt with swiftly at  [39].  The  expert
         evidence was dismissed essentially on the basis that the  issue  of
         the  appellant's  nationality  had  been  resolved  on  an  earlier
         occasion by the respondent's expert. The appellant's expert however
         challenged those findings in a detailed report and  the  judge  was
         required to demonstrate that he had engaged with the  substance  of
         the conflict of opinion and resolve them and/or provide reasons  as
         to  why  the  opinion  of  the  appellant's  expert  could  not  be
         preferred. It is accepted by the respondent that this task was  not
         adequately performed by  Judge  Buckwell,  and  I  agree  that  the
         reasoning at [39] is inadequate and flawed. I thus  find  that  the
         judge erred in law and that the error is material.

Decision

      8. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the  making  of  a
         material error of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.



      9. The appeal shall be remade by the First-tier Tribunal de novo by  a
         judge other than Judge Hillis and Judge Buckwell.


Signed:

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Bagral

Date:
31 December 2018



