

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/07787/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice         |      Decision and Reasons        |
|                                         |Promulgated                       |
|On 29 January 2018                       |      On 15 February 2018         |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?



                                   Between

                                WANDY SANNEH
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:      Mr C Emezie, Solicitor-Advocate, Dylan Conrad
Kreolie Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. The appellant is a Gambian national born on 15 February  1960.  He
          is the subject of a deportation order signed by the respondent  on
          15 December 2014 and he appeals the refusal  of  his  asylum/human
          rights claim on 25 July 2017. He entered in September 2000 on  the
          basis of his marriage which  ended  when  he  obtained  indefinite
          leave to remain in June 2003. Another partner  and  children  then
          applied to join him in the UK.


       2. On 14 March 2014 the  appellant  was  convicted  of  wounding  and
          inflicting grievous bodily harm on his wife; he  had  stabbed  her
          whilst she was in bed and as a result of the  seriousness  of  the
          wound she required hospital treatment. The appellant received a 24-
          month prison sentence, initially suspended for  24  months  and  a
          restraining order prohibiting him from  contacting  his  wife  and
          children or visiting the family home for three years. He  breached
          the terms of that order twice and on 21 June  2014  his  suspended
          sentence was activated but reduced to 18  months.  The  respondent
          then issued a decision to deport.  The  appellant  relied  on  his
          family life although at that time  he  had  no  contact  with  the
          family. On 14 September 2016, the day after being notified of  his
          impending  removal,  he  claimed  asylum  on  the  basis  of   his
          unwillingness to participate in idol worship.


       3.  The  appeal  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Keith  at
          Harmondsworth on 30 October 2017 and was dismissed  by  way  of  a
          determination promulgated on 15 November 2017.



       4. The appellant sought to challenge the determination on  the  basis
          that the judged erred in refusing an adjournment application, that
          he did not appear to have considered the article 8 representations
          made in March 2017 and that the asylum claim had not  been  fairly
          considered. Permission was only granted on the adjournment point.



      Submissions



       5. Mr Emezie submitted  that  an  adjournment  application  had  been
          sought because two witnesses (the appellant's wife and  a  friend)
          had been unable to  attend  the  hearing  and  wanted  the  matter
          transferred to Manchester. After some  discussion,  it  transpired
          that no application had ever been made for such a transfer.



       6. Mr Emezie submitted that the  judge  had  failed  to  address  the
          inability of the witnesses to attend. When it was pointed  out  to
          him that in fact the judge had done so, he submitted that  he  had
          not properly dealt with the issues. He submitted the  evidence  of
          the wife was crucial as the  judge  could  not  assess  the  claim
          without hearing evidence from her.



       7. Mr Emezie complained that although the wife and the  children  had
          written  letters,  the  judge  found  there  was   no   subsisting
          relationship. He submitted that bail had been wrongly  denied  and
          all attempts to obtain evidence for his case  had  been  thwarted.
          The judge had placed too much weight  on  an  out  of  date  Oasys
          report. He had been wrong to find that the  appellant's  wife  did
          not want him back and he speculated about the appellant's  ability
          to integrate (at paragraph 50). Mr Eemzie submitted that the judge
          was wrong to find  that  the  appellant  was  still  an  alcoholic
          because he would not have been able to obtain alcohol  in  prison.
          Whilst the judge claimed to have taken the best interests  of  the
          appellant's child into account, he could not have done so  as  the
          child wants him back home. He relied upon Teinaz v London  Borough
          of Wandsworth [2002]  EWCA  Civ  1040  where  the  position  of  a
          litigant who could not attend through no fault of his own had been
          considered. Mr Emezie  submitted  that  those  principles  applied
          equally  to  witnesses.  The  effect  of  deportation   upon   the
          appellant's wife would be  unduly  harsh  and  he  therefore  fell
          within the exceptions to deportation.  There  were  insurmountable
          obstacles to his  reintegration  to  Gambia  which  had  not  been
          considered.


       8. Mr Kotas responded. He submitted that  the  appellant's  complaint
          was essentially that he had not obtained the  adjournment  he  had
          sought. He pointed out that an  adjournment  had  previously  been
          granted and there  had  been  no  further  application  until  the
          hearing and no reference had ever been made about  any  disability
          suffered by the partner which prevented her  from  attending.  The
          judge had considered the adjournment application at length. He had
          regard to the ultimate test of fairness. He explored what  further
          documentary evidence was sought but the representative  could  not
          assist. The only supporting evidence from the appellant's  partner
          was an email from 2014 which did not support his appeal. Given the
          domestic abuse, there had to be credible evidence from the partner
          that she had had a change of heart. The judge properly  considered
          all the evidence and properly assessed whether there  could  be  a
          fair hearing. The grounds amounted to no more than a disagreement.
          The appellant chose to withdraw from his own appeal hearing. There
          was no reason for him to have done so. He could  have  given  oral
          evidence. He could have challenged the Oasys report.  He chose not
          to do so.  He  is  just  aggrieved  because  he  did  not  get  an
          adjournment. The issue of insurmountable obstacles  had  not  been
          raised in the grounds. The  asylum  claim  was  hopeless.  It  was
          raised late in the day. The appellant could relocate to escape his
          uncle.



       9. Mr Emezie replied. He submitted that there was a statement from  a
          solicitor who confirmed that the appellant's partner  was  willing
          to give evidence. She had attended a bail hearing. The appeal  was
          doomed without the evidence of the partner so there was  no  point
          in him staying for the hearing.  The  judge  acted  unfairly.  The
          asylum claim engaged the convention. Internal relocation was not a
          reasonable option.



      10. That completed submissions. At the conclusion of  the  hearing,  I
          reserved my determination which I now give with reasons.



      Discussion and Conclusions



      11. I have considered the submissions  and  the  evidence  with  care.
          Permission was not granted in respect of the asylum aspect of  the
          claim. In any event, there has been no reason given  for  why  the
          appellant did not pursue that claim at the hearing.  His  decision
          to abandon his article 8 claim  because  there  was  no  point  in
          staying without the oral evidence of his partner does not have any
          relevance to the asylum limb of the claim. The appellant  had  the
          opportunity to pursue it but chose not to. His conduct, along with
          the lack of merit in that ground (as found by Judge  Scott  Baker)
          means there can be no challenge to the findings on asylum.



      12. I now turn to what is essentially the appellant's  complaint;  the
          refusal of an adjournment.  The  Tribunal  files  shows  that  the
          appeal was initially due to be heard on 19 September 2017  but  on
          12 September 2017 the representatives sought an adjournment on the
          basis that the appellant had applied for bail and needed  time  to
          prepare as "all the evidence relating to his private life has  not
          been collected". An adjournment  of  six  weeks  was  sought.  The
          application was refused on the grounds that there was no guarantee
          that bail would be granted and that the appellant could obtain his
          evidence through other means. The application was renewed  at  the
          hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal   Judge   Malcolm   and   an
          adjournment was granted until 30 October 2017.



      13. The matter then came before First-tier Tribunal Keith.  A  further
          application for an adjournment was made at that hearing. The judge
          was told that the bail application had been withdrawn because  the
          appellant's partner had been unable to attend  it  and  the  other
          surety had travelled to Gambia. The  representative  relied  on  a
          statement in which he set down the instructions  he  had  received
          which were that the appellant's partner was willing to attend  the
          hearing if it was transferred to Manchester so that she could more
          easily travel there.



      14. The judge considered this  statement  at  paragraph  30.  He  then
          explored with the representative the further documentary  evidence
          sought and what steps had been taken to obtain it (at  31-32).  He
          noted there was some  inconsistency  in  whether  the  appellant's
          partner was willing to assist (at 32) and the only direct evidence
          from the partner was an email (and so unsigned) from 2014 (at 33).
          He noted also that there was no documentary  evidence  to  support
          the claim that the eldest (adult) child  was  sick  and  had  been
          unable to assist in obtaining further evidence (at 32).



      15. The judge  then  considered  the  test  and  reminded  himself  of
          fairness principles (at 37) and the seriousness of the appeal  (at
          38). He took account of what was said about  documentary  evidence
          but did not find the submission that there was further evidence to
          be reliable given the absence, without any reason, of any  witness
          statements from the appellant's family (at 39 and 40). Although Mr
          Emezie vociferously argued that the statement from  the  solicitor
          was evidence of the partner's willingness to give  evidence,  that
          statement is nothing more than instructions from the appellant  as
          confirmed in the opening sentence. There  is  nothing  to  suggest
          that  the  partner  has  been  consulted  or  that  she  gave  any
          instructions or information to the solicitors. The email  of  2014
          was written at a time  when  the  appellant  was  prohibited  from
          making any contact with his family and that raises  concerns.  The
          judge was clearly mindful of the coercion that could be placed  on
          the partner as evidenced by  the  Oasys  report  (at  39)  and  he
          properly questioned why there was only one friend who  could  have
          given evidence (ibid).   he  questioned  why  there  was  also  no
          statement from the appellant's adult son or why he had not  helped
          to obtain any documentary evidence (at 41). He considered that the
          claim that the appellant's partner would  attend  to  support  the
          appeal was speculative.


      16. Notwithstanding Mr Emezie's submissions, I do not  find  that  the
          judge approached the adjournment application unfairly. He properly
          considered the  evidence  and  the  claims  made  and  reached  an
          entirely  sustainable  conclusion.  In  the  six  weeks  that  the
          appellant had previously obtained, nothing appears  to  have  been
          done to obtain any evidence and the absence of witness  statements
          from the appellant's family without any reasons whatsoever, was  a
          significant red flag to the judge.



      17. The judge properly considered the application for an  adjournment.
          Weighing all the submissions made and the evidence before him,  he
          was entitled to conclude that the refusal of the adjournment would
          not cause  unfairness  to  the  appellant.  the  decision  of  the
          appellant and his representative to them abandon  the  proceedings
          is a matter for them but as  Mr  Kotas  submitted,  there  was  no
          reason for that. The appellant  could  have  given  oral  evidence
          himself and certainly in respect of his asylum claim  he  had  not
          proposed to call any other oral evidence.



      18. The judge carefully considered the  position  of  the  appellant's
          partner as did the sentencing judge and the author  of  the  Oasys
          report. In the absence of any reliable  supporting  evidence  from
          her, it was entirely open to him to conclude that the evidence did
          not suggest that she would  attend  any  hearing  to  support  the
          appeal. It is also significant that no reference  to  her  alleged
          disability was made prior to the second hearing before the  First-
          tier Tribunal.



      19. In conclusion, therefore, I find that the judge did not  make  any
          errors of law which necessitate the setting aside of his decision.




      Decision


      20. The First-tier Tribunal did  not  make  any  errors  of  law.  The
          decision to dismiss the appeal is upheld.









      Anonymity



      21. I was not asked to make an anonymity order and, in any event,  see
          no reason to do so.

    Signed



       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 12 February 2018






