
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07993/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 13 November 2017                   |On 23 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB

                                   Between

                                   s i i a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Evans, Duncan Lewis Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sudan who was arrested on 3 June 2012  in
    the UK having been found concealed in the back of a lorry.  He  claimed
    asylum.   Investigation  demonstrated  that  the  appellant  had   been
    fingerprinted in Italy in August 2011 and had previously claimed asylum
    there.  As a result, it was decided that he should be returned to Italy
    under the Dublin II Regulations.  A formal  request  was  made  of  the
    Italian authorities to accept responsibility for his asylum claim.   No
    response having been received, on 6 July 2012 it was deemed  that  they
    had accepted responsibility which was subsequently acknowledged by  the
    Italian authorities.  As a consequence, the  appellant's  asylum  claim
    was certified on safe third-country grounds.  Removal  directions  were
    set to Italy for 26 July 2012 but were subsequently cancelled.

 3. On 2 August 2012, the respondent refused the  appellant's  claim  under
    Art 3 of the  ECHR  and  certified  the  claim  as  clearly  unfounded.
    Removal directions were then set for 16 August 2012 but were  cancelled
    as a  result  of  a  judicial  review  application  being  filed.   The
    appellant was granted temporary release on 14 August 2012.

 4. On 12 November 2015, the Secretary  of  State  further  considered  the
    appellant's claim under Arts 3 and 8 of the ECHR based upon his removal
    to Italy.  His claim was refused and again  certified.   The  appellant
    was detained on 22 March 2016 and removal directions set for  12  April
    2016.  These were again cancelled after a further judicial review claim
    was filed.  The respondent  then  withdrew  the  certification  of  the
    appellant's human rights claim conferring, as a result,  an  in-country
    right of appeal.

 5. The appellant appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   Judge  Barcello
    dismissed the appellant's appeal under Arts 3 and 8 of  the  ECHR.   He
    found that the appellant's removal to Italy did not  breach  his  human
    rights.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  which
    was granted by the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Scott-Baker) on  21  June
    2017.

 7. On 10 July 2017, the Secretary of State filed a rule 24 notice  seeking
    to uphold the First-tier Tribunal's decision.

The Hearing

 8. At the hearing, Mr Richards, who represented  the  Secretary  of  State
    confirmed that the Secretary of State  had  now  decided  to  determine
    substantively the appellant's asylum claim.  An interview was, he  told
    me, scheduled.  Both representatives acknowledged, therefore, that  the
    appellant would no longer be subject to  removal  to  Italy  under  the
    Dublin II Regulations.  Both  representatives  acknowledged  that  this
    appeal was academic in the sense that  even  if  unsuccessful  in  this
    appeal, the appellant would not  be  removed  to  Italy.   However,  Ms
    Evans, who represented the appellant, indicated that the appellant  was
    concerned that the adverse credibility findings made by Judge  Barcello
    (if unsuccessfully challenged before the Upper Tribunal)  might  affect
    the consideration of the appellant's asylum claim by the  Secretary  of
    State.  Mr Richards maintained the Secretary of State's  position  that
    the decision of Judge Barcello was sustainable and should stand.

 9. Despite the appeal, therefore, being entirely academic  as  to  whether
    the appellant can lawfully be removed to Italy, in  the  light  of  the
    parties' positions I see no  option  but  to  determine  whether  Judge
    Barcello's decision should stand.

Discussion

10. Ms Evans' submissions, relying upon the grounds of appeal, focused upon
    the judge's adverse findings against the appellant and in respect of  a
    supporting witness (Mr S) in concluding that  the  appellant  could  be
    removed to Italy without breaching Arts 3 or 8 of the ECHR.

11. Ms Evans submitted that the judge was wrong  in  law  to  make  adverse
    credibility findings in the circumstances of the appeal.   She  pointed
    out that the respondent was not represented at the  hearing.   Further,
    the respondent's  decision  letter  did  not  call  into  question  the
    credibility of the appellant or Mr S.  The appeal hearing had proceeded
    on the basis that credibility would not be an issue.   She  highlighted
    the fact that that had been stated  as  the  expected  premise  in  her
    skeleton argument.  The appellant, because he  suffered  from  learning
    disabilities and was vulnerable, had  not  given  evidence  before  the
    judge.  Also, the judge had indicated that he  did  not  wish  to  hear
    evidence from Mr S as he had "read the statement and would not have any
    questions for him".  Ms Evans submitted that, in the light of this,  to
    make adverse credibility  findings  against  the  appellant  and  Mr  S
    without raising the matter at the hearing was unfair and in  breach  of
    the Surendran guidelines (appended to MNM v SSHD [2000] INLR 576).   Ms
    Evans  submitted  that  the  judge's  approach  was  material  to   his
    assessment of the evidence as he specifically referred to his  concerns
    about credibility at paras 21 and 22 of his determination.

12. In addition, Ms Evans submitted that in  doubting  the  credibility  of
    both the appellant and Mr S, the judge failed properly to  have  regard
    to the appellant's learning difficulties and wrongly stated that  there
    was no evidence to support that he had a "deficiency  in  his  memory".
    There was such evidence and she referred me to page 39  of  the  bundle
    where AGP stated that: "He  has  significant  problems  with  retaining
    information".

13. Finally, Ms Evans submitted that the judge  had  been  wrong  to  infer
    inconsistencies and reach an adverse credibility finding on  the  basis
    of  the  appellant's  screening   interview   which   the   appellant's
    representative had not had time to deal with.  The interview  had  only
    been sent by the respondent on the Thursday before the appeal was heard
    on  the  following  Monday.   Because  of  the   appellant's   learning
    disabilities, it was  impossible  to  take  instructions  from  him  by
    telephone even with the aid of an interpreter.  As a consequence, there
    was no reference to the issues ultimately  relied  upon  by  the  judge
    arising out of the screening interview  in  the  appellant's  statement
    and, of course, he did not give evidence before the  judge  because  of
    his vulnerability.

14. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Richards submitted that  there  was  no
    material error of law.  He submitted that the judge  had  clearly  been
    aware of the appellant's vulnerable status and made specific  reference
    to it in para 12 of his determination and  was  aware  of  his  medical
    condition in paras 22 and 23.  Mr Richards submitted that the judge was
    entitled to  accept  that  the  appellant's  and  Mr  S'  evidence  was
    exaggerated.  He was entitled, Mr Richards submitted, to reach his  own
    view on the evidence.  Further, in any event, the credibility  findings
    had no impact upon the  judge's  overall  decision  and  therefore  any
    errors were not material.  He submitted that there was no reference  in
    the judge's conclusion to the adverse credibility finding he had  made.
    He submitted that the judge found, in effect, that there was no  reason
    why Mr S could not accompany  the  appellant  to  Italy  and,  thereby,
    overcome any risk to him and breach of his human rights as a vulnerable
    person in Italy.

15. In substance, I accept Ms Evans' submissions.  It is clear to  me  that
    the Secretary of State in her decision letter  did  not  challenge  the
    credibility of the appellant or of Mr S.  The Secretary  of  State  was
    not represented before the judge and so  could  not  be  said  to  have
    departed from that position.  It was the starting position  before  the
    judge at the hearing.  It was specifically referred to as a premise  in
    the skeleton argument of the appellant's representative.  So far  as  I
    can see, the judge never suggested otherwise.  Indeed, his approach  to
    whether Mr S should give evidence is more consistent with a  view  that
    his credibility was not in issue than that it was.

16. Of course, a judge is entitled, in appropriate circumstances, to  raise
    matters of credibility  even  if  the  Secretary  of  State  does  not,
    including when the Secretary of State is  not  represented.   Fairness,
    however, requires that if a  judge  has  any  concern  in  relation  to
    evidence and the credibility of  a  witness  (including  the  appellant
    himself) then he should  raise  those  concerns  with  the  appellant's
    representative.  That is reflected in  guideline  5  of  the  Surendran
    guidelines which is in the following terms:

         "Where no matters of  credibility  are  raised  in  the  letter  of
         refusal but, from a reading of  the  papers,  the  [judge]  himself
         considers there are matters of credibility  arising  therefrom,  he
         should similarly point these matters out to the representative  and
         ask that they be dealt with, either in examination of the appellant
         or in submissions."

17. It is clear to me that the judge  did  approach  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant and Mr S on the basis that he doubted their credibility.   In
    para 21, when he is dealing with Mr S' evidence as to  the  implication
    for the appellant if he is returned to Italy, the judge stated:

         "I have serious concerns about the credibility of the  evidence  of
         both the Appellant and his cousin [namely, Mr S]."

18. Likewise, in para 22 he stated that he approached Mr S':

         "assessment of the  Appellant's  capabilities  with  great  caution
         given my concerns as to his credibility."

19. I do not accept Mr Richards' submission that  the  judge  assessed  the
    evidence and the risk to  the  appellant  of  returning  to  Italy  and
    credibility was immaterial to his findings.   That  is,  with  respect,
    impossible to reconcile with what the judge says at paras  21  and  22.
    The impact upon the appellant included the impact upon him due  to  his
    claimed epilepsy, learning difficulties and cerebral palsy.  Mr  S  was
    familiar with the appellant and his evidence concerning the impact upon
    the appellant of return was found by  the  judge,  given  his  "serious
    concerns" about  Mr  S'  credibility,  as  evidence  which  "sought  to
    exaggerate their circumstances in Italy so as to enhance  their  claims
    to remain in the UK."

20. Despite the judge's reference to the professional evidence, the adverse
    credibility finding was  material  to  his  ultimate  conclusion.   The
    appellant, or more accurately his representatives, had no clue that the
    judge would take a number of points against the appellant and Mr  S  to
    doubt their credibility.  It had not been raised prior to  the  hearing
    and was not raised at the  hearing.   This  was,  in  my  judgment,  in
    itself, unfair and the judge's  findings  are  accordingly  flawed  and
    cannot stand.

21. But, in addition, I also accept Ms Evans' submission that the judge  in
    para 21 was wrong to say that there was no evidence that,  due  to  his
    learning difficulties, the appellant had a "deficiency in his  memory".
    The GP's letter did support that.  The respondent's refusal letter  did
    not doubt the appellant suffered from learning difficulties.   At  para
    26, the Secretary of State accepted that:

         "Your  client   suffers   from   epilepsy   and   severe   learning
         difficulties.  He also has other  health-medical  issues  including
         cerebral palsy for which he has been  clinically  diagnosed.   Your
         client requires assistance with day-to-day activities like cooking.
          He also requires help when he is out and about as he has no  sense
         of danger and needs guidance when crossing the road.   Your  client
         has been heavily reliant on his cousin who has provided  this  care
         for him on (sic) route to the UK and since their arrival."

22. Having summarised this paragraph in para 22 of his judgment, the  judge
    went on to doubt Mr  S'  assessment  of  the  appellant's  capabilities
    because of his concerns about his credibility.  Mr S' assessment of the
    appellant's capabilities was unchallenged by  the  respondent  and  the
    appellant's representatives were not put on notice at the hearing  that
    his assessment was not accepted.

23. Further, I see considerable force in  Ms  Evans'  submission  that  the
    judge failed to take into account the appellant's  vulnerabilities,  in
    particular his learning difficulties, in  assessing  the  evidence.   I
    accept, as  Mr  Richards  submitted,  that  the  judge  refers  to  the
    appellant's "claimed vulnerabilities" in para 12 but that  was  in  the
    context of the conduct of the hearing.  Whilst also the judge  referred
    to the appellant's conditions, he appears to do  so  in  a  conditional
    sense referring to them as "claimed" (see para 12) and "potential" (see
    para 22).  Whilst there was not then (although there is now)  a  formal
    diagnosis, there  was  the  supporting  letter  from  the  GP  and  the
    respondent in para 36  of  the  refusal  letter  did  not  dispute  the
    appellant's conditions.  The issues raised, in particular  in  relation
    to the screening interview and the appellant's account of  his  journey
    to the UK relied upon in para 21, give me  serious  cause  for  concern
    that  the  judge  did  not   properly   factor   in   the   appellant's
    vulnerabilities.  Ms Evans placed  reliance  upon  the  fact  that  the
    screening  interview  had  only  been  disclosed  to  the   appellant's
    representatives shortly before the hearing and at a time  when  it  was
    not possible to take proper instructions upon it in  order  to  include
    any explanation in the appellant's witness statement: it  always  being
    remembered that the appellant was not fit to give oral evidence.   That
    was a matter which, of course, the  appellant's  representatives  could
    have raised with the judge.  It may be that they should  have  done  so
    but, of course, again since any discrepancies were not issues raised by
    the respondent, the appellant's representatives were 'in the dark'  and
    had no reason to expect the judge to take the points  that  he  did  to
    doubt both the credibility of the appellant and Mr S.

24. The importance of having  due  regard  to  the  vulnerabilities  of  an
    appellant both in the conduct of the hearing and in the  assessment  of
    his evidence has recently been authoritatively stated by the  Court  of
    Appeal in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.  This  decision
    postdated  the  hearing  before  the  judge  and,  in  large   measure,
    reinforces the long-recognised need for caution and care  both  in  the
    conduct of a hearing and in the assessment of evidence,  including  the
    determination of credibility when an appellant's evidence (or  that  of
    another witness) is being assessed.  The emphasis, however, in AM does,
    perhaps, sharpen and intensify the importance of ensuring the procedure
    at the hearing is scrupulously fair and of the cautionary  approach  to
    the assessment of evidence given by an individual with demonstrable  or
    (even) potential vulnerabilities.

25. For the reasons I have given, I am satisfied that the judge  materially
    erred in law in  reaching  his  adverse  findings  in  respect  of  the
    appellant's claim to be at risk on return to Italy.



Decision

26. The First-tier Tribunal's decision involved the making of an  error  of
    law and the decision cannot stand.  I set it aside.

27. The only course open to me, despite the continuing academic  nature  of
    this appeal, is to remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for a de
    novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge Barcello.  I do so fully
    expecting that no such appeal hearing will ever take place  given  that
    it is academic as the appellant is not, and will  not  be,  subject  to
    removal to Italy under the Dublin II Regulations.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]

                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                           22, November 2017
