
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07413/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18 February 2019                           |On 21 02 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     KVN
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Muzira of Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Widdup promulgated on 6 December 2018, in which the
    Appellant's appeal against the decision to refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claims, in the context of deportation, dated 30  May  2018
    was dismissed.

 2. The Appellant is a national of Vietnam, who was  first  encountered  in
    the United Kingdom in  2012,  at  which  point  he  claimed  to  be  an
    unaccompanied minor (albeit he has since stated that he is in  fact  13
    years older than originally claimed) and absconded from foster care two
    days later.  He next came to the attention of the authorities  in  2017
    when he was arrested by the police, following which on 4 December  2017
    he was convicted of production of a class B drug and was  sentenced  to
    12 months' imprisonment.  The Appellant claimed asylum in early 2018 on
    the basis that he was at risk from loan sharks in Vietnam and had  been
    trafficked  by  them  to  the  United  Kingdom  to  work  here  without
    remuneration, albeit there is a negative conclusive grounds decision in
    which he is not accepted as a victim of  trafficking.   The  Respondent
    refused the Appellant's claim on the basis it was not considered to  be
    credible, and in any event, there was a sufficiency of  protection  and
    the option of internal  relocation  within  Vietnam  available  to  the
    Appellant.

 3. Judge Widdup dismissed the  appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  6
    December 2018 on all grounds.  Before the First-tier Tribunal, the only
    ground pursued on behalf of  the  Appellant  was  in  relation  to  his
    protection claim, it being accepted that he didn't meet the family  and
    private life exceptions to deportation under the Immigration Rules.  In
    summary, the appeal was dismissed on the basis of  adverse  credibility
    findings against the Appellant.

The appeal

 4. The Appellant appeals on the basis that the First-tier  Tribunal  erred
    in law in failing  to  make  adequate  findings  on  the  core  of  the
    Appellant's protection claim; focusing on and attaching too much weight
    to the delay in making a protection claim; failing to  give  sufficient
    weight to the finding that the Appellant's claim  was  consistent  with
    background evidence and further in placing reliance on the  Appellant's
    previous agreement  to  be  voluntarily  returned  to  Vietnam  (albeit
    withdrawn) on the basis that there was a  real  possibility  given  his
    hearing  problems  that  he  did  not  understand  the  nature  of  the
    disclaimer that he signed.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Scott Baker on all grounds, with a further comment that there  appeared
    to be no consideration by the First-tier Tribunal  as  to  whether  the
    Appellant should be treated as a vulnerable witness.

Findings and reasons

 1. At the oral hearing before me,  Mr  Bramble  conceded  that  there  was
    sufficient merit in the grounds of appeal for the finding of  an  error
    of law and the parties agreed that in the circumstances the decision of
    the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside and the appeal remitted for
    a de novo hearing before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. This concession on behalf of the Respondent were appropriately made and
    I agree that there was an error of law in the  decision  under  appeal.
    The First-tier Tribunal  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  account  was
    consistent with both expert and medical  evidence,  as  well  as  being
    supported by background evidence, but  in  any  event  the  Appellant's
    claim was not found to be credible.  The reasons for this included that
    when the Appellant was first encountered by the police in 2012, he gave
    a false and identity and failed to claim asylum at the  time.   It  was
    not accepted that when he was placed in foster care  at  that  time  he
    continued to be  under  the  control  of  traffickers  and  could  have
    therefore claimed asylum at the time.  It was found that the  Appellant
    had not given any reasonable explanation for the use of  a  false  name
    and date of birth  when  first  encountered  either.   The  Appellant's
    evidence as to when he was physically beaten in Vietnam was  considered
    to be inconsistent on the dates between his asylum interview  and  that
    recorded in the medical report relied upon, which contained far greater
    detail than the original  vague  account  given  at  interview.   These
    inconsistencies, taken together, were found to undermine  significantly
    a core element of the Appellant's account.

 3. Further, the First-tier Tribunal found that fact that the Appellant had
    signed a disclaimer form for voluntary return to Vietnam on  5  January
    2018  was  inconsistent  with  his  claimed  fear  on  return  and  the
    Appellant's explanation that he did not understand the contents was not
    accepted given that he had signed it and it  was  also  signed  by  the
    interpreter who  confirmed  it  had  been  read  to  the  Appellant  in
    Vietnamese and he had understood.

 4. Overall, the First-tier Tribunal found  that  the  Appellant's  actions
    since arriving in the United Kingdom have at times been  dishonest  and
    misleading to the police and immigration authorities and his account of
    his experiences in Vietnam in relation to an important  aspect  of  his
    claim has  at  times  been  vague  and  at  other  times  inconsistent.
    Additionally, reliance was placed on section 8 of the Asylum (Treatment
    of Claimants etc) Act 2004 to damage the Appellant's credibility.

 5. I find that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law  for  the  reasons
    set out in  the  grounds  of  application  for  permission  to  appeal,
    primarily on the basis that there is a lack of adequate findings as  to
    the core of the Appellant's protection claim with  adverse  credibility
    findings being made essentially on one relatively  small  inconsistency
    as to the date of an attack in Vietnam,  delay  in  making  the  asylum
    claim and the signing of a disclaimer.  On the latter,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal was well aware that the Appellant is deaf in one ear and there
    had previously been interpretation difficulties  as  a  result  in  the
    course of the appeal, such that  the  Appellant's  explanation  was  at
    least plausible, albeit this factor was not considered or rejected when
    assessing  the  Appellant's  explanation.   There   are   no   findings
    whatsoever about the Appellant's claim to have borrowed money from loan
    sharks, whether in fact he had been physically beaten  on  one  or  two
    occasions in Vietnam and whether in any event he would be  at  risk  on
    return, there is only a global rejection of the claim on the  basis  of
    adverse credibility findings.  In the context of a claim  found  to  be
    consistent with background country information, expert evidence  and  a
    medical report, the findings are insufficient and amount to an error of
    law.

 6. In all of the circumstances, there are no findings of fact which can be
    preserved from the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  the  error  of
    law infects the whole decision and as such it is necessary  to  set  it
    aside.  It is  appropriate  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing given the significant  extent  of  fact-
    finding required to determine the appeal afresh.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  did  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such it is  necessary  to  set  aside
the decision.

I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a  de  novo  hearing
before any judge except Judge Widdup.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity due to the nature of this asylum claim, which  includes  a
claim that the Appellant is a victim of trafficking.   No  report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.

Signed        [pic]        Date     18th February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson

