
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07660/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under Rule 34 of the                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules    |                              |
|2008                                         |On 23 June 2020               |
|On 8 June 2020                               |                              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     HA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Iraq.   I  make  a  direction  regarding
    anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal
    Rules) Rules 2008.  I do so because this is  a  protection  claim  (see
    Guidance note 2013 No 1: Anonymity Orders).   Unless and until a  court
    directs otherwise the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  refer  to  him.   This
    direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure
    to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

The Background

 2. The appellant with permission, appeals  against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal  (Judge  Mack)  (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the
    "FtTJ")  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  7  October  2019,
    dismissed his protection claim.

The factual background:

 3. The background to the appellant's protection claim is set  out  in  the
    determination of the FtTJ at paragraph 13 and in the decision letter of
    the Secretary of State issued on 31 July 2019.

 4. In a decision letter dated 31 July  2019  the  respondent  refused  his
    claim for asylum. It was accepted that he was a national of Iraq and of
    Kurdish ethnicity. The decision letter began by assessing  his  factual
    claim to be at risk of an honour crime and  his  asserted  relationship
    with a woman, D, whilst in Iraq,  and  his  associated  claim  to  have
    received threats from family and the position  of  influence  of  those
    involved which led to him leaving Iraq. For the reasons set out in  the
    decision letter, the respondent did not accept that the  appellant  had
    been targeted as a result of any relationship that he had with  D  when
    in Iraq. Nor did it accept that the  appellant  had  given  a  credible
    account that he also feared Hashdi Shaabi (see  paragraphs  55  -  58).
    Consideration was given to the humanitarian situation in Iraq but  that
    in his home area there was no evidence to suggest that the humanitarian
    situation was worse than in other areas of Iraq. As to the  feasibility
    of return the decision letter made reference  to  the  decision  in  AA
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 and that in relation to the  IKR  the
    appellant would be able to relocate there where he would not be at risk
    of harm. The decision letter also made reference to the  importance  of
    the CSID document but that based on his own evidence he would  be  able
    to access the necessary documentation both to return and to  internally
    relocate if necessary.

 5. His claim was therefore refused on all grounds.

 6. The appellant lodged grounds  of  appeal  against  that  decision.  The
    appeal against that decision came before the FtTJ on the  19  September
    2019 and in the decision promulgated on 7 October 2019 his  appeal  was
    dismissed.

 7. The FtTJ had the opportunity of hearing oral evidence of the  appellant
    alongside the documentary  evidence  that  had  been  advanced  on  his
    behalf. The judge is set out her findings of fact at  paragraphs  51  -
    68. Whilst the judge accepted  that  documentary  evidence  within  the
    appellant's bundle demonstrated that honour killings occur in Iraq, for
    the reasons set out  within  that  judgement,  the  FtTJ  rejected  his
    account of being at risk  of  harm  in  this  regard.  The  judge  gave
    adequate and sustainable reasons for reaching the conclusion  that  the
    appellant had not given a credible or plausible account  or  which  was
    consistent as to the factual circumstances relating to his relationship
    with the woman D, or that she was connected to the KDP or that  he  had
    been threatened by D's family or A's family and that  he  would  be  at
    risk of honour killing and thus be unsafe for him  to  be  returned  to
    Iraq.  The judge therefore rejected his factual claim.

 8. In relation to return to Iraq the FtTJ made reference to the  issue  of
    relocation to the IKR, and having considered the decisions in  AAH  and
    AA(Iraq) reached the conclusion that  the  appellant  could  contact  a
    family member to obtain a replacement CSID. The FtTJ's analysis as  set
    out at paragraphs 74 - 85 was to the effect that it would not be unduly
    harsh or unreasonable for the appellant to relocate to the IKR.

 9. The appellant applied for permission to appeal the  decision  advancing
    two grounds.  Those grounds were drafted by Counsel who had represented
    the appellant before the FtT.

10. Ground 1 asserted  that the FtTJ had erred in law in her evaluation  of
    credibility by mis applying the standard of  proof,  unfairly  reaching
    conclusions without offering  the appellant the opportunity to  address
    them, by engaging in unwarranted speculation and failing to follow  the
    approach to credibility  set  out  KB  and  AH  (credibility-structured
    approach) Pakistan [2017] UKUT 00491. The  grounds  then  proceeded  to
    challenge the credibility assessment made by the FtTJ by  reference  to
    specific paragraphs as identified at paragraphs 4-15 of the grounds.

11. Ground 2 submitted that the FtTJ had erred in law ( even if  his  claim
    of threat of honour violence was not accepted) in her analysis  of  the
    issue of return and relocation to Iraq by failing to properly apply the
    then Country Guidance case of AAH ( Iraq)  and   by  reference  to  his
    home area, which was a contested area, and any difficulties there would
    be in obtaining documentation and that the FtTJ had failed to  consider
    properly his circumstances in the IKR.

12. Permission to appeal was initially refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
    however  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Blundell  granted  permission  to  the
    Appellant on Ground 2 only. UTJ Blundell stated as follows:

         "The appellant is an Iraqi national who originates from a  formerly
         contested area. He sought asylum on the basis that he was  at  risk
         because he had a relationship with a woman called D,  whose  family
         did not approve of  their  relationship.  That  claim  was  roundly
         disbelieved by Judge Mack. The judge accepted  that  the  appellant
         could not return to N or to Baghdad. She concluded that it would be
         safe and reasonable for him to return to the IKR.

         By ground one  it  is  asserted  that  the  judge's  assessment  of
         credibility is vitiated by various legal errors. I do not  consider
         this ground to be arguable. On a fair reading of the decision as  a
         whole, it cannot properly be said  that  the  judge  prejudged  the
         appellant's credibility or that she applied the wrong  standard  of
         proof. The judge was entitled to attach weight to the  matters  she
         identified as militating against the  appellant's  credibility  and
         there is no indication that she approached her task with  a  closed
         mind or that she applied a standard of proof other than  the  lower
         standard. Nor can it properly be said that the judge fell into  the
         error considered by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga [2005] INLR  377
         and subsequent authorities. As is clear from  [23]  in  particular,
         the judge was  alive  to  the  appellant's  vulnerability  and  the
         consequences of that vulnerability from the outset.

         Ground two is more meritorious, however,  by  this  ground,  it  is
         contended that the judge erred in  her  approach  the  question  of
         whether the appellant could obtain a replacement CSI D document and
         could relocate to the IKR. At first blush, the judge's analysis  at
         paragraphs 77 - 85 as detailed and thorough. It is arguable however
         that she failed to take at least one material matter  into  account
         which is at the appellant's home area (and therefore  the  location
         of the family book) is in N, a  formerly  contested  area.  On  the
         basis of the country guidance as is stood  at  the  time  that  was
         arguably a material matter in deciding whether either the appellant
         (or proxy) could obtain a new CS ID. In the circumstances, I  grant
         permission on the second ground only."

13. The matter was  then  listed  for  an  oral  hearing.  The  matter  was
    adjourned in the light of the COVID-19 pandemic and  the Upper Tribunal
    issued directions (dated 1 April sent out on the  17th  April)  in  the
    light of the Covid-9 pandemic,  inter  alia,  indicating  that  it  was
    provisionally of the  view  that  the  error  of  law  issue  could  be
    determined without a hearing and inviting submissions on that issue and
    also the error of law of issue.

The submissions of the parties:

14. In response to those directions, the first  submissions  received  were
    those from the respondent (rather than the appellant).

The respondent's submissions:

15. On 30 April (received on 4 May 2020), the Secretary of State responded.
    It was submitted that Judge Blundell considered it  arguable  that  the
    Judge  failed  to  take  into  account  material  matters,  namely  the
    appellant's home area is a formerly contested area. On the  caselaw  as
    it stood at the time, it is arguably a material matter on  whether  the
    appellant or a proxy could obtain a new CSID.

16. Thus the respondent accepted that the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision
    failed to  consider the issue of documentation  in  the  light  of  the
    country guidance case and inviting the Upper Tribunal to set aside  the
    decision for the reasons set out by UTJ Blundell in relation to  Ground
    2.

17. It was further noted that permission had not been granted on  Ground  1
    and that the findings made on credibility remained including  paragraph
    68 in which the FtTJ did  not accept his account that he had  not  been
    in contact with his family.

18. In terms, however, of set aside  the  Respondent  noted  that  the  new
    Country Guidance decision in SMO and others may materially  affect  the
    position on obtaining CSID and on the significance of the  presence  or
    absence of family support. The respondent expressed no strong  view  at
    this stage as to the nature of such a hearing and  suggested  that  the
    views of the appellant would be required.

The appellant's submissions:

19. The appellant's solicitors sent submissions in reply drafted by Counsel
    who had represented the appellant before  the  FtTJ  on  1st  May  2020
    (received 4  May  2020).  In  light  of  the  concession  made  by  the
    respondent it was agreed that the correct course was to set  aside  the
    decision of the FtTJ but  that  the  finding  at  [68]  should  not  be
    preserved.

20. In support of that submission it was stated as follows: -

          1)  Ground  1,  for  which  permission  has  not  been   granted,
             challenged the treatment of credibility in respect of the risk
             of  honour  violence.   Ground  2,  which  has  been   granted
             permission,  and  is  accepted  as  unsafe,   challenged   the
             treatment of the question of return if the threat of  risk  of
             honour violence was not accepted; that  challenge  runs  wider
             than the narrow view taken by the SSHD.

          2) Adverse credibility findings in  respect  one  aspect  of  the
             claim do not necessarily  mean  that  that  extends  to  other
             aspects, see Green LJ in SB (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ
             160 at [43] for  a  recent  observation  in  this  area.   The
             enquiry into the prospect of obtaining a CSID card,  and  what
             does or does not flow from that was deficient and needs to  be
             conducted properly.  Preserving findings  at  [68],  which  in
             themselves are unclear, complicates what otherwise would be  a
             discrete area of remaking, it further risks an  unfairness  to
             the Appellant.

21. It was therefore submitted that  the appropriate  course  was   to  set
    aside the FTT decision, preserving the findings in respect of the  risk
    of honour violence and to remit this matter back to the FTT for an oral
    hearing,  in which further and up-to-date   evidence  relevant  to  the
    question of obtaining a CSID / INID card can be examined  in  light  of
    SMO.

22. Mr Karnik submitted that  if  the  Tribunal  accepted  the  Appellant's
    approach there would be no reason for a further oral hearing in the UT.
    However if the UT rejected the Appellant's  approach  to  remaking  the
    decision it was submitted that it would be appropriate for that  narrow
    but important issue to be ventilated at  an  oral  hearing   (see   the
    observations of Laws LJ in Sengupta v Holmes [2002] EWCA  Civ  1104  at
    [38]:

         "As I have indicated (paragraph 9) Miss O'Rourke accepts that the
         bystander be taken to possess "some knowledge of legal culture". He
         would know of the central place accorded to oral argument in our
         common law adversarial system. This I think is important, because
         oral argument is perhaps the most powerful force there is, in our
         legal process, to promote a change of mind by a judge. That judges
         in fact change their minds under the influence of oral argument is
         not an arcane feature of the system; it is at the centre of it.
         Knowledge of it should, in my judgment, be attributed to the fair-
         minded and informed observer; otherwise the test for apparent bias
         is too far distant from reality. It is a commonplace for a hearing
         to start with a clear expression of view by the judge or judges,
         which may strongly favour one side; it would not cross the mind of
         counsel on the other side then to suggest that the judge should
         recuse himself; rather, he knows where he is, and the position he
         has to meet. He often meets it."

          1) It was submitted that those observations applied directly to
             error of law hearings in the Tribunal, and in circumstances
             where, as here, fundamental rights are at stake they ought to
             be given particular force.

23. On the 12th May 2020, the Upper Tribunal sent  out  further  directions
    seeking further  written  submission  dealing  with  the  two  remining
    issues; that of preserved findings and the venue.

The respondent 's reply:

24. The Secretary of State responded in submissions sent by email on the 18
    May 2020 (received on 20 May).  It was  submitted  that  the  following
    findings should be preserved:

      a) The appellant is not credible and that his account is a fabrication
         [63]

      b) The appellant was not in a relationship has claimed and the  events
         did not occur [64]

      c) He is not at risk of honour killing [60], [64-65] and [72]

      d) The Red Cross documents do not add to the claim [67]

      e) He is not at risk of the KDP  and  Ali's  family  do  not  hold  an
         influential position [59]

      f) The appellant is not at risk from Ali's family [59-60]

      g) The appellant has not received threats from Ali's family [61]

      h) It is not credible that the appellant has not been  or  is  contact
         with his family and still is [68]

      i) The appellant has not made genuine attempts to  redocument  himself
         while being in the UK [81]

      j) The appellant is a healthy  young  man  who  was  previously  self-
         employed [85]

25. As to the issue of re-making the appeal, it was submitted that in light
    of the limited findings that would be required that it  would  be  more
    appropriate for the appeal to remain in the Upper Tribunal.

The appellant's second reply:

26. There is a reply to the Secretary of State's response from Mr Karnik of
    Counsel representing  the  Appellant,  which  was  sent  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal dated 20 May 2020.

27. The Appellant continues to rely upon his submissions dated 1st May 2020
    (but sent out on 3 June) which in summary contend that:

    (a)  The proper approach is for this matter to be remitted to  the  FTT
    to address the live issues of identity documentation and relocation.

    (b)  Those live issues should be addressed by means of an oral  hearing
    in which up-to-date evidence is adduced.

    (c)  [68] of the FTT decision should not be preserved.

28. It is submitted that in the event  that  the  Appellant's  position  in
    respect of [68] is not accepted, an oral hearing should be held in  the
    UT in  order  to  determine  the  parameters  for  the  redetermination
    hearing.

29. It was stated that the SSHD had not submitted that this matter could be
    resolved without  an  oral  hearing,  and  that  the  Appellant's  oral
    evidence would be required in order to remake the decision.

30.  The  Appellant  accepted  that  it  is  not  open  to  him,  in  these
    proceedings, to challenge the FtTJ's treatment of  him  in  respect  of
    being at risk of honour violence.

31. It was further noted that in her  first  response  to  the  appellant's
    grounds the only paragraph that the SSHD  identified  as  relevant  was
    [68].  The appellant had already made submissions in  respect  of  that
    paragraph. The SSHD had provided no justification for  now  wishing  to
    preserve further findings.

32.  Mr  Karnik  submitted  that  when  granting  permission  UTJ  Blundell
    recognised a  distinction  between  the  issues  of  risk  from  honour
    violence and those identified in the Appellant's second ground.   Being
    found not credible in respect  of  one  aspect  of  a  claim  does  not
    necessarily mean that a person is not to be taken as being credible  in
    respect of another part of their claim.  For example, it was  submitted
    that at [63] the FtTJ finds that "this part" of his  claim  is  nothing
    more than a fabrication  to  bolster  an  extremely  weak  claim;  that
    clearly leaves other parts of his claim open.

33. It was submitted that the SSHD sought to  retain  paragraphs  [81]  and
    [85], yet in granting permission UTJ Blundell  identified  these  among
    the paragraphs he finds problematic. As with [68] these paragraphs  are
    unclear and fail for want of sufficient enquiry (or anxious  scrutiny),
    and by retaining them undermined the enquiry that would be necessary in
    redetermining the appeal in a fair and comprehensive manner.

34. Lastly it was submitted that since the FtTJ considered the appeal,  the
    question of documentation has become further complicated by  COVID  19.
    Any tribunal remaking the decision will have  to  have  regard  of  the
    current situation, that  includes  taking  into  account  the  approach
    currently  applied  by  the  Iraqi  authorities  to  documentation  and
    movement.  That amounts to extensive and new  fact  finding,  which  in
    fairness to all parties is better undertaken in the FTT.

35. I have carefully considered all  of  the  submissions  that  have  been
    provided by the parties in reaching a decision on the  relevant  issues
    and I have done  so  in  the  light  of  the  documentation  before  me
    including the decision under challenge.

Decision under Rule 34 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008

36. Having had full regard to the  Pilot  Practice  Direction:  Contingency
    arrangements in the  First  -Tier  Tribunal  and  Upper  Tribunal,  the
    Presidential Guidance Note No 1 2020 and all documents submitted by the
    parties, I have reached the decision that the decision on  this  appeal
    should be made without a hearing.

37. In the preceding paragraphs I have set out the submissions advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant. It  is  submitted  that  an  oral  hearing  is
    necessary, in light of issues  in  the  case  and  that  a  hearing  is
    necessary in order so that the appellant's representatives are able  to
    raise further issues in terms of fairness  and to allow either party to
    properly respond to such issues or concerns. However,  no  issues  have
    been raised other than those addressed in the  written  submissions.  A
    general submission has been made concerning the value of oral  advocacy
    (see (see the observations of Laws LJ in Sengupta v Holmes [2002]  EWCA
    Civ 1104 at [38]) which I have taken into account.

38. In my judgment there  is  no  complexity  which  necessitates  an  oral
    hearing  to  ensure  fairness.  The  parties  have  been   given   full
    opportunity to  advance  their  respective  submissions  and  to  fully
    participate in the decision-making process. Each  party  has  submitted
    two sets of written submissions and have been asked to directly address
    two issues identified by the Upper Tribunal. There  are  no  issues  or
    concerns to which fairness demands  the  parties  be  given  a  further
    opportunity to respond or a hearing. The appellant  has  been  given  a
    full opportunity to engage in the proceedings and to advance his  case.
    I do not accept that there is any lack of clarity in the  evidence  set
    out in the FtTJ's decision nor is this a reason to list the matter  for
    an oral hearing when seen in the context of this appeal.

39. It has been conceded by the respondent that the decision  of  the  FtTJ
    involved the making of an error of law and should be set aside and  the
    only issues to resolve flow from that concession as  to  venue  of  re-
    making and on what basis.  In  any  event,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    appellant's submissions deal with the issues  that  were  necessary  to
    address, and specifically as to what findings should  be  preserved  or
    not and the venue for any future hearing. I  have  therefore  concluded
    that the matter can be fairly and justly determined without  a  hearing
    and that I should go on to consider those issues which the parties have
    provided their respective submissions on.

Decision on the error of law:

40. As set out in the submission advanced by the respondent, it is conceded
    that the First-tier Tribunal's decision to dismiss the appeal  involved
    the making of a material error of law. I agree with that concession for
    the reasons set  out  in  the  Ground  2  and  the  respondent's  short
    submissions.

41. The issue that remains between the parties is  what  findings  of  fact
    should be properly preserved and whether the appeal should be  remitted
    to the FtT on the outstanding issues or whether it should be re-made by
    the Upper Tribunal.

42. It is accepted on behalf of the  appellant  that  permission  has  been
    granted on ground 2  only.  It  is  further  accepted  in  the  written
    submissions that it is not open  to  the  appellant  to  challenge  the
    FtTJ's findings of fact in relation to the issue of him being  at  risk
    of honour violence. In my judgement it must follow from that concession
    that the findings of fact which are not infected by error of law should
    be preserved. Those factual findings are set out at paragraphs 51 -  68
    with a summary at paragraph 72. Those  paragraphs  concern  the  FtTJ's
    findings which were largely the subject of Ground 1, that relate to the
    appellant's account of being at risk in his  home  area  in  Iraq  (his
    asserted  relationship  with  D,  the  risk  of  honour  violence,  the
    assertion that A's father works for the KDP (paragraph 58), threats  to
    his person in Iraq, material from the British Red Cross  to  help  find
    his girlfriend, and contact with his family). As such those findings of
    fact do not impinge on the issues identified in ground 2  which  relate
    to issues of identity documentation and relocation whereby the  country
    materials relevant to the appellant's home area and/or other  areas  of
    relocation in the context of the most recent country guidance  decision
    of SMO and others will be relevant.

43. I do not accept the submission made on behalf of the appellant that  to
    preserve the findings set out at paragraphs 51 - 68   complicates  what
    is referred to in the  written  submissions  as  a  "discrete  area  of
    remaking" or that to do so would risk any unfairness to the  appellant.
    In particular, it  is  submitted  that  paragraph  68  is  unclear  and
    therefore should not be preserved.

44. At paragraph  68,  the  FtTJ  considered  the  evidence  given  by  the
    appellant and his attempts to contact his family members. The FtTJ  did
    not make findings of fact based on the  position  that  the  judge  had
    found him to lack credibility in general terms but gave  reasons  based
    on the appellant's own factual account and the evidence given  by  him.
    There  is  no  lack  of  clarity  at  paragraph  68  but  sets  out  in
    straightforward terms and reasoning why the FtTJ did  not  accept  that
    the appellant has not been in contact with his family or  that  he  was
    unable to contact his family.

45. That said, on any remaking it would be open to the appellant to provide
    further evidence concerning contact with his  family  when  considering
    the issues relevant to ground to such as documentation, relocation, and
    issues of return. The preservation of paragraph 68  does  not  preclude
    further evidence on this issue and  therefore  cannot  be  said  to  be
    unfair to the appellant.

46. Whilst the respondent has set out a summary of the findings  sought  to
    be preserved in the  written  submissions  (set  out  at  paragraph  21
    above), in my judgement it is sufficient to record that  the  preserved
    findings are those made by the FtTJ  at paragraphs 51 - 68.

47. It is further submitted on behalf of the respondent that paragraphs  81
    and 85 should also  be  preserved.  Paragraph  81  does  not  stand  in
    isolation but should be seen alongside paragraph 80 in which the  judge
    set out an assessment of redocumentation in the UK.  In  light  of  the
    error of law in  my  judgement  those  findings  should  not  stand  as
    preserved findings which relate to the issue of documentation  as  this
    is one area in which the FtTJ did not consider the country  information
    set  out  in  the  former  CG  decision  and   will   require   further
    consideration in the light of the recent  CG decision of SMO and others
    or any further country materials which postdate that decision.

48. The respondent also seeks to preserve paragraph 85  and  in  particular
    that the judge found the appellant to be a "healthy young man  who  was
    previously self-employed." The respondent does not appear  to  seek  to
    preserve any other factual findings or the analysis in that paragraph.

49. Mr Karnik on behalf of the appellant submits that  UTJ  Blundell  found
    paragraph 85 to be "problematic" and therefore should not be preserved.
    That submission does not address the difference between factual  issues
    and issues of analysis. UTJ  Blundell  considered  that  there  was  an
    arguable error in relation to the issue of documentation and the issues
    of return in the context of relocation. I would agree that paragraph 85
    forms part of the analysis of those  issues  which  are  agreed  to  be
    unsafe as the FtTJ' s assessment failed to  consider  material  aspects
    relating to documentation which is also relevant also to the  issue  of
    return and relocation. However, paragraph 85  also  refers  to  factual
    matters which were not in dispute which were based on  the  appellant's
    own evidence such as the appellant was a single man with no  dependents
    who previously worked as a taxi driver. What that  means  is  that  the
    issue of relocation has to be factored in alongside the other  relevant
    issues such as the position  of  the  place  of  relocation,  what  has
    happened in respect of the appellant's home area all of which  will  be
    the subject of further argument and analysis. However,  that  does  not
    change  the  factual  detail  which  comes  from  the  appellant's  own
    evidence.

50. In summary, none of the analysis of the issues of feasibility of return
    and relocation and the  associated  issues  of  documentation   can  be
    preserved in view of the error of law but that does not mean  that  any
    further tribunal will or should ignore factual evidence concerning  the
    appellant's own characteristics particularly when that was the evidence
    which was not in dispute. It is the analysis of  those  factual  issues
    which require further consideration alongside the country materials and
    the most recent CG decision of SMO and others. As paragraph 85 concerns
    analysis of the issues which are  found  to  be  in  error,  I  do  not
    preserve paragraph 85. For the reason that I have set out earlier, I do
    not preserve paragraph 81.

51. As to the venue of the remaking of the decision, having considered  the
    respective submissions of the parties I am satisfied that the extent of
    the oral  evidence  necessary  to  remake  the  decision  that  further
    findings of fact on the issues of return, relocation and  documentation
    which will be necessary are such that they should be considered by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

52. Mr Karnik has also highlighted other issues which arise from  Covid  19
    and that when remaking the decision it will be  necessary  to  consider
    the current situation, that includes taking into account  the  approach
    currently  applied  by  the  Iraqi  authorities  to  documentation  and
    movement which is likely to amount to extensive and new  fact  finding,
    which in fairness to all parties is better undertaken in the First-tier
    Tribunal. I agree with that approach and therefore I have  reached  the
    decision that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier  Tribunal
    for this to be the subject of a further hearing in that Tribunal.

53. For the avoidance of doubt and for the  reason  that  I  have  set  out
    earlier, I preserve the findings of fact made at paragraphs 51 - 68.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss
the appellant's appeal involved the making of an error  of  law.  I  set  it
aside.

The appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Manchester  Hearing
Centre) to be heard by a Judge other than Judge Mack.





Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Dated: 8 June 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal. Any such application must be
received by the Upper Tribunal within the appropriate period after this
decision was sent to the person making the application. The appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the individual and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is in the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration Acts, the appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the notice of decision is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the application is in detention under the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working days
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is outside
the United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday, Christmas
Day, Good Friday, or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the covering
letter or covering email


