



                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07971/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On : 29 August 2017                   |On: 30 August 2017                   |
|                                      |                                     |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [a h]

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Martin, instructed by Barnes Harrild & Dyer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity born on [  ]  1989.
He arrived in the United Kingdom on 15 January 2016 and  claimed  asylum  on
17 January 2016. His claim was refused on 15 July 2016. He appealed  against
that decision and his appeal was heard before the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
was  dismissed  in  a  determination  promulgated  on  16   February   2017.
Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on 12 June 2017.

The appellant claims to come from a village near  Mosul  and  to  have  been
captured, together with other villagers, by Daesh, when  they  attacked  his
village in June 2014. He claims to have been transported  to  Mosul  and  to
have been detained for nine months in various prisons where  he  was  beaten
and tortured, before escaping in March  2015  and  fleeing  to  the  Kurdish
Region of Iraq (IKR). He claims to have resided in a camp in Paramegnoon  in
the IKR and to have been assaulted by a  family  of  Arabs  because  of  his
Kurdish ethnicity.


The respondent, in refusing the appellant's  claim,  accepted  that  he  was
Iraqi and Kurdish but did not accept that he was  captured  or  detained  by
Daesh and did not accept that he was attacked by a family of  Arabs  in  the
IKR. The respondent accepted that the appellant could not  return  to  Mosul
due to the internal armed conflict in  that  area  but  considered  that  he
could relocate to the IKR.

The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  by
First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes on 15 February 2017. Judge Boyes found  that
the appellant would be at risk if returned to an ISIS  controlled  area  but
considered that he would not be returned to such an area in any  event.  For
that reason he did not make any  findings  on  the  appellant's  account  of
capture and torture, which he  considered  to  be  a  collateral  issue.  He
concluded that the appellant could internally relocate to the IKR  where  he
would be able to secure entry and would not be at risk  of  persecution.  He
accordingly dismissed the appeal on all grounds.


Permission to appeal was sought by the appellant on various grounds and  was
granted on the basis that the judge had arguably failed  properly  to  apply
the country guidance in AA (Article 15(c))  [2015]  UKUT  544  and  to  make
findings on material matters.

The matter then came before me on 29 August 2017. Mr Singh  agreed  with  Mr
Martin's submission that the judge's lack of  findings  on  the  appellant's
account of his capture and torture was a material error of law,  given  that
the key  issue  in  the  case  was  internal  relocation  and  that  a  past
experience of torture was relevant to  the  question  of  reasonableness  of
relocation. In view of the judge's failure to  make  any  findings  on  that
material matter, and given also the lack of consideration by  the  judge  of
how the appellant would reach the  IKR  from  Baghdad  and  his  ability  to
remain in the IKR in light of his claim to have no  family  or  support,  it
was agreed by all parties that the judge's decision  was  unsustainable  and
had to be set aside and that the decision in the appeal had  to  be  re-made
in its entirety.

DECISION

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  to  be  dealt  with  afresh,  with  no
findings preserved,  pursuant  to  section  12(2)(b)(i)  of  the  Tribunals,
Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 and Practice Statement  7.2(b),  before  any
judge aside from Judge Boyes.


Signed   [pic]


Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 29 August
2017
