
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07147/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 14 November 2018                      |On 03 December 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                     F H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented, but Mr Hammatt advised and assisted
                    the appellant at the hearing
For the Respondent:    Ms Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

1.   This is an appeal from the decision of Judge of the First-tier
Tribunal (FTT) M A Khan (the Immigration Judge).



Background

2.   By way of background, the appellant is an Algerian national who was
born on 4 May 1980.  She applied originally for a one year visa but she
outstayed her visa and she then returned to the UK again on 1 September
2003.  She then overstayed a spouse visa that she was given and was
arrested in September 2008. She then made an asylum claim which was refused
on 16th May 2018 and a refusal letter was addressed to the appellant on
that day notifying the appellant of her liability to removal from the UK.
The appellant appealed that decision under Section 82 of the Nationality,
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 to the FTT.

The hearing before the FTT

3.   A notice of hearing was sent out in this case to the appellant's
address in Barking on 2 July 2018, notifying her of the hearing on 6 July
2018 at Harmondsworth hearing centre. The appellant was notified that the
case would be heard on that day and that no further directions would be
issued. The notice of hearing also suggested that she should arrive at the
hearing centre no later than fifteen minutes before the hearing.  Previous
directions had been sent out for the service of witness statements,
paginated bundles and so forth.  There was a notice of change of venue sent
out on the same day and the solicitors then instructed, Messrs Montagues,
notified the FTT on 3 July 2018 that they were no longer instructed on
behalf of the appellant.

4.   It seems that on 3 July 2018 new solicitors were instructed, Sabz
Solicitors LLP, who are situated in Manchester. Sabz said it had only
recently been instructed in relation to the matter.  They were instructed
by their client that the previous representatives had failed to prepare a
bundle or advise the client of the date of the hearing. The appellant had
also produced a letter dated 8 June 2018 she which confirmed that the full
hearing was to be heard on Friday, 6 July 2018 at 10am. However, Sabz
represented that that it had detailed instructions from their client that
she requires an assessment from an independent psychologist to assess the
impact of contracting HIV from a previous partner. The appellant has also
provided a letter dated 5 April 2018 from Dr Christopher Wood, which said
that if, for whatever reason, the appellant has to stop her medication she
would rapidly become vulnerable to life-threatening conditions. Sabz
therefore thought that further evidence would be needed and they requested
an adjournment in that letter.

5.   A further fax was sent on 5 July 2018 (the day before the hearing) at
16.35 requesting a further adjournment stating that their client was unwell
and would not be able to attend the hearing "tomorrow".  The instructions
that had been given to Sabz were that the appellant had to see an emergency
doctor that night who would be able to provide documentary evidence before
the FTT.  They were also in contact with Mr Hammatt, who has attended the
hearing before the UT, as I have stated, in an effort to advise and assist
the appellant in the presentation of her case. It appears that Sabz no
longer represent the appellant.

6.   A further letter was sent Sabz on 6 July 2018 stating that, further to
a telephone conversation that morning, they had not been able to reach the
appellant but they had spoken to Mr Hammatt, who had informed them that the
appellant was unable to visit her GP or an emergency doctor.  His
instructions were that she would contact her GP on that day and use her
best endeavours to obtain a "not fit to attend" note or letter.  This was
faxed through to the Tribunal at 11.26 on the day, notifying the FTT and
the Immigration Judge that the appellant had insufficient time to obtain
evidence as to her medical condition.

7.   The UT is now provided with evidence from the Emergency Department of
East Suffolk and North Essex NHS Foundation Trust to the effect that the
appellant was admitted at 19.50 hours on 6 July 2018, the day of the
hearing.  Mr Hammatt has described the appellant as his "partner", although
they live apart in respectively, Hertfordshire and Clacton-on-Sea. It seems
that that the appellant was an emergency admission because there is
reference to a "111 contact", and there is another letter dated 10 July
2018 from Sabz Solicitors to the Tribunal, requesting an adjournment of the
hearing and notifying the Immigration Judge at the hearing that the reason
for the adjournment was that the appellant had attended the hospital on 6
July, having been unable to secure an appointment with her GP. It is stated
that the appellant was unable to get out of bed due to her ill-health and
had to be admitted to the Emergency Department of East Suffolk and North
Essex Hospital that evening. As a BZ invited the Immigration Judge to
consider that evidence when determining whether the hearing should be re-
listed to allow the appellant a fair opportunity to present her case.

Discussion

8.   Unfortunately, there is no evidence that that the last-mentioned
document came to the attention of the Immigration Judge before he made his
decision, which was promulgated on 21 August 2018.  It was only faxed
through, according to the fax transmission report, at 16.29 on 11 July 2018
and the Immigration Judge had heard the case on 6 July 2018.  In fact, the
case was not sent for promulgation until 19 August 2018 but it is not
unusual for documents that are submitted following a hearing not to reach
the judge to whom they are directed for some time. It may well be, indeed,
it is almost certainly the case here, that the Immigration Judge did not
see a copy of the fax dated 11 July 2018 before he reached his decision.

9.   The problems with this case have been compounded by poor legal
representation and a lack of familiarity with tribunal procedures on the
part of the appellant.

Conclusion

10.  Having regard to the need to apply the overriding objective of trying
cases justly and at proportionate expense and the need to act fairly to
both parties in this case, I have decided that it would have been in the
interests of justice to have adjourned the case if the Immigration Judge
had been aware of the true facts.  It is unfortunate that nobody placed the
true facts before him as to the extent of the appellant's medical condition
but those facts are now known. In particular, the appellant did in fact
have a potential emergency condition and she was in fact unable to attend
the hearing on 6 July 2018.

11.  In the interests of justice, the appellant ought to be given a proper
opportunity to present her case.  Obviously, it is incumbent upon her to
prepare for her case and that would include obtaining on her own behalf and
at her own expense an up-to-date indication of her medical condition if it
is relevant to the outcome of her appeal.

12.  Due to an error of procedure, the hearing before the FTT proceeded in
the appellant's absence and that may have been unfair as she was not given
an opportunity to present her case. It is necessary to remit this matter
back to the FTT. She should not take from this that her appeal is
ultimately likely to be successful.

13.  The appeal to the UT is allowed to the extent it is necessary to set
aside the decision of the FTT. There will have to be a de novo hearing.
That hearing can be before any judge of the FTT including the Immigration
Judge, because there is no criticism of this Immigration Judge in the
decision he reached.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed. The appeal is limited to the FTT.

Further directions will be sent out by the FTT.

And anonymity direction is made in this case by the FTT and I continue  that
anonymity direction.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 27 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




The Immigration Judge made no fee award as no  fees  were  payable  in  this
case.


Signed                                  Date 27 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

