
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07406/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 December 2018                      |On 13 February 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                   M Z M M
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Short, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan born on 12  March  1995.   He
    appealed to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the
    respondent dated 25 January 2016 to refuse the  appellant's  protection
    claim.  In a decision promulgated on 28 August 2018, Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Abebrese dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Grounds

 2. The appellant appeals with permission on the grounds that:

    Ground 1:     the judge required corroboration including concerning his
              father being a commander of the Taliban;

    Ground 2:     the judge misunderstood and misapplied the importance  of
              the psychological reports before him;

    Ground 3:     the judge failed to make an assessment  of  the  security
              situation in the appellant's home province of Parwan and  his
              findings in relation to relocation to Kabul were misconceived
              and unsustainable.

Background

 3. The appellant arrived in the UK on 5 June 2011 and claimed  asylum  the
    following day.  That claim  was  refused  on  12  December  2012.   The
    appellant's appeal was allowed and his case remitted to the  respondent
    for further consideration on 20  November  2015.   Subsequent  to  that
    reconsideration the respondent made the decision dated 25 January 2016.
     The appellant claims asylum on the basis that if he were  returned  to
    Afghanistan he would face mistreatment due  to  his  imputed  political
    opinion and a fear of recruitment to the Taliban.

Error of Law Discussion

 4. Mr Avery accepted that the judge had incorrectly required corroboration
    in respect of whether the appellant's father was  a  commander  of  the
    Taliban but submitted that this was not  material.   He  also  accepted
    that the judge had not specifically considered  whether  the  appellant
    faced an Article 15(c) risk in  his  home  area  of  Parwan  but  again
    submitted this was not  material  given  his  substantial  findings  in
    relation to relocation to Kabul.

 5.  Although  Miss  Short  submitted  that  the  judge  required   further
    corroboration at [29] where the appellant had  said  that  it  was  not
    unusual for the government authorities to pursue matters even  after  a
    significant period had elapsed, the judge finding it not  plausible  as
    it was not supported by evidence  that  this  is  how  the  authorities
    conduct the investigations, this is not on all fours with  the  judge's
    erroneous requirement for  corroboration  in  respect  of  whether  his
    father was a commander in the Taliban.

 6. The judge's findings at [29] relate to  something  that  the  appellant
    stated occurred in Afghanistan the judge was entitled to find  that  no
    background information had been  invited  that  might  support  such  a
    claim.  The judge was more than entitled to find that there was nothing
    in the background information before him to support such a claim.   and
    that it was an unsupported assertion.  The fact that  corroboration  is
    not required does not mean that a First-tier Tribunal cannot take  into
    account the absence of documentary evidence which might  reasonably  be
    expected (see ST (Corroboration - Kasolo) Ethiopia [2004] UKIAT 00119).

 7. The judge went on to find that he did not find  it  credible  that  the
    appellant's mother would have been able to prevent the authorities from
    taking the appellant away with them if they were of the mind to do  so.
    The judge made findings, at [30], that it was  not  credible  that  the
    appellant managed to stay for a period of two weeks undetected and then
    managed to leave the country without coming to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities and the judge took into consideration that the  appellant's
    mother and uncle were able to find funds for him  to  travel  within  a
    very short period which, considered in the context of  the  appellant's
    evidence that he came from a poor family, led  the  judge  to  question
    whether or not the appellant's departure  from  the  country  had  been
    planned over a longer period.  Those findings  were  available  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 8. The judge was also entitled to take into consideration, as  he  did  at
    [31], that the background country  information  referred  to  suggested
    that the Taliban do not have an issue with recruitment  and  that  they
    have ample volunteers and  that  although  the  report  suggested  that
    employment and poverty may be a factor in recruitment the judge was not
    satisfied that the appellant fell into these categories and  the  judge
    was entitled to take into consideration as he  did  at  [32]  that  the
    appellant's family were able, at very short notice, to arrange and fund
    his departure.

 9. It was submitted that the judge's findings, at [32],  where  he  stated
    that he did not find that the appellant had "provided evidence" that he
    satisfied the judge that he fell into the categories of unemployment or
    poverty in respect of a factor in recruitment  to  the  Taliban,  again
    erred in requiring corroboration of the appellant's poverty  Whilst the
    judge might have worded this differently, the First-tier  Tribunal  was
    taking into account all  the  factors  including  the  appellant's  own
    witness statement: although the grounds for permission  note  that  the
    appellant had not claimed that  he  was  of  interest  to  the  Taliban
    because he was poor, the appellant stated at paragraph 16, in  response
    to paragraph 17 of  the  refusal  letter  (where  it  stated  that  the
    appellant had not made any suggestions that he lived  in  poverty)  the
    appellant stated that he  and  his  mother  had  enough  food  to  feed
    themselves but they were not rich and had a small house made of mud and
    were not educated with the appellant's mother completely illiterate and
    the appellant's "reading and writing is very bad".

10. It was evident  that  the  judge  was  considering  all  the  evidence,
    including the background country information about recruitment  factors
    and the appellant's claim that he was not rich, as well as taking  into
    consideration that the family had been in  a  position  to  arrange  an
    agent to take the appellant out of Afghanistan at very short notice.

11. The judge also took into consideration that in the appellant's previous
    claim the refusal letter noted that the appellant had asserted that  he
    had managed to stay in his maternal uncle's  area  without  facing  any
    difficulty but that he would have had difficulty  if  he  had  remained
    there  for  a  longer  time.   The  judge  considered   that   in   the
    circumstances if the appellant was wanted by the authorities they would
    have looked for the appellant in his maternal uncle's area.

12. In the context of all of those findings there is no material  error  in
    the judge  erroneously  requiring  corroboration  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim that his father  was  a  commander  of  the  Taliban.
    Although that is part of the appellant's claim the judge notes that the
    core of the appellant's claim was that he was informed  by  his  mother
    that his father had disappeared and that after a period  of  ten  years
    the appellant was a person of interest.  The judge's key findings  were
    that the appellant's claim that it was not unusual for the government's
    authorities to pursue matters even after a significant period  of  time
    was not supported by background country information or otherwise  where
    it might be reasonable  to  expect  such  evidence;  that  it  was  not
    credible that the authorities would not have  taken  the  appellant  if
    they had been minded  to  do  so  (and  the  appellant  gave  confusing
    evidence in relation to whether uniforms were worn); that  it  was  not
    credible that the appellant managed to stay  at  his  maternal  uncle's
    property for two weeks; and that there was no adequate  explanation  as
    to why the family were able to find funds in such  a  short  period  of
    time particularly taking into consideration  the  appellant's  evidence
    that he was not from a rich family.

13. It was Miss Short's submission that the judge  did  not  give  adequate
    consideration to the appellant's documented learning difficulties,  the
    judge noting on two occasions (in  relation  to  one  issue)  that  the
    appellant's evidence had been confusing (about  the  Taliban  uniform).
    However,  the  judge  took  into  consideration  the  evidence  of  the
    appellant's learning difficulties and poor memory  as  set  out  in  Mr
    Selwood's 2012 report and reminded himself, at  [20]  of  Mr  Selwood's
    report, in the conduct of the hearing.   This  was  not  the  principal
    reason for finding against the appellant which was the unlikelihood  of
    the authorities being interested in the appellant's  family  after  ten
    years on from his father's disappearance and the finding  that  it  was
    not  credible  that  the  appellant  would  have  been  a  target   for
    recruitment by the Taliban and that even if he had been, the judge  did
    not accept that his mother would have been able to prevent the  Taliban
    recruiting him if they had so wished.

14. The judge made the findings he did in the context of all  the  evidence
    including the background country information in respect of the  Taliban
    not having difficulties with recruitment, that the  appellant  did  not
    fall into the two factors which might be a  factor  in  recruitment  of
    individuals and I note that this is in relation to  recruitment  rather
    than forced recruitment which is the appellant's claim.  The judge  was
    entitled to find that it was not credible that the  appellant's  mother
    would have been  able  to  prevent  the  Taliban  from  recruiting  the
    appellant if that was what they wished to do.

15. It cannot be properly said that the judge would have come to any  other
    conclusion even if he had accepted that the appellant's  father  was  a
    commander in the Taliban, given the weight of  the  other  factors  and
    findings against the appellant.  In any event the judge went on, in the
    alternative to find that there was sufficiency of protection  available
    to the appellant.  No material error of law is disclosed in ground 1.

16. In respect of the medical evidence Miss Short  relied  on  the  reports
    from Mr Selwood in 2011 and 2012 and it was not disputed that he  is  a
    chartered psychologist.  He  had  provided  reports  and  undertook  an
    assessment in 2011 and gave IQ figures indicating that if the appellant
    had been educated in the UK he would almost certainly  have  been  made
    the subject of a statement of special educational  needs  and  probably
    placed  in  a  special  school  for  children  with  moderate  learning
    difficulties.   The  judge  took  that  into  consideration,  at  [35],
    including that there was an assessment that the appellant  had  a  poor
    working memory.  The judge  took  into  consideration  the  submissions
    including that the appellant had tried his best with his  evidence  and
    also took into consideration  the  respondent's  view  in  the  refusal
    letter that the appellant had managed to provide  evidence  to  support
    his claim to his legal representatives.

17. It was the judge's ultimate conclusion, at  [35],  that  the  appellant
    does  have  learning  difficulties  and  that  he  may  have  had  some
    difficulties, as expressed in the report, in managing  information  and
    responding to questions but that this would not  render  the  appellant
    unable to cope if he were to return to his own country.   Although  the
    grounds and Miss Short criticised the judge for taking into account the
    fact that six years have elapsed since the last report  was  made,  the
    Tribunal could only make findings on the evidence before him.

18. Although it was submitted that the judge misunderstood the evidence and
    the grounds argued that the judge had made an assumption and that  such
    difficulties would "simply disappear" that is not what the judge found.
     It was incumbent on the First-tier Tribunal to take into  account  all
    the evidence, including the age of the reports.  The  fact,  as  relied
    upon  by  Miss  Short,  that  the  reports  might  have  been  prepared
    specifically for the original hearing is irrelevant to that assessment.
     It was not argued that there was anything to prevent  the  appellant's
    representatives  obtaining  a  further  report  in  relation   to   any
    difficulties that he experienced including at the date  of  the  second
    hearing, if that was the case.

19. The judge gave weight to Mr Selwood's report, but was entitled to  find
    that during the time that the appellant had been in the UK  since  that
    report he would have learnt more skills which had enabled him  to  cope
    better in the UK including resilience which he had shown and the  judge
    also took into consideration, at [48], that the appellant had been able
    to show resourcefulness and determination in coming  to  the  UK.   The
    judge will have had in mind all the evidence including the  appellant's
    witness statement that he was at the time of the hearing living on  the
    street and occasionally stayed with a friend but most of the time slept
    on the street.  The appellant also stated that he had tried his best to
    study English and had had difficulties progressing and listed a  number
    of other difficulties.  It was clear that  the  judge  had  taken  into
    account the appellant's resilience, notwithstanding that he was  living
    in poor conditions on the street, in finding that he had  improved  and
    learnt more skills which had enabled him to cope better in the UK.   No
    material error is disclosed in ground 2.

20. In relation to ground 3, as noted Mr Avery accepted that the judge  had
    not considered the appellant's home  area  and  whether  there  was  an
    Article 15(c)  persecution  issue  in  Parwan.   However  it  was  also
    submitted that the judge considered  safety  in  Kabul  as  opposed  to
    considering whether relocation  would  be  unduly  harsh  and  had  not
    adequately considered AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2018]  UKUT
    00118 (IAC).

21. The judge at [40] to [45] considered the  issue  of  return  to  Kabul,
    including in light of AS (Afghanistan) and took into consideration  all
    the  factors,  including  that  the  particular  circumstances  of   an
    individual must be  taken  into  account  (at  [41]).   The  judge  was
    entitled not  to  find  that  the  2012  report  from  Mr  Selwood  was
    conclusive as to the appellant's  abilities  and  any  difficulties  he
    might have at the date of the hearing on the basis of all the  evidence
    before him.

22. Contrary to the grounds the Tribunal was aware of  and  considered  the
    issue of undue harshness, beginning at [41].  Given the appellant's age
    and the lack of any up-to-date medical evidence  it  was  open  to  the
    judge find, at [42] that  the  appellant  would  not  have  significant
    problems.   It was also open to the  judge  to  find  as  he  did  that
    limited weight could be attached to the 2013 Red Cross letter, replying
    to the appellant's tracing request in respect of his family, given that
    it was five years old.  What the judge was saying was that there was no
    further evidence of any steps that had been  taken  to  follow  up  the
    letter from the Red Cross in 2013 (although the appellant  referred  in
    his witness statement to the Red Cross no longer being  in  Afghanistan
    no further details were provided to the First-tier  Tribunal  including
    that might confirm this assertion  and  provide  dates)  and  that  the
    production of the Red Cross letter did not mean the appellant would not
    be able to contact his family on return to Afghanistan.  Those findings
    were available to the First-tier Tribunal.

23. The judge also took into consideration the support that  the  appellant
    would be offered on return that all Afghans are offered  (at  [49])  in
    terms of the integration programmes in addition to vocational  training
    and business support and it was the judge's findings that the appellant
    who was currently of no fixed address would be provided   a  "platform"
    by these programmes to re-establish himself in Afghanistan which  is  a
    country where he speaks the language  The First-tier Tribunal took into
    consideration at [43] the background material and did not consider that
    the appellant would be at risk in Kabul.  Although  complaint  is  made
    that undue harshness is  not  specifically  considered  the  judge  did
    consider   those   factors   including   the   appellant's    potential
    vulnerability and was well aware, at [41], that this was a  factor  but
    concluded for  the  reasons  that  were  available  to  him  that  this
    appellant could internally relocate.  The judge's findings could not be
    said to be irrational and were adequate.  No error of law is  disclosed
    in ground 3.

24. I have reminded myself what was said in MD (Turkey) v SSHD [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1958 that adequacy means no more nor less than that. It  is  not  a
    counsel of perfection. Still less should it provide an  opportunity  to
    undertake a qualitative assessment of the reasons to see  if  they  are
    wanting, perhaps even surprising, on their merits. The purpose  of  the
    duty to give reasons, is in part, to enable the losing  party  to  know
    why he has lost.

25. Any error therefore in the judge's credibility findings which I am  not
    satisfied  in  any  event  is  significant,  and  in  not  specifically
    considering return to the appellant's home area, is not material  given
    both the  weight  of  the  credibility  findings  and  the  alternative
    findings on internal relocation.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal does not disclose an error of law and  shall  stand.
The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Dated:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee was paid I make no fee award.


Signed                                  Dated:  28 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson


