
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07924/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 14 August 2017                     |On 18 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL

Between

                          mr Kheder Hussain Koshnam
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant


                                     and



               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Martin, Solicitor
For the Respondent:    Mr M Matthews, Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  G  J  Ferguson,  promulgated  on  6  March  2017
    dismissing his appeal against the decision of the respondent made on 26
    July 2016 to refuse his protection claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iran of Kurdish ethnicity.  The basis  of
    his case is that he had worked as a "smuggler" taking goods across  the
    Iran-Iraq border and on two occasions had helped his cousin who  was  a
    supporter of the KDPI by transporting literature  for  the  KDPI.   His
    cousin was arrested by the Authorities and the appellant's family  home
    was subsequently raided by the security forces (Ettelaat)  leading  him
    to conclude that his cousin had revealed his name under  torture.   The
    appellant then made arrangements to leave Iran  and  travelled  to  the
    United Kingdom via Turkey, leaving the country illegally.

 3. The respondent's case is set out in the refusal letter  dated  26  July
    2016.  The respondent rejected all aspects  of  the  appellant's  claim
    other than him being a national of Iran.

 4. The judge heard evidence from the appellant as well as a  Mr  Drakshani
    who is involved with the KDPI in the United Kingdom.

 5.  The  judge  noted  [17]  that  the  primary  issue  in  the  case  was
    credibility,  it  being  accepted  by  the  respondent  that   if   the
    Authorities were looking for him because they believe he  had  assisted
    the KDPI then the appellant would be at real risk of persecution.   The
    judge found that: -

      i)  although  the  case  that  the  core  of  the  claim  was  broadly
         consistent, there was a significant discrepancy as to  whether  the
         appellant had learned of his cousin's arrest after he had  returned
         home from a trip or during that trip, this  being  significant  and
         the appellant's evidence being inconsistent  between  what  he  had
         said in his witness statement and interview and with  what  he  had
         said in oral evidence [18] with reference to [7];

     ii) it was not consistent with the background evidence as  to  how  the
         Iranian Authorities deal with the families of  those  suspected  of
         involvement with a  separate  party  or  who  had  been  caught  in
         possession of a KDPI flyer that they had not been targeted and that
         it was not plausible the whole family would remain  in  their  home
         and that only the appellant would have needed to flee to the United
         Kingdom in fear [20];

    iii) the appellant had not been truthful about the contact  he  has  had
         with the family since he arrived in the United Kingdom [21], it not
         being plausible that he would not have made contact with his family
         to let them know he was safe [22];

     iv) the appellant's credibility was damaged by  his  failure  to  claim
         asylum en route [23]; and

      v) having had regard to SSH [2016] UKUT 00308 the appellant was not at
         adverse risk from the Iranian Authorities despite the fact that  he
         had left illegally;

     vi) there was no evidence to show that there was a real risk  that  the
         basic activities the appellant  had  undertaken  involving  himself
         with the KDPI in the United Kingdom would come to the attention  of
         the Authorities in Iran [26].

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that: -

      i) the material cited by the judge at [17] do not actually reflect the
         entirety of that part of the evidence and did not justify a finding
         by the judge that the family would all be at risk  and  they  would
         have fled; and, whilst accepting that there would  be  pressure  on
         families in the appellant's family's position it was not sufficient
         to justify a finding the family would be at  risk  and  would  have
         fled;

     ii) the finding that  the  appellant  had  been  untruthful  about  the
         contacts he had had with his family [21] was infected by the  above
         error;

    iii) the judge had erred failing to provide adequate reasons  why  there
         was no evidence to  show  that  there  is  a  real  risk  that  the
         appellant's activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  as  evidenced  by
         Facebook photographs would not have come to the  attention  of  the
         Authorities in Iran.

 7. The appellant's case is that he is a smuggler who had on two  occasions
    assisted his cousin to take KDPI documents into Iran.  At  Q85  in  his
    interview he was asked why he had to leave Iran and stated:

         "The second time when I helped my cousin, when I took documents  to
         my home.  After two days my cousin came.  He took the documents and
         went  to  Sardasht.   Then  three  days  after  my  paternal  uncle
         telephoned my father, that Khalid was arrested by Ettelaat.  I  was
         on a trip when they said  Khalid  was  arrested.   Two  days  after
         Khalid was arrested Ettelaat came to my house.  I was  on  the  way
         going home.  People from my village, his name was Mohsen  was  with
         me, his brother rang him, told him to tell Kheder not  to  go  back
         home because Ettelaat were looking for him".

 8. There is a degree of ambiguity in the phrase," I was  on  a  trip  when
    they said Khalid was arrested", as it is unclear whether  it  is  meant
    that he learned of the arrest whilst on  the  trip  or  that  he  later
    learned that Khalid had been arrested, that event  having  taken  place
    while he was on the trip.  The position is  clarified  in  the  witness
    statement where at [11] the appellant said that he was away on  a  trip
    doing his smuggling at the time when Khalid had been  arrested  and  it
    was on his return from a smuggling trip when someone from his  village,
    when that man's brother rang to tell the appellant  he  should  not  go
    home.

 9. In his oral evidence, however,  at  [7]  the  appellant's  evidence  is
    recorded as follows: -

         "... he said that his uncle had called his father to tell him.   He
         said: 'My father told me that he got a call from his brother to say
         that his brother's son was arrested.  I found out when it was night
         time and I was at home.  The day  the  Ettelaat  raided  my  family
         house was when I was coming  back  from  the  border  with  another
         friend called Mohsen.'"

10. The judge then records that the appellant was referred to what  he  had
    said in answer to question 85 and confirmed his evidence.

11. The judge was therefore entitled to draw inferences from a  significant
    discrepancy and it was also open to him to note  that  the  appellant's
    evidence at hearing was that he had continued his normal routine  after
    he found out that his cousin had been arrested.  That too was a  matter
    that the judge was entitled to attach weight.  Accordingly, there is no
    merit in the challenge to this finding.

12. There is no merit in the challenge to the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    background evidence at [19] to [20].  Viewing the evidence as a  whole,
    of which only a part is reproduced in the decision, it  is  clear  that
    there is a substantial body of evidence to show that the  families  are
    targeted and at times suffer severe punishment.  Mr Martin  effectively
    conceded as much and  was  unable  to  persuade  me  that  the  judge's
    assessment of  the  evidence  was  perverse,  inadequate  or  otherwise
    unlawful.  It was open to the judge to note that it is not credible and
    that the appellant's  family  would  not  have  been  targeted  by  the
    Authorities in the circumstances of what he had said  and  also,  given
    the appellant's evidence  referred  to  above  that  he  continued  his
    ordinary routine also appears inconsistent.

13. In the absence of any merit to the challenges made to the findings that
    the appellant lacked credibility, there is no basis on which it can  be
    asserted that the judge erred at [21] in finding that the appellant had
    not been truthful about the contact he had had with  his  family  since
    arrival in the United Kingdom.  Further, the judge gave further reasons
    for such a finding at [21] and [22], the judge pointing out properly an
    inconsistency in the appellant's assessment of the risk to his family.

14. There is no merit in the challenge to the  judge's  assessment  of  the
    risk flowing from the  fact  that  the  appellant  has  been  shown  on
    Facebook attending a demonstration.  I pressed Mr Martin on the  point
    but he was unable to provide any evidence  to  show  that  the  Iranian
    authorities would take any steps to identify the appellant on return to
    Iran.  As Mr Martin was able  to  take  me  to  passages  in  the  COIR
    indicating the breadth of activities carried out by the Iranian  Secret
    Services, this information provides nothing specific to show that  they
    undertake the difficult and labour intensive task of identifying people
    from photographs  of  those  attending  demonstrations  in  the  United
    Kingdom.  Whilst there is evidence that people on duty at  the  airport
    on return to Iran are capable of checking up to 200 faces, there is  no
    evidence to show that the  appellant's  face  would  be  amongst  those
    displayed or given to the staff on arrival, still less that there would
    be any such identification of him.

15. Mr Martin in his submissions indicated that there has been a change  in
    the appellant's situation since the decision, in  that  he  appears  to
    have become a member of the KDPI, but that was not something and  there
    was no information to that effect before  Judge  Ferguson.   Mr  Martin
    accepted that.

16. Accordingly, for these reasons, I find  no  merit  in  the  grounds  of
    challenge to the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal.   I  therefore
    uphold it.

SUMMARY OF CONCLUSIONS

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error of aw and I uphold it.

 2. No anonymity direction is made.




Signed                                  Date:  18 August 2017
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul

