
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07071/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2018                         |On 6th March 2018             |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   MR ASA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Elliott-Kelly instructed by J  D Spicer Zeb
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Somalia, entered the UK on 4th January 2017
    and claimed asylum on 23rd January 2017.  He appealed to the First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State  of  14th  July
    2017 to refuse his application for asylum and for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of his rights under the European Convention on Human  Rights.
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC dismissed the  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 11th September 2017.  The Appellant now appeals
    to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Ford on 15th November 2017.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford decided  that  there  was  no  error  in
    relation to the Judge's assessment of paternity on  the  basis  of  the
    birth certificates or in relation to the ground challenging the judge's
    findings as to the credibility of the Appellant's claims in relation to
    threats from Al-Shabaab in 2014. Accordingly, at the hearing before  me
    Ms Elliott-Kelly accepted that there were two remaining issues  arising
    from the grounds.  These were the contention that the  judge  erred  in
    his assessment of family life and  Article  8  and  that  he  erred  in
    relation to the assessment of the background country conditions.

 3. The background to this appeal is that the  Appellant  claimed  to  have
    encountered difficulties with Al-Shabaab in Somalia and  to  have  left
    Somalia in 2012 for Kenya and returned to Somalia in  2014  and  claims
    that he was threatened by Al-Shabaab.  The judge  did  not  accept  the
    core elements of  the  appellant's  account.   There  is  no  longer  a
    challenge to that part of the decision.

 4. The Appellant claims that he married his wife in  2003  in  Kenya.   It
    appears that at some stage she came to the UK although it is not  clear
    the basis on which she entered or remained in the  UK.   The  Appellant
    claims that he returned to Somalia in 2008 and stayed until 2012.   The
    Appellant and his wife claimed to  have  four  children  together.  The
    eldest child is a daughter who was born on 9th  April  2007  and  is  a
    Somali national with indefinite leave to remain in the UK. She  suffers
    from health conditions including cerebral palsy. It is claimed that the
    couple have a son who was born on 27th July 2008 who is also  a  Somali
    national with indefinite leave to remain in the UK.   The  couple  also
    claim to have two children born in the UK on 1st January 2013 and  17th
    May 2015 both sons and both British citizens.

 5. In considering the family life aspect  of  the  appeal  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge found at paragraph 39
         "I find as a fact that the Appellant's qualitative family life with
         his wife (and any children) has been minimal, given the history  of
         comings  and  goings  for  each  of  them,  which  has  not  always
         coincided.  Quantitatively I find that there  has  been  no  or  no
         significant family life between them  since  the  Appellant's  wife
         procured settlement in this country.  If married, there  is  family
         life de jure, but  I  am  satisfied  that  de  facto  it  has  been
         minimal."

 6. The judge went on to  consider  Section  117B(6)  of  the  Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. The judge noted  that  the  Respondent
    did not accept the Appellant's alleged paternity of  any  of  the  four
    children.  The judge examined the circumstances of the location of  the
    Appellant and his wife at various times.  Although he took into account
    that the birth certificates in relation to the  younger  children  name
    the Appellant as the father he considered that this  was  a  matter  of
    self-report and was capable of it being entirely self-serving.  In  the
    circumstances the judge concluded that it would not be proper  to  find
    paternity proved in respect of any of the four children [43]. The judge
    went on to consider proportionality concluding that  the  Secretary  of
    State's decision to remove the Appellant  is  proportionate  concluding
    that there is no impediment to the Appellant's wife choosing to  reside
    with him in Mogadishu and that the fact that she had indicated that she
    does not wish to return there with him "speaks volumes  concerning  the
    quality of any alleged family life between them and or  speaks  volumes
    to the lack of any true husband/wife relationship."[43].

 7.  In  her  submissions  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  accepted  that,  in   the
    assessment of proportionality, the judge had  failed  to  consider  the
    best interests of the children and had failed to assess the evidence in
    relation to the health condition of the eldest child.  Accordingly  she
    accepted that the appeal turned on the findings in paragraph  39  where
    the judge found that there was no family life in this  case.   This  is
    because, if that finding was sound, then  the  judge  had  no  need  to
    consider any proportionality assessment and therefore any  errors  made
    thereafter are not material.  I agree with this approach.

 8. The main thrust of Ms Elliott-Kelley's submissions is that the  finding
    at paragraph 39 that there is no or  minimal  family  life  into  error
    because of the judge's failure to  consider  the  documentary  evidence
    before him supporting the assertion that the family have lived together
    since the Appellant came to the UK.  In her submission the judge failed
    to consider the evidence that the Appellant and his wife have formed  a
    family unit in the UK and had failed to consider the evidence at  pages
    21 to 47 of the Appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle from the school,
    the Somali Bravenese Welfare Association, the CAF review of  9th  March
    2017 and the review of the eldest  child's  special  educational  needs
    statement.  Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted that the evidence is  capable
    of being read either way.  I do note that the special educational needs
    statement report of 24th April 2017 does not appear  to  refer  to  the
    Appellant.  However the letter from  the  school  of  20th  April  2017
    highlights the help the Appellant provides for the child care  and  his
    emotional support to his wife.  The letter of 16th March 2017  entitled
    CAF review refers to the assistance provided by the Appellant in living
    at the family home.

 9. In her submissions Ms Elliott-Kelly referred to the decision in
    R (on the application  of  RK)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department (s.117B(6); "parental relationship" (IJR) [2016]  UKUT  0031
    (IAC) where the Tribunal said:
         "42. Whether a person is in a "parental relationship" with a  child
         must, necessarily, depend on the individual  circumstances.   Those
         circumstances will include what role they actually play  in  caring
         for and making decisions in relation to the child.  That is  likely
         to be a most significant factor.  However,  it  will  also  include
         whether that relationship arises because of their legal obligations
         as a parent or in lieu of a parent under a  court  order  or  other
         legal obligation.  I  accept  that  it  is  not  necessary  for  an
         individual to have "parental responsibility" in law  for  there  to
         exist a "parental relationship," although whether or  not  that  is
         the case will be a relevant factor.  What is important is that  the
         individual can establish that they have taken on the  role  that  a
         "parent" usually plays in the life of their child.
         43.  I agree with Mr Mandalia's formulation  that,  in  effect,  an
         individual must "step into the shoes  of  a  parent"  in  order  to
         establish a "parental  relationship".    If  the  role  they  play,
         whether as a relative or friend of  the  family,  is  as  a  caring
         relative or friend but not so as to take on the role  of  a  parent
         then it cannot be said that they  have  a  "parental  relationship"
         with the child.  It is perhaps obvious to state that  "carers"  are
         not per se "parents."  A child may have carers who do not step into
         the shoes of their parents but look after the  child  for  specific
         periods of time (for example whilst the parents  are  at  work)  or
         even longer term (for example  where  the  parents  are  travelling
         abroad for a  holiday  or  family  visit).   Those  carers  may  be
         professionally employed; they may be  relatives;  or  they  may  be
         friends.  In all those cases, it may properly be said that there is
         an element of dependency between the child and his or  her  carers.
         However, that alone would not, in  my  judgment,  give  rise  to  a
         "parental relationship."
         44.  If a non-biological parent ("third party") caring for a  child
         claims such a relationship, its existence will depend upon all  the
         circumstances including whether or not there  are  others  (usually
         the biologically parents) who have such  a  relationship  with  the
         child also. It is unlikely, in my judgment, that a person  will  be
         able to establish they have taken on the role of a parent when  the
         biological parents continue to be involved in the child's  life  as
         the child's parents as in a case such  as  the  present  where  the
         children and parents continue to live and function  together  as  a
         family.  It will be difficult, if not impossible,  to  say  that  a
         third party has "stepped into the shoes" of a parent."

10. Ms Elliott-Kelly submitted that the judge failed  to  consider  whether
    there was a de facto parental relationship and/or family unit  in  this
    case.  Whilst she reiterated that Appellant's case that he is  in  fact
    the father of the children (and advised that DNA evidence has now  been
    obtained), she submitted that the judge's error  here  was  failing  to
    consider the documentary evidence in order to establish  whether  there
    is a de facto family life in this case. In  her  submission  the  judge
    focussed on the biological relationship to the exclusion of  the  other
    evidence.

11. I have considered the decision carefully and  the  judge  has  made  no
    reference to the documentary evidence about  the  role  played  by  the
    Appellant in the family's life before  concluding  that  the  de  facto
    family life "has been minimal".  The judge may well have  reached  that
    same conclusion having considered the documentary evidence.  However  I
    cannot be certain that he would have done so.  In these circumstances I
    consider that the finding that there was minimal family  life  in  this
    case failed to  take  account  of  relevant  material  evidence.   That
    finding cannot therefore be sustained.

12. I also note that in considering Section 117B(6) the judge decided  that
    there is no genuine and subsisting parental relationship because of the
    judge's doubts as to the paternity  of  the  children.   However,  that
    failed to take account of the evidence indicating that there may  be  a
    parental relationship outside of the biological relationship claimed.

13. In these circumstances, there is no need to consider the issues  around
    the proportionality assessment and the failure to consider  Section  55
    and the best interests of the children as accepted  by  Ms  Brocklesby-
    Weller.  The judge erred in his approach  to  these  issues.   However,
    that is not material given my finding  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    assessment of family life and therefore  that  decision  must  be  made
    again.

14. Ms Elliott-Kelly also pursued the Grounds of  Appeal  complaining  that
    the judge erred in his assessment of the objective country  conditions.
    She submitted that there were two consequences of this  failure.  These
    were that not only had  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  security
    situation in relation to the Appellant's own return to Somalia but also
    in relation to the assessment of proportionality in relation to  family
    life.  In terms of the Appellant's own situation  under  Article  3  or
    humanitarian protection I am satisfied that the judge properly  applied
    the guidance in MOJ [2014] UKUT 442 on the basis  of  the  findings  in
    relation to the Appellant and his personal circumstances.  There is  no
    error  in  the  judge's  approach  to  this  issue  in  the  particular
    circumstances of this case at paragraph 35 of the decision.  In my view
    the judge clearly dealt with the fact that  the  Appellant  is  from  a
    minority clan at paragraph 25 where he related the  evidence  and  also
    reached a conclusion that the alleged difficulties  in  Mogadishu  were
    not specified or identified.  The judge also considered this matter  at
    paragraphs 31 and 34.  I am accordingly satisfied that the  judge  gave
    adequate consideration to this issue.

15. In terms of the proportionality assessment and the impact of return  to
    Mogadishu on the particular circumstances of the children I accept that
    this was not properly assessed however given my finding in relation  to
    paragraph 39 this decision has to be set aside  to  be  remade  in  any
    event.

16. The parties were in agreement  that  the  Article  8  issue  should  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in light of the fact that there had
    been a failure to consider the documentary evidence and in light of the
    fact that there has now been a significant change of circumstances with
    the acquisition of DNA evidence.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of law  in
relation to Article 8 of the European Convention on Human Rights.

That part of the decision is set aside. The remainder  of  the  decision  is
preserved.

The appeal is remitted to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  assessment  to  be
remade only in relation to the Article 8 element of the appeal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 28 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 28 February 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

