

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07738/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 3rd April 2018                         | On 9th May 2018                  |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                   Mr SPKM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms E Harris, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka born on 1st January 1982.   The
    Appellant's immigration history showed that he entered the UK  on  11th
    August 2011.  He applied for a Tier 2 visa on 11th June 2014  and  this
    was rejected with no  right  of  appeal.   On  18th  January  2016  the
    Appellant claimed asylum.  The Appellant's claim for asylum  was  based
    upon a fear that if returned to Sri Lanka he  would  face  mistreatment
    due to his imputed political opinion as a perceived  supporter  of  the
    LTTE.  The Appellant has two dependants, being his  spouse  and  child.
    The Appellant's application for  asylum  was  dismissed  by  Notice  of
    Refusal dated 15th July 2016.

 2. The Appellant appealed and the appeal came before Judge of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal M P W Harris sitting  at  Harmondsworth  on  17th  August
    2017.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 17th October  2017  the
    Appellant's appeal was allowed on asylum and human rights grounds.

 3. On 27th October 2017 the Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to
    the Upper  Tribunal.   Those  grounds  contended  that  the  judge  had
    materially erred

      i) in finding that not much weight or limited weight could be attached
         to the credibility of various aspects of the account;

     ii) in not making any positive findings of fact about  the  Appellant's
         assertions as to his history;

    iii) in not factoring in his assessment;

     iv) finally of the Appellant's credibility and his findings as  to  the
         Appellant's  assertions  about  the   conduct   of   his   previous
         solicitors.

 4. On 1st February 2018 Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Baker  granted
    permission to appeal.  Judge Baker considered that there was  merit  in
    the assertion that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had:-

      i) addressed only the Respondent's criticisms and adverse  credibility
         assessments without the judge himself making positive  findings  on
         specific aspects of the claim with reasons; and

     ii) in not assessing future risk to the Appellant on return within  the
         framework country guidance case law the decision arguably  did  not
         reveal  risk  factors  of  the  Appellant.   Further  Judge   Baker
         considered the judge  had  arguably  materially  erred  in  law  by
         failing to give reasons for his conclusions.

 5. It is on that basis that the appeal comes before me solely to determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  For the  purpose  of  continuity  throughout  the
    appeal process I refer herein to Mr M as the Appellant albeit that this
    is an appeal by the Secretary of State.  The First-tier  Judge  granted
    the Appellant anonymity and no application is made to vary that  order.
    The anonymity direction therefore  remains  in  place.   The  Appellant
    appears by his instructed Counsel, Ms Harris.  The  Respondent  appears
    by her instructed  Home  Office  Presenting  Officer,  Mr  Wilding.   I
    specifically record that the fact that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge,
    Counsel for the Appellant and myself have  the  same  surname  is  pure
    coincidence and that there is no relationship between any of us.

Submissions/Discussions

 6. Mr Wilding advises that he relies on the Grounds of Appeal,  submitting
    that  the  approach  adopted  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   to
    credibility was wrong and that the judge has looked at  some  concerns,
    agreed with some and not others.  This is referred to at  paragraph  62
    of the decision and it is submitted that it is not at all  clear  which
    matters go in the Appellant's favour and it is not clear as to how  and
    why the judge has made findings in the manner  in  which  he  has.   He
    submits that the determination is very short so  far  as  findings  and
    that there is a failure to give properly reasoned findings.  By way  of
    example he takes me to the three lines in which  at  paragraph  60  the
    judge has made  findings  and  conclusions  regarding  the  Appellant's
    spouse's evidence.

 7. He takes me to paragraphs 5 to 7 of the Grounds of Appeal which  amount
    to an analysis of paragraphs 49, 52, 53,  56  and  57  of  the  judge's
    decision and relies heavily upon those paragraphs,  pointing  out  that
    the decision lacks an explanation so  far  as  negative  parts  of  the
    findings are concerned and as a result there is a definite error of law
    in the decision.  Further he submits  that  the  judge  has  not  given
    adequate reasons  for  his  findings  which  stem  from  an  inadequate
    analysis of the evidence and that it is clear from the terminology used
    by the judge that even if he were correct in  his  findings,  the  only
    avenue open to him was to dismiss the appeal.  He further contends that
    it is clear that the Appellant does not fall within  any  of  the  risk
    categories enunciated in GJ (Sri Lanka) CG [2013] UKUT 00319.  He  asks
    me to set aside the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
    bearing in mind the lack of findings submits that it would be necessary
    to remit the matter back to the First-tier Tribunal for rehearing.

 8. Ms Harris starts by addressing the position with  regard  to  GJ.   She
    submits that this is an Appellant who has given evidence  to  the  LRRC
    and as such falls within the risk category number 7.4  recited  in  the
    head note of GJ and referred to  at  paragraph  55  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge's decision.

 9. So far as credibility is concerned she submits that all  findings  were
    open to the judge and that he has dealt with them  and  looked  at  the
    recognised indications and  that  he  is  entitled  to  have  made  the
    findings that he has and submits that the submissions of the  Secretary
    of State amount to nothing more than mere disagreement.  She  takes  me
    to paragraphs 53, 54, 57 and 59 within the judge's findings and submits
    that they set out conclusions that were open to him.  She  goes  on  to
    submit that in the absence of inconsistencies there is no basis to find
    the Appellant not credible and that the  judge  has  dealt  with  these
    issues and therefore he was entitled to find  that  the  Appellant  was
    credible.

10. As to the testimony of the Appellant's wife she submits  that  this  is
    referred to further at paragraph 52, as well as paragraph 16  and  that
    the judge was entitled to find that her testimony  was  credible.   She
    reminds me that she is merely supporting the testimony of the Appellant
    and ultimately what the judge has done is precisely what he is expected
    to do, he has weighed all the factors in order to  make  his  decision.
    She submits that the arguments put forward by the  Secretary  of  State
    amount to nothing more than disagreement and asks  me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.

11. In brief response Mr Wilding submits that the reference to abduction is
    part of the narrative and it is therefore incumbent upon the  judge  to
    come to findings on that narrative and that you cannot compartmentalise
    parts of the evidence.  He submits at paragraphs 53 and  55  the  judge
    has not engaged with the evidence and at paragraph 57 he has not  given
    adequate reasons for rejecting the Secretary of State's  arguments  and
    has not given reasons for finding the Appellant credible.   So  far  as
    the testimony of the Appellant's spouse is  concerned  he  submits  the
    findings are so lacking that it does amount to an  error  of  law.   He
    reiterates his original contentions.

The Law

12.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

13. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

14. I start by addressing the submission made by Mr Wilding  on  behalf  of
    the Secretary of State and that the Appellant does not fall within  any
    of the risk categories enunciated in GJ (Sri Lanka).   I  do  not  find
    that argument sustainable.  Paragraph 7.4 of GJ indicates that  someone
    would be at risk if they have given evidence  to  the  LRRC.   This  is
    identified by the First-tier Tribunal Judge  at  paragraph  55  of  his
    decision.  I therefore do not find that he has materially erred in  law
    on this aspect.

15. The main submission of the Secretary  of  State  is  that  the  judge's
    approach to credibility has been wrong and that what the judge has done
    is looked at the concerns of the Secretary of State and  merely  agreed
    with some and not others and left it  at  that  and  that  he  has  not
    engaged with the points made by the Secretary  of  State  and  has  not
    analysed the positive case put  forward  by  the  Secretary  of  State.
    Further it is his submission that he has failed  to  address  the  fact
    that the burden of proof is on the Appellant.  What is in issue here is
    whether or not the judge has given adequate reasons for  his  findings.
    I remind myself  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  is  not  carrying  out  an
    examination of excellence of the First-tier Tribunal Judge's  decision.
    All that is necessary is for the judge, who heard the appeal,  to  have
    made findings based on his reasons and to show that such  reasoning  is
    not perverse.  It may well be that another judge would have  gone  into
    greater detail and given additional reasons.   However  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge heard the evidence and provided he  has  given  reasoned
    findings which are not perverse then his approach will  not  create  an
    error of law.  I remind myself that I am not rehearing the issue.

16. A proper approach to credibility will always require an  assessment  of
    the evidence and of the general claim and relevant factors would be the
    internal consistency of the claim, the  inherent  plausibility  of  the
    claim and the consistency of the claim with external  features  of  the
    sort typically found in country guidance.  I  acknowledge  that  it  is
    theoretically correct that a claimant need do no more  than  state  his
    claim, but that will always need to be  examined  for  consistency  and
    inherent plausibility and in nearly  every  case  external  information
    against which the claim can be checked would be available.

17. This is a judge who has heard the evidence.  He has noted the Appellant
    was  asked  to  provide  a  statement  to  the  Lessons   Learned   and
    Reconciliation Committee and  that  this  is  referred  to  within  the
    decision at paragraphs 55, 57 and 58.   The  judge  has  addressed  the
    evidence at paragraphs 53 to 60 of his decision.  He has looked at  the
    objective evidence and has  agreed  that  the  Appellant  has  provided
    plausible explanations, e.g. at paragraph 54 and has made  findings  at
    paragraphs 57 and 59 that he was entitled to.

18. Whilst accepting that the judge could have gone into greater detail and
    worded his decision better  I  find  that  he  has  given  reasons  for
    rejecting the Secretary  of  State's  contentions  which  are  adequate
    albeit they could have been  expressed  in  more  detailed  and  better
    terms.

19. Further so far as the witness statement  evidence  of  the  Appellant's
    spouse is concerned the judge has concluded  that  she  is  a  reliable
    witness.  I accept that what is said in paragraph 52 does not add  much
    to that and that taken in isolation the judge has not given reasons for
    finding the Appellant's spouse to be credible,  other  than  to  merely
    state that he has.  However that finding has to be  looked  at  in  the
    round against the whole of the decision.  Having looked at the decision
    in the round I am satisfied that the judge's decision gives reasons  as
    to why he has found the Appellant credible, that he has considered  all
    the evidence, and that the decision is not perverse  and  that  he  has
    engaged with country guidance.   In  such  circumstances  the  decision
    discloses no material error of law and the appeal of the  Secretary  of
    State is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is
    maintained.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge discloses  no  material  error
of law and the appeal of  the  Secretary  of  State  is  dismissed  and  the
decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is maintained.

The  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  granted  the  Appellant   anonymity.    No
application is made to vary that order and none is made.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 08/05/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date:08/05/2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


