

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07754/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                              |Promulgated                  |
|On 14 July 2017                               |On 17 July 2017              |
|                                              |                             |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                SARKAR SAMAD
                         (anonymity order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr R Sharif of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:     Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Aujla dismissing his appeal for protection. He  is  an  Iraqi
         national born on 3 November 1991 who arrived  here  on  23  January
         2016 and claimed asylum on the grounds that he was gay and would be
         persecuted for that reason if he returned.


      2. The appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  Aujla  at  Taylor
         House on 8 February 2017. The appellant was represented. The  judge
         heard oral evidence from the appellant and,  having  considered  it
         along with the documentary evidence, concluded that  the  appellant
         had fabricated the claim and would not be at risk on return as  his
         claim of homosexuality was untrue.



      3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the following grounds:
         (1)  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  assess  risk   on   return;
         specifically, as a failed asylum seeker and in the context  of  the
         AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 (IAC) factors and  had
         not  assessed  the  feasibility  of  return  and  whether  internal
         relocation would be unduly harsh; (2) that the  judge  should  have
         assessed the risk of return to Iraq rather than Iran and  (3)  that
         there was inadequate reasoning for the findings  on  the  claim  of
         homosexuality.



      4. Permission was only granted on the  first  ground.  Although  Judge
         Page did not give any reason for rejecting the second argument,  it
         is plain that the references  to  Iran  rather  than  Iraq  in  the
         standard paragraphs 44 and 45 are typographical errors rather  than
         examples of factual errors. The judge was plainly  aware  that  the
         assessment was to be made for Iraq as it clear from  the  remainder
         of the determination. This was a slip in the judge's proof  reading
         rather than anything else and whilst  it  is  regrettable  and  not
         condoned, I find no material error arises from it.



      5. Having heard the submissions of the parties on the first ground,  I
         reach the following conclusions. Despite Mr Sharif's  criticism  of
         the judge for his failure to consider the issues now raised in  the
         grounds, it is plain from the evidence before the judge that  there
         was no suggestion that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  for  any
         reason  other  than  his  sexuality.  It  was  never  part  of  the
         appellant's claim that he would be  at  risk  as  a  failed  asylum
         seeker, that he did not have documents and would be at risk because
         of that or that he could not relocate because of his  ethnicity  or
         other reasons. The sole claim was that he  was  gay  and  that  his
         problems on return would be as a result of that.



      6. As far as relocation was concerned, the only concern the  appellant
         raised was that those who were aware of his  sexuality  would  seek
         him out. No other fears  were  raised  at  the  interview,  at  the
         hearing, in written statements or  in  the  skeleton  argument.  As
         confirmed by the representative at the hearing  before  the  First-
         tier Tribunal, whom I am now informed formulated  the  grounds  for
         permission, the sole issue was asylum. There  was  no  reliance  on
         article 15(c) or indeed article 8 and  this  is  confirmed  by  the
         skeleton argument. No evidence was called or adduced in  any  other
         form to support the claim now made that the appellant would  be  at
         risk for other reasons. If these newly raised issues formed part of
         the appellant's case, they should have been  put  forward  earlier,
         certainly by his representatives if not the appellant  himself.  Mr
         Sharif suggested that "enquires should have been made". Indeed they
         should have, but this was not a task for the judge. It was the task
         of the representatives to ensure that all reasons for  a  potential
         risk on return were identified and argued before the judge.


      7. I invited Mr Sharif to point me to any evidence before  the  judge,
         other than the copy of AA, which addressed the issues now relied on
         and which the judge might have considered of his own  volition.  He
         was unable to do so.


      8. I therefore conclude that the appellant's complaints are  not  made
         out. He came here recently from Iraqi Kurdistan and that  is  where
         he can return. As Mr Clarke pointed  out,  even  if  the  issue  of
         documentation had been raised  as  a  matter  requiring  attention,
         there is nothing in  the  country  guidance  which  identifies  the
         necessity of a CSID card for the return to that area.



      9. It follows that I find no material errors have  been  made  by  the
         judge and that his determination is sound.


     10. Anonymity



     11. I was not asked to continue the anonymity order made by the  First-
         tier Tribunal and see no reason to do so.


     12. Decision


     13. The judge's determination stands. The appeal is dismissed.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 14 July 2017






