
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07474/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Birmingham Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th May 2021                     |On 15 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |


                                   Before


                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA
                                     and
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHEPHERD




                                   Between


                                    R S H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:
    For the Appellant:     Mr M Mohzam, Burton & Burton Solicitors
    For the Respondent:     Ms  C  Bates,  Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
    Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity


 1. As this a  protection  claim,  it  is  appropriate  that  an  anonymity
    direction is made.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  Court  directs
    otherwise, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of
    his family.   This direction applies amongst  others  to  all  parties.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.


Background


 2. The appellant is a national of Iraq of Kurdish ethnicity.   He  arrived
    in the United Kingdom on 18th December 2017 and  claimed  asylum.   His
    claim was refused by the respondent for reasons set out in  a  decision
    dated 6th June 2018. The appellant's appeal against that  decision  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman for reasons set out in a
    decision promulgated on 29th October 2018.  Because it is  relevant  to
    our decision, we shall return to that  decision  shortly.  For  present
    purposes it  is  sufficient  to  note  that  Judge  Chapman  found  the
    appellant is not a credible witness and he rejected  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim that he is at risk upon return to Iraq because  of  a
    land dispute between his family and a Shia Turkmen family, known as the
    'Bayati'.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Shimmin
    on 20th November 2018.  The appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  heard  by
    Upper Tribunal  Judge  Allen  on  12th  July  2019.   In  his  decision
    promulgated on 12th August 2019, he said:


             "2.  I need say little about this appeal since it  was  common
         ground that the judge had erred in his application of  the  country
         guidance in AAH [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC).  As was summarised by  Mrs
         Aboni, the judge had erred with regard to internal  relocation  and
         the issue of the CSID.  He  had  found  that  the  appellant  could
         relocate to the IKR but failed to consider  whether  the  appellant
         could make the journey from Baghdad. She accepted that there was  a
         lack of adequate reasoning in that the appellant needed a  CSID  to
         continue his journey.


 4. I agree with what was in effect a joint submission that the judge erred
    in law in this case and the matter needs reconsidering. However  I  can
    see no reason why it should not be done in the Upper Tribunal. There is
    forthcoming country guidance on issues of relocation  to  the  IKR  and
    documentation, and it is also the case  that  there  are  a  number  of
    findings by the judge which do not need to be  disturbed  because  they
    were not challenged. The issue is essentially that of  the  appellant's
    ability, in light of the finding that he is at risk on  return  in  his
    home area, to relocate to the IKR and the consideration of  that  issue
    can be just as easily done in the Upper Tribunal as in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Accordingly, I find an error of  law  and  direct  that  the
    matter be reconsidered at a hearing at Field  House  on  the  issue  of
    internal relocation."


The issues


 5. The appeal was listed for hearing before us on 11th May 2021 to  remake
    the decision.  Since the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman,
    and the decision of Upper Tribunal Judge Allen, the Upper Tribunal  has
    provided further country guidance in SMO,  KSP  &  IM  (Article  15(c);
    identity documents) (CG) [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) "SMO  &  Others".   At
    the outset of the hearing before  us,  Mr  Mohzam  confirmed  that  the
    appellant's  home  area,  Tuz  Khurmatu,   is   in   the   Salah-Al-Din
    Governorate.  He  acknowledges  that  Judge  Chapman  referred  to  the
    country guidance previously set out in AA (Article 15(c) Iraq CG [2015]
    UKUT 00544 (IAC) as considered by the Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) SSHD
    [2017] EWCA Civ 944, and applying that country guidance, found that the
    appellant remains at risk of indiscriminate violence in his  home  area
    contrary to Article 15(c).  Mr Mohzam acknowledges that we  must  apply
    the most recent country guidance set out in SMO & Others, and  we  will
    have to consider whether the appellant can now return to his home  area
    in Tuz Khurmatu.  Mr Mohzam accepts that Tuz Khurmatu is  no  longer  a
    contested area.  He helpfully summarised the appellant's claim  at  the
    outset of the hearing before us. The appellant did  not  challenge  the
    previous findings made by Judge  Chapman  regarding  the  core  of  the
    appellant's claim but relying upon what is said in SMO & Others and the
    respondent's CPIN; Iraq: Internal relocation, civil  documentation  and
    returns' published in June 2020 ("the June 2020 CPIN"),  the  appellant
    claims that he will be unable to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Consulate
    in the UK, or upon return to Baghdad.  He claims that he will be unable
    to secure a CSID withing a reasonable time so that he can  safely  make
    the journey from Baghdad to Tuz Khurmatu or the IKR.


 6. The appellant has appealed under s82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration
    and Asylum Act 2002 against the decision of the  respondent  to  refuse
    his claim for asylum and humanitarian protection. The appellant  claims
    to be a refugee whose removal from  the  UK  would  breach  the  United
    Kingdom's   obligations   under   the    1951    Refugee    Convention.
    Alternatively, he claims that his removal to Iraq would be contrary  to
    Articles 3 and 8 ECHR.


 7. The appellant bears the burden of proving  that  he  falls  within  the
    definition of "refugee".  In essence, the appellant  has  to  establish
    that there are substantial grounds for believing, more simply expressed
    as a 'real risk', that he is outside of  his  country  of  nationality,
    because of a well-founded fear of persecution for a refugee  convention
    reason and he is unable or unwilling, because of such  fear,  to  avail
    himself of the protection of  that  country.   Paragraph  339C  of  the
    immigration rules provides that an applicant who does not qualify as  a
    refugee will nonetheless be granted humanitarian  protection  if  there
    are substantial grounds for believing that if returned, they will  face
    a real risk of suffering serious harm and they are unable, or, owing to
    such risk, unwilling to avail themselves  of  the  protection  of  that
    country.


The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Chapman


 8. As Judge Allen said in his 'error of law' decision, there are a  number
    of findings by Judge Chapman which do not need to be disturbed  and  it
    is helpful for us to record those findings.  He said:


             "56. I find that  the  appellant  is  a  bright,  intelligent,
         capable young man, and I do not accept  his  account  that  he  was
         unaware of which countries he travelled through, and why he did not
         claim asylum in those countries. He attempted to enter into England
         using false documents, which suggests that his intention was not to
         openly claim asylum on arrival but to enter the  country  illegally
         and disappear underground.  I  find  that,  in  leaving  Iraq,  the
         appellant's intention was not to flee  from  persecution  from  the
         Bayati family. It may be that the appellant was seeking  to  escape
         from the very difficult circumstances that existed in  Tuz  at  the
         time, but that does not explain why he did not move to another part
         of Iraq, such as the IKR where he had other family members. I  find
         that his intention was to come specifically to the United  Kingdom.
         This suggests he came as an economic migrant and not as  a  refugee
         seeking protection.


             57.  For these reasons, I do not find the appellant's  account
         to be credible. I find that I  cannot  rely  on  his  evidence.  It
         follows that I find that he has not discharged the burden upon him,
         even to the lower standard required in these appeals, that he is at
         risk as claimed from the Bayati family in his home area.


             58.  It follows that I am not satisfied that the appellant  is
         at risk from the Bayati family outside his home area. Even if I  am
         wrong about them posing a risk in Tuz, it was  not  suggested  that
         they pose a risk outside of Tuz. Indeed, in his own  evidence,  the
         appellant accepted that he had explored the possibility  of  moving
         to the IKR to escape the risks he claimed to face in Tuz.


             59.  In summary, my  findings  thus  far  are  that:  (i)  the
         appellant is at Article 15(c) risk  in  his  home  area:  (ii)  the
         appellant is not at further  risk,  either  in  his  home  area  or
         elsewhere in Iraq from his claimed persecutors. In light of (i),  I
         must consider whether or not the appellant can internally relocate.


             60.  Since I find  that  I  cannot  rely  on  the  appellant's
         evidence generally, I also find that I cannot rely on  it  when  he
         says he has no contact with his family in Iraq. He did not  explain
         why he does not  have  the  telephone  numbers  of  his  father  or
         brother. He said that he had memorised his uncle's number and  that
         he was able to use the agent's phone to contact his uncle after  he
         left the country, but does not explain why he cannot do so now.  He
         has made no efforts to trace his family since being in  the  United
         Kingdom, through, for example, the Red Cross. I am  not  satisfied,
         again bearing in mind the lower standard of proof, that he has lost
         contact with his family members. Even if he had lost  contact  with
         his family from Tuz, in interview, he said he had family  in  Ranya
         in the IKR.


             61.  I have considered what the appellant's individual profile
         would be on return to Iraq. I find that his home  area  is  Tuz  in
         Sala Al-Din Province.  I find that he is of Kurdish ethnicity and a
         Sunni Muslim, but there is little to suggest that his religion  has
         played a significant part in his life. The appellant has shown  the
         fortitude and  resilience  to  migrate  from  Iraq  to  the  United
         Kingdom. I find that the appellant is a healthy, intelligent, young
         man who is capable of finding work and working. I find that he does
         have a family network of support both in Iraq and the IKR.


             62.  The amended country guidance provided by  AA  (Iraq),  as
         supplemented by AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal  relocation)  Iraq  CG
         [2018] shows that there are risks associated with a returnee  being
         unable to gain the necessary documentation, such as  the  CSID,  in
         order to access basic services in Iraq  on  return.  The  appellant
         failed to discharge the burden of showing that he would  have  this
         difficulty because I find he has family support to help him  to  do
         so within a reasonable period of his return, and to support him  so
         that he is not at risk of becoming destitute.  In AA (Iraq), it was
         held that he is not at risk of serious harm by reason of not having
         a current passport.


             63.  I find that, because he is a Kurd, relocation to  Baghdad
         would be unduly harsh. However,  the  same  risks  do  not  present
         themselves for Kurds in the  IKR.   AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  internal
         relocation) makes clear that relocation to  the  IKR  may  be  more
         difficult without a valid passport and CSID. However, the appellant
         has failed to satisfy me that he cannot return to the IKR, even  if
         he is returned, firstly, to Baghdad.  He accepts he has  previously
         had a valid CSID and  Iraqi  national  identification  card,  which
         should assist in replacing them  and  in  travelling  to  the  IKR.
         Paragraph 6 of the headnote in AAH makes clear that, as a Kurd,  he
         would be allowed to enter the IKR without impediment and that there
         is no sponsorship requirement for entry.


             64.  Even if there were such requirements, the  appellant  has
         stated that he has family in Ranya.  Paragraph 8 of the headnote in
         AAH shows that cultural norms will  require  his  family  there  to
         accommodate the  appellant,  and  that  he  would  have  sufficient
         support from the family so as to lead a  "relatively  normal  life"
         which would not be unduly harsh."


 9. We can consider and make our own assessment of facts that have occurred
    since the decision of Judge Chapman.  At the resumed hearing before us,
    we heard oral evidence from the appellant with  the  assistance  of  an
    interpreter.


The evidence before the Upper Tribunal


10. At the outset of the hearing the parties agreed that that the  evidence
    before us is set out in the following bundles:


          i) The respondent's bundle


         ii) The appellant's bundle comprising of 159 pages sent to the FtT
             under cover of a letter from the  appellant's  representatives
             dated 4th July 2018.


        iii) The appellant's  Rule  15(2A)  application  and  supplementary
             bundle comprising 105 pages.


11. A full account of the evidence and the submissions made  before  us  is
    set out in our record of proceedings.  At the end of the hearing before
    us, we reserved our decision. We informed the parties that our decision
    will follow in writing, and this we now do. In reaching our decision we
    have fully considered all the evidence that was  before  the  Tribunal,
    whether it is expressly referred to in this decision or not.


The appellant's evidence


12. The appellant gave evidence with the assistance of an interpreter using
    the Kurdish  Sorani  language.   Both  the  appellant  and  interpreter
    confirmed that they understood each other without any difficulty.   The
    appellant adopted his witness statement dated 27th June 2018  (pages  1
    to 5 of the appellant's first bundle), and  his  supplementary  witness
    statement dated 23rd November 2020 (page 1  to  4  of  the  appellant's
    supplementary bundle).  He confirmed that the content of each of  those
    statements has been read to him in a language that he understands,  and
    the contents are true and correct.


13. The appellant's statement dated 27th June 2018  was  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Chapman and there is nothing to be gained by setting out
    the content of that statement  in  this  decision.  The  focus  of  the
    statement is the appellant's claim that he is at risk  upon  return  to
    Iraq because of a land dispute, and as a potential victim of an  honour
    killing. The appellant's account of events was previously considered by
    Judge Chapman and rejected.  The findings made by  Judge  Chapman  have
    not been appealed.


14. In his supplementary witness statement dated 23rd  November  2020,  the
    appellant confirms that after his appeal was dismissed  by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal, on 17th February 2020, he went to the Iraqi  Embassy  in
    Manchester with a friend. He waited in the  queue  and  when  his  turn
    came, he explained that he needs new documents as he has lost  all  his
    documents.  He was asked if he has  any  documents  from  Iraq  and  he
    replied, no, but confirmed that he is from Iraq. He was told that  they
    could not help him if he did not have any documents.


15. The appellant states that he has also been in contact with the  British
    Red Cross, and during a telephone appointment on 27th August  2020,  he
    explained that he was trying  to  find  his  family.  At  a  subsequent
    appointment in September 2020, he  provided  photographs  and  personal
    details about himself and his family. The appellant was  informed  that
    the Red Cross will do what they can to assist, and his photographs will
    be posted on websites around the world.  The appellant has  provided  a
    copy of a letter from the British Red Cross  dated  21st  October  2020
    confirming the appellant  has  consented  for  his  information  to  be
    entered onto the 'Trace the Face Database'.  He has not heard from  the
    Red Cross since.


16. The appellant maintains that his life will be in  danger  and  that  he
    will be killed by the Turkman family.  He states that it is possible to
    live in the IKR temporarily, but individuals are not  allowed  to  live
    there permanently.  He claims that a surety would be required,  and  he
    has no one to provide that surety, and no one will become a surety  for
    someone from a formerly contested area like  Tuz  Khurmatu.  He  claims
    that he has no ID card, and he will not be able to return to  his  home
    area and cannot internally relocate, as he does not have  his  CSID  or
    any other documents to prove his identity. He claims that he would also
    have no one to support him.


17. In cross-examination the appellant confirmed he had a mobile  phone  in
    Iraq. He confirmed that  his  parents  also  had  a  mobile  phone  and
    although he could remember the number previously, he has been unable to
    remember the number since his arrival in the UK.  The appellant claimed
    that he had his mobile phone until he reached Greece, but in Greece the
    agents took everything from him. When asked what family he has  in  the
    IKR, he claimed that he  does  not  know  them  because  they  are  not
    immediate family or close relatives.  He was unable to say how they are
    related.  He confirmed that he had his CSID when he left Iraq, but just
    before his arrival in Greece, he was advised by the agent to  throw  it
    away.  He confirmed that he has contacted the Red  Cross  and  provided
    them with the details they requested to help locate his family.


18. In answer to questions put by us for clarification, the appellant  said
    that he could not remember when he last spoke to his brothers.  It  was
    whilst he was still in Iraq.  He said that he remained  in  touch  with
    his maternal uncle after he left Iraq,  because  it  was  his  maternal
    uncle that had arranged his journey.  He remained  in  touch  with  his
    uncle whilst he was detained in Greece, and when he spoke to his  uncle
    he was provided with information about his family.   He  was  therefore
    able to keep in touch with his family indirectly. He last spoke to  his
    maternal uncle on 16th October 2017, and at the time, his parents  were
    still living in the family home in Tuz,  and  his  brothers  were  also
    living in Tuz.  When we asked what he had  done  to  establish  contact
    with his family since October 2017, the appellant claimed that  he  had
    no one to help him, and that he had been advised by his GP to seek  the
    assistance of the Red Cross. He could not remember when he  first  made
    contact with the Red Cross, but said it was about two months before  he
    had received the letter from the Red  Cross  dated  October  2020.   We
    referred the appellant to the exchange recorded at  questions  [54]  to
    [57] of the asylum interview record conducted on 15th May 2018.  He was
    told that the Red Cross is an international aid organisation  that  can
    help people find their families.  He said that  although  he  had  been
    told about the Red Cross during that interview, he had forgotten  about
    it because he had spent about four hours at  the  interview.   He  said
    that he had asked many people if they could help, but all that  he  was
    told was that all the Kurdish people had left his home area  and  there
    was no good news. The information he received was  general  information
    about the area, and nothing specific about his family.   The  appellant
    confirmed that the CSID held by him had his name,  date  of  birth  and
    details about his parents. As far as he can  remember,  the  CSID  card
    also had a number but he cannot recall the number.


The parties submissions


19. We heard submissions from both  parties,  which  are  recorded  in  the
    record of  proceedings  and  which  we  have  carefully  considered  in
    reaching our decision. It serves no purpose  to  burden  this  decision
    with a lengthy recital of those submissions.


20. Broadly put, Mr Bates adopts the reasons for refusal letter and submits
    that there is nothing in the evidence received by  us  that  undermines
    the findings previously made by Judge Chapman and  in  particular,  the
    conclusion that the appellant cannot be relied upon when he says he has
    no contact with his family in Iraq.  The appellant had been directed to
    the Red Cross during his asylum interview  in  May  2018,  but  he  did
    nothing to approach the Red Cross until after the hearing of the appeal
    before the FtT.  Mr Bates submits the delay in contacting the Red Cross
    is indicative of an individual who does not require  their  assistance,
    because he remains in contact with his  family  and  in  any  event,  a
    belated referral to the Red Cross is not evidence  that  the  appellant
    has no contact with his family.  Mr Bates submits that in SMO & Others,
    the Upper Tribunal referred to the importance of family  life  in  Iraq
    and to the extensive use of mobile phones.  The appellant had a  mobile
    phone, as did his  parents  and  brothers.   Mr  Bates  submits  it  is
    incredible that by the time of his arrival in the UK the appellant  had
    simply forgotten the contact details.  Mr Bates invites us to find  the
    appellant remains in contact with his  family  and  that  he  has  male
    members of his family that can assist him obtain a CSID.  He can be met
    by his family in Baghdad with his CSID and  could  safely  travel  from
    there to Tuz Khurmatu or the IKR. Tuz Khurmatu is no longer a contested
    area.  At paragraphs [262] to [267] of SMO & Others, the Upper Tribunal
    referred to the difficulties experienced by Kurds in the area, and also
    noted that "..vast numbers returned to the  area..".   The  appellant's
    family were comfortable, and are  better  placed  to  bounce  back  and
    return, even if they did leave the area.  There is therefore no  reason
    to believe the appellant cannot  return  to  Tuz  Khurmatu.   Mr  Bates
    submits that in any event, the appellant has family in Ranya.   He  now
    claims that they are distant relatives and seeks  to  distance  himself
    from them.  As a Kurd, the appellant would not need sponsorship in  the
    IKR, and he would  be  well  placed  to  internally  relocate.   As  to
    documentation, Mr Bates referred to Annex I  of  the  June  2020  CPIN,
    which describes the process for obtaining a CSID for  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.


21. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Mohzam submits that when he  last  spoke
    to his uncle in October 2017, the appellant was told  that  his  family
    remained in Tuz Khurmatu.  In SMO & Others, the Upper Tribunal referred
    to events in the Salah al-Din Governorate, and at paragraph  [79],  the
    Upper Tribunal noted that on 16th October  2017,  an  estimated  35,000
    people fled Tuz Khurmato in the face of violence and intimidation  from
    Turkmen armed groups.  In paragraph [263] of its  decision,  the  Upper
    Tribunal noted that violence in the area continued into  2018  and  the
    area is now ruled by a powerful Shia militia.  Mr  Mohzam  submits  the
    background material suggests the  circumstances  in  Tuz  Khurmatu  are
    likely to have changed  significantly  since  the  appellant  last  had
    contact with his family, and we should now find his claim that  he  has
    lost contact with his family to be credible.  He submits the  appellant
    has been to the Red Cross and we should accept his  explanation  as  to
    how and why he contacted the Red Cross.


22. Mr Mohzam refers to  the  June  2020  CPIN,  in  which  the  respondent
    acknowledges that since SMO & Others was promulgated in December  2019,
    further information regarding the issuance of CSID's in the UK has been
    obtained by the Home Office.  At paragraph [2.6.16] it is said:


             "Based on the above information, it is highly unlikely that an
         individual would be able to obtain a CSID from  the  Iraqi  Embassy
         while in the UK. Instead  a  person  would  need  to  apply  for  a
         Registration Document (1957) and would then apply for an INID  upon
         return to their local CSID office in Iraq."


23. Mr Mohzam submits the appellant cannot therefore obtain a CSID from the
    Iraqi Embassy in the UK and he would not be able to  get  a  CSID  card
    within a reasonable time of arriving in Baghdad.  He  submits  that  if
    the appellant cannot obtain  a  CSID,  he  cannot  safely  travel  from
    Baghdad to Tuz Khurmatu or the IKR, and  as  it  is  necessary  for  an
    individual to have a CSID or INID in order to live  and  travel  within
    Iraq,  the  absence  of  such  a  document  will  leave  the  appellant
    encountering treatment or conditions which are contrary  to  Article  3
    ECHR.


Findings and conclusions


24. In reaching our decision we have had the  opportunity  of  hearing  the
    appellant and seeing his evidence tested in cross-examination.  Matters
    of credibility are never easy  to  determine,  particularly,  as  here,
    where the appellant's evidence is received through an interpreter.   We
    acknowledge that there may be a danger  of  misinterpretation,  but  we
    were careful to explain to the appellant, that  questions  and  answers
    must be broken down into short  sentences  so  as  to  ensure  that  he
    understood the question, and the interpreter had a  proper  opportunity
    to translate the answer provided.  We have also borne in mind the  fact
    that events that may have occurred some time  ago,  can  impact  on  an
    individual's ability to recall exact circumstances.  We recognise  that
    there may be a tendency by a  witness  to  embellish  evidence  because
    although the core of the claim may be true,  he/she  believes  that  by
    embellishing their evidence, the claim becomes stronger.   In  reaching
    our decision we have also been careful not to  find  any  part  of  the
    account relied upon, to be inherently incredible, because  of  our  own
    views on  what  is  or  is  not  plausible.   We  have  considered  the
    appellant's claims and the story as  a  whole,  against  the  available
    country evidence and other familiar factors, such as  consistency  with
    what the appellant has said before.


25. It is uncontroversial that the  appellant  is  an  Iraqi  national,  of
    Kurdish ethnicity.  Judge Chapman did not find the appellant's  account
    of a land dispute and his claim that he was coerced by his  father  and
    brothers into starting a relationship with a  daughter  of  the  Bayati
    family, to be credible. He also rejected the appellant's claim that  he
    had been kidnapped by armed men who he recognised  as  being  from  the
    Bayati family.  The appellant did not challenge the  findings  made  by
    Judge Chapman and when the appellant  was  asked  in  cross-examination
    before us, whether there are any other reasons why  he  left  Iraq,  he
    confirmed that there are no other reasons.  There  is  nothing  in  the
    evidence before us that undermines the finding made  by  Judge  Chapman
    that even to the lower standard, the appellant has failed to  establish
    that he is at risk as claimed from the Bayati family in his  home  area
    of Tuz Khurmatu.


26. Judge Chapman also rejected the appellant's  claim  that  he  has  lost
    contact with his family and found that in any event, the appellant  has
    family in Ranya in the IKR, and that he has a family network of support
    both in Iraq and the IKR.


27. We have considered the appellant's claim that  he  does  not  have  any
    contact with his family and that he has taken steps,  through  the  Red
    Cross to trace his family.  The appellant maintains that he is  not  in
    contact  with  his  parents,  brothers  and  his  maternal  uncle.   He
    maintains that he had some limited telephone contact with his  maternal
    uncle whilst he was  detained  in  Greece,  using  the  agent's  mobile
    telephone.  He claims that since his arrival in the  UK,  he  has  been
    unable to remember the telephone numbers to establish contact with  his
    family.


28. We have no hesitation is finding, even to the lower standard, that  the
    appellant is not a credible witness.  He was vague in the evidence that
    he gave before us, and his evidence lacked any detail and clarity.   We
    reject his claim that he has simply been unable to recall the telephone
    numbers for his family and has been unable to  establish  contact  with
    them.  It is  quite  simply  incredible  that  having  left  Iraq,  the
    appellant would have maintained contact with his  maternal  uncle,  but
    not with his parents and brothers.   As Judge Chapman found previously,
    the appellant is unable to explain why he does not have  the  telephone
    numbers of his father and brothers.


29. In paragraph [392] of SMO & Others the Tribunal noted that as is  clear
    from AAH(Iraq), Iraq is a collectivist society in which the  family  is
    all important. It is also a country with a high  prevalence  of  mobile
    telephone usage amongst the  adult  population.  Given  the  background
    material, it is contrary  to  common  sense  and  experience  of  human
    behaviour that the appellant would simply have had no contact with  his
    immediate family after he left Iraq.  The appellant's family will  have
    been concerned about the appellant and the  appellant  will  have  been
    concerned about them.  Even to the lower standard, we do not accept the
    appellant would have maintained contact with  his  maternal  uncle  and
    relied upon him to provide the appellant  with  information  about  his
    parents and  brother,  when  there  is  a  high  prevalence  of  mobile
    telephone usage amongst the adult population In  Iraq.   The  appellant
    was able to recall the telephone number for his maternal uncle, and  he
    offers no credible explanation why he could not  recall  the  telephone
    numbers of other close family members.  His claim that  he  forgot  the
    phone numbers after his arrival in the UK is incredible and we  do  not
    accept his evidence.


30. We also reject the appellant's claim that he does not know  his  family
    in the IKR because they are not immediate family  or  close  relatives.
    In his asylum interview, the appellant was asked  whether  he  has  any
    family or friends in the IKR.  He replied (Q.157); "Relatives yes,  but
    not friends".  He confirmed (Q.158) that his relatives live  in  Kirkuk
    and Ranya.  He confirmed (Q.159) that Ranya is  in  Sulaymaniah.   When
    questioned about his  family  in  the  IKR  before  us,  we  found  the
    appellant to be very evasive  and  it  was  apparent  to  us  that  the
    appellant was not prepared to explain how he is related to  those  that
    he previously described as "family" that were living in  Ranya  in  the
    IKR.   He himself drew a distinction between "friends" and "family" and
    we do not accept that he would have  referred  to  having  "family"  in
    Ranya if the position  was,  as  he  now  claims,  that  they  are  not
    immediate family or close relatives.  He quite simply failed to explain
    how he is related to those that he  previously  described  as  'family'
    living in Ranya, in what we  find  is  a  cynical  attempt  by  him  to
    distance himself from having family in the IKR to whom he can turn.


31. True it is that the appellant has now contacted the Red Cross, but that
    was not until 2020, some two years after the appellant had  arrived  in
    the UK, and after his attention was drawn to the  assistance  that  the
    Red Cross may be able to offer,  during  the  asylum  interview.   Even
    applying the lower standard, we do not accept the appellant's  evidence
    that he has no contact with his family.   We  find  he  has  throughout
    remained in contact with them.  The referral to the Red Cross  and  the
    absence of a response from the Red Cross or a successful trace  of  the
    appellant's family is not  sufficient  for  us  to  conclude  that  the
    appellant has lost contact with his family as he claims.   We  have  no
    evidence before us of the information the appellant has provided to the
    Red Cross about his family.


32. Overall, the appellant's evidence that he does not know the whereabouts
    of his family and  the  attempts  that  he  has  made  to  maintain  or
    establish contact with them is vague.  There  is  in  our  judgment  no
    evidence before us of the appellant making any  meaningful  attempt  to
    establish contact with his immediate family.  He does not need  to  if,
    as we find, he has remained in contact with them  throughout.  We  have
    considered the referral made to the Red Cross in the  round,  with  all
    the other evidence before us.  Even to the lower standard, we  are  not
    satisfied that  the  appellant  has  lost  contact  with  his  parents,
    brothers and his maternal uncle as  he  claims.    Like  Judge  Chapman
    previously, we cannot rely on  the  evidence  given  by  the  appellant
    regarding the appellant's lack of contact with his family.


33. We have also considered the  evidence  before  us  of  the  appellant's
    attempts to re-document himself.  It is accepted by the appellant  that
    he previously held a CSID.  He claims that it was thrown  away  on  his
    journey to Greece on the advice of the agents.


34. The appellant claims that he attended the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester
    on 17th February 2020 and his claim is supported by a short letter that
    purports to be written by Mr Rawan Karim.  Mr Karim did not  attend  to
    give evidence.  We are however prepared to  accept  the  appellant  did
    attend the Iraqi Consulate  as  he  claims.   We  have  considered  the
    appellant's account of events at the Iraqi Consulate  but  even  taking
    his evidence at its highest, there is scant information  regarding  the
    steps taken by the appellant to make a genuine  attempt  to  redocument
    himself.  There is no evidence of the appellant  having  completed  any
    forms to begin the process of obtaining replacement documents, even  if
    that were the 'Registration Document (1957)' that is referred to in the
    June 2020 CPIN.   The evidence before us does not, even  to  the  lower
    standard, establish a careful, genuine and determined  attempt  by  the
    appellant to redocument himself but has the appearance of a superficial
    attempt to demonstrate that the appellant has taken the most  basic  of
    steps in an attempt to  bolster  his  claim.  It  is  in  our  judgment
    unsurprising that the appellant was told during his visit to the  Iraqi
    Embassy that they were unable to assist him based on the very vague and
    limited information he was prepared to provide.


35. The appellant's case is to be considered in light of the latest country
    guidance set out in SMO & Others.  The appellant  originates  from  Tuz
    Khurmato in the Salah Al-Din  Governorate.   Judge  Chapman  previously
    found the appellant is not at risk in his home  area  or  elsewhere  in
    Iraq from his claimed persecutors but would be at Article 15(c) risk in
    his home area, based upon the  country  guidance  then  in  force.   Mr
    Mohzam quite properly accepts that matters have now  moved  on  and  we
    must assess the risk upon return by reference to the  country  guidance
    set out in SMO & Others.  The Upper Tribunal held:


      A. INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ: ARTICLE 15(C) OF THE QUALIFICATION
         DIRECTIVE






          1. There continues to be an internal armed  conflict  in  certain
             parts of Iraq, involving government  forces,  various  militia
             and the remnants of ISIL.  Following the  military  defeat  of
             ISIL at the end of 2017 and the resulting reduction in  levels
             of direct and indirect violence,  however,  the  intensity  of
             that conflict is not such that, as a general matter, there are
             substantial grounds for believing that any  civilian  returned
             to Iraq, solely on account of his presence there, faces a real
             risk of being subjected to indiscriminate  violence  amounting
             to serious harm within the scope of Article 15(c) QD.


          2. The only exception to  the  general  conclusion  above  is  in
             respect of the small mountainous area north of Baiji in  Salah
             al-Din, which is marked on the map at Annex D.  ISIL continues
             to exercise doctrinal control over that area and the  risk  of
             indiscriminate violence there is such  as  to  engage  Article
             15(c) as a general matter.


          3.  The  situation  in  the   Formerly   Contested   Areas   (the
             governorates of Anbar, Diyala, Kirkuk, Ninewah and  Salah  Al-
             Din)  is   complex,   encompassing   ethnic,   political   and
             humanitarian issues  which  differ  by  region.   Whether  the
             return of an individual to such an area would be  contrary  to
             Article  15(c)  requires  a  fact-sensitive,  "sliding  scale"
             assessment to which the following matters are relevant.


          4. Those with an actual or perceived association  with  ISIL  are
             likely to be at enhanced risk throughout Iraq.  In those areas
             in which ISIL retains an active presence,  those  who  have  a
             current personal association with local or national government
             or the security apparatus are likely to be at enhanced risk.


          5. The impact of  any  of  the  personal  characteristics  listed
             immediately below  must  be  carefully  assessed  against  the
             situation in the area to which return  is  contemplated,  with
             particular reference to the extent of  ongoing  ISIL  activity
             and the behaviour of the security actors in  control  of  that
             area.  Within the framework of such  an  analysis,  the  other
             personal characteristics which are capable of being  relevant,
             individually and cumulatively, to the sliding  scale  analysis
             required by Article 15(c) are as follows:


                . Opposition to or criticism of the GOI, the  KRG  or  local
                  security actors;


                . Membership of a national, ethnic or religious group  which
                  is either in the minority in the area in question, or  not
                  in de facto control of that area;


                . LGBTI individuals, those not conforming to  Islamic  mores
                  and wealthy or Westernised individuals;


                . Humanitarian or medical staff and  those  associated  with
                  Western organisations or security forces;


                . Women and children without genuine family support; and


                . Individuals with disabilities.


          6. The living conditions  in  Iraq  as  a  whole,  including  the
             Formerly Contested Areas, are  unlikely  to  give  rise  to  a
             breach  of  Article  3  ECHR  or  (therefore)  to  necessitate
             subsidiary protection under Article 15(b)  QD.   Where  it  is
             asserted that return to a particular part of Iraq  would  give
             rise to such a breach, however, it is to be recalled that  the
             minimum level of severity required is relative,  according  to
             the personal circumstances of the individual  concerned.   Any
             such circumstances require individualised  assessment  in  the
             context of the conditions of the area in question.






         B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)


          7. Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR)
             will be to the IKR and all other Iraqis will  be  to  Baghdad.
             The Iraqi authorities will allow an Iraqi national (P) in  the
             United Kingdom to enter Iraq only if P is in possession  of  a
             current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or a  Laissez
             Passer.


          8. No Iraqi national will be returnable  to  Baghdad  if  not  in
             possession of one of these documents.


          9. In the light of the Court of Appeal's judgment  in  HF  (Iraq)
             and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2013]
             EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made  by  P
             cannot succeed by  reference  to  any  alleged  risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport
             or a Laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
             not currently feasible on account of a lack of  any  of  those
             documents.


         10. Where P is returned to Iraq on a  Laissez  Passer  or  expired
             passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the point of
             return by reason of not having a current passport.






         C.   CIVIL STATUS IDENTITY DOCUMENTATION


         11. The CSID is being replaced with a new biometric Iraqi National
             Identity Card  -  the  INID.   As  a  general  matter,  it  is
             necessary for an individual to have one of these two documents
             in order to live and travel within Iraq  without  encountering
             treatment or conditions which are contrary to Article 3  ECHR.
              Many of the checkpoints in the country  are  manned  by  Shia
             militia who are not controlled by the GOI and are unlikely  to
             permit an individual without a CSID or an  INID  to  pass.   A
             valid Iraqi passport is not recognised as acceptable proof  of
             identity for internal travel.


         12. A Laissez Passer will be of no assistance in the absence of  a
             CSID or an INID; it is confiscated upon arrival and is not, in
             any  event,  a  recognised  identity   document.    There   is
             insufficient evidence to show that returnees are issued with a
             'certification letter' at Baghdad Airport, or to show that any
             such document would be  recognised  internally  as  acceptable
             proof of identity.


         13. Notwithstanding the phased transition to the INID within Iraq,
             replacement CSIDs  remain  available  through  Iraqi  Consular
             facilities.  Whether an individual will be able  to  obtain  a
             replacement CSID whilst in the UK  depends  on  the  documents
             available and, critically, the availability of the volume  and
             page reference of the entry in the Family Book in Iraq,  which
             system  continues  to  underpin  the  Civil  Status   Identity
             process.  Given the importance of that information, most Iraqi
             citizens will recall it. That information may also be obtained
             from family members, although  it  is  necessary  to  consider
             whether such relatives are on the  father's  or  the  mother's
             side because the registration system is patrilineal.


         14. Once in Iraq, it  remains  the  case  that  an  individual  is
             expected to attend their local CSA office in order to obtain a
             replacement document.  All CSA  offices  have  now  re-opened,
             although the extent to which records have  been  destroyed  by
             the conflict with ISIL is  unclear,  and  is  likely  to  vary
             significantly depending on the extent  and  intensity  of  the
             conflict in the area in question.


         15. An individual returnee who is not from Baghdad is  not  likely
             to be  able  to  obtain  a  replacement  document  there,  and
             certainly not within a reasonable time.  Neither  the  Central
             Archive nor the assistance facilities for IDPs are  likely  to
             render documentation assistance to an undocumented returnee.


         16. The likelihood of obtaining a replacement identity document by
             the use of a proxy, whether from the UK or on return to  Iraq,
             has reduced due to the introduction of the  INID  system.   In
             order to obtain an INID, an individual must attend their local
             CSA office in person  to  enrol  their  biometrics,  including
             fingerprints and iris scans.  The CSA offices  in  which  INID
             terminals have been installed are unlikely - as  a  result  of
             the phased replacement of the CSID system - to issue  a  CSID,
             whether to an individual  in  person  or  to  a  proxy.    The
             reducing number of CSA offices in which  INID  terminals  have
             not been installed will continue to issue CSIDs to individuals
             and  their  proxies   upon   production   of   the   necessary
             information.


Application of the Country Guidance and Background  Material  to  the  facts
found


36. To summarise, we find  the  appellant's  parents,  brothers  and  their
    families and his maternal uncle remain in Iraq and  the  appellant  has
    family in Ranya,  Sulaymaniyah.   We  find  the  appellant  remains  in
    contact with his parents, brothers, and maternal uncle and is  able  to
    contact them.


37. We note from the decision of the Upper Tribunal in SMO  &  Others  that
    although there continues to be an internal armed  conflict  in  certain
    parts of Iraq involving government  forces,  various  militia  and  the
    remnants of ISIL, the intensity of that conflict is not such that, as a
    general matter, there are substantial grounds for  believing  that  any
    civilian returned to Iraq, solely on account  of  his  presence  there,
    faces a  real  risk  of  being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence
    amounting to serious harm within the scope of Article  15(c)  QD.   The
    only exception to that general conclusion is in respect  of  the  small
    mountainous area north of Baiji in Salah al-Din, which is marked on the
    map at Annex D of the decision.  Tuz Khurmatu is the main city  of  the
    Duz District in Salah al-Din and is not in the small  mountainous  area
    north of Baiji in Salah al-Din.  We acknowledge that the  situation  in
    the formerly contested areas, including the Salah  Al-Din  Governorate,
    is complex and whether the return of  the  appellant  to  Tuz  Khurmatu
    would be contrary to Article 15(c) requires a fact-sensitive,  "sliding
    scale" assessment.


38. In paragraphs [77] to [96] of SMO & Others, the Tribunal refers to  the
    evidence before the Tribunal regarding the position in the Salah Al-Din
    Governorate.  At paragraph [266], the Upper Tribunal said:


         "The metrics for the governorate are not indicative of a  level  of
         threat which engages Article 15(c) in  general.   The  IBC  figures
         recorded 152 civilian deaths out of a population of more  than  1.5
         million in 2018.  The intensity of the  violence  was  considerably
         lower than in Ninewa, for example, standing at 10.05 per 100,000 in
         2018, marking a reduction from 28.05  in  100,000  in  2017.   Vast
         numbers have returned to the governorate and it is clear  that  the
         authorities are taking regular action in the area to  continue  the
         pressure on ISIL.  We  also  take  account  of  indirect  forms  of
         violence,  particularly  the  assassination  of   local   authority
         figures; the coercion exerted by ISIL  on  sections  of  the  rural
         population in particular; and the sectarian tensions which  persist
         across the governorate (in Tuz Khurmato in particular).  We do  not
         consider, however, that an ordinary  civilian  faces  such  a  high
         level of indiscriminate violence  there  that  substantial  grounds
         exist for believing that he would, solely by being  present  there,
         face a real risk which threatens his life or person.."


39. The appellant is a healthy young male who  lived  previously  with  his
    family in Tuz Khurmato.  The core of his account relating to the events
    that he claimed lead to his departure from Iraq have been rejected.  He
    confirmed in his evidence before us that there are no other reasons for
    claiming international protection.  The appellant has not been involved
    in activities of voiced opposition to, or criticism of the GOI, the KRG
    or local security actors and does not have the personal characteristics
    identified in headnote 5 of SMO.   The appellant has a general fear  of
    the security situation in Iraq  and  Tuz  Khurmato,  but  we  were  not
    directed to any evidence which indicates  that  the  situation  in  the
    Salah Al-Din governorate is, per se, sufficient to expose an individual
    such as the appellant to a real risk of harm.   The most recent country
    guidance indicates that the security situation in the area is no longer
    so serious as  to  attract  Article  15(c)  protection.   We  find  the
    appellant has family in Tuz Khurmato and he is not at risk upon  return
    to his home area.


40. In any event, we find that the appellant has family in Ranya in the IKR
    and that internal relocation to the IKR would not be unduly harsh.   As
    noted in SMO & others, subject to security screening,  and  registering
    presence with the local mukhtar, the appellant would  be  permitted  to
    enter and reside in the  IKR  with  no  further  legal  impediments  or
    requirements. There  are  no  sponsorship  requirements  for  entry  or
    residence in  any  of  the  three  IKR  Governorates  for  Kurds.   The
    appellant has shown the fortitude and resilience to migrate  from  Iraq
    to the United Kingdom. There is nothing in the evidence  before  us  to
    establish that he is anything other than a healthy, intelligent,  young
    man who is capable of finding work and working. We find that he  has  a
    network of family support both in Iraq  and  in  the  IKR.   In  SMO  &
    Others, the Upper Tribunal noted that   cultural  norms  would  require
    family to accommodate the appellant  and  we  are  satisfied  that  the
    appellant would have sufficient assistance from his family in  the  IKR
    such that he could lead a 'relatively normal life', which would not  be
    unduly harsh.


41. We accept that upon the appellant's return to Iraq, travel from Baghdad
    by land is only viable with valid proof of identity.  We have carefully
    considered whether the appellant could obtain a new  CSID  at  all,  or
    within a reasonable timeframe.  The appellant's evidence  is  that  the
    original of the CSID card was thrown away by him, on the advice of  the
    agents,  during  his  journey  to  Greece.   We  have  found  that  the
    appellant's parents and brothers remain in Iraq and, in  our  judgment,
    there is no reason why the CSID reference or any  information  required
    by the appellant to confirm his Iraqi nationality cannot be provided to
    him by his family in Iraq.


42. We have had regard to what is said at headnote [16] of SMO & Others and
    acknowledge that  the likelihood of obtaining  a  replacement  identity
    document by the use of a proxy, whether from the UK  or  on  return  to
    Iraq, has reduced due to the introduction of the INID system.  There is
    no evidence before us that the registry office in the appellant's  home
    area is not operational or is an office in which  INID  terminals  have
    been installed and thus is an office that does not  continue  to  issue
    CSID cards.  With the appellant's father and  brothers  in  particular,
    available to vouch for him, there is no reason why a  replacement  CSID
    cannot be obtained from the Civil Status Affairs  Office  in  his  home
    Governorate, using a proxy and the assistance of a lawyer.  There is no
    reason  why  the  appellant  cannot  take  immediate  steps,  with  the
    assistance of his family to secure a CSID.  Once obtained, there is  no
    reason why the appellant's CSID could not be sent to the appellant here
    in the UK or why the appellant could  not  be  met  by  his  family  or
    relatives, in Baghdad, with the CSID, within a reasonable time  of  the
    appellant's arrival to facilitate safe travel between Baghdad  and  Tuz
    Khurmatu or the IKR.


43. The focus of Mr Mohzam's submissions before us was that  the  appellant
    cannot now obtain a CSID from within the UK.  At paragraph [383] of SMO
    & Others, the Upper Tribunal said:


         "We have not been asked to revisit the extant country  guidance  on
         the way in which an individual might obtain a replacement CSID from
         within the UK, for which see [173]-[177] of AA (Iraq) and  [26]  of
         AAH (Iraq).  We add only this: whilst the INID is clearly replacing
         the CSID in Iraq, consulates do not have the  electronic  terminals
         necessary to issue the INID and continue to issue the CSID instead,
         as confirmed in a Canadian Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  report
         which is quoted at 5.6.9 of the respondent's CPIN entitled Internal
         Relocation, civil documentation and returns, dated  February  2019.
         An Iraqi national in the UK would be able to apply for  a  CSID  in
         the way explained  in  AA  (Iraq)  and,  if  one  was  successfully
         obtained, we find that it  would  be  acceptable  evidence  of  the
         individual's identity throughout Iraq.  Notwithstanding the plan to
         replace the old CSID system with the INID by the end  of  2019,  we
         accept what was said by EASO (in  February  2019)  and  the  Danish
         Immigration  Service  and  Landinfo  (in   November   2018),   that
         implementation was delayed and that the CSID was still  being  used
         in Iraq, and that it continues to be issued in those parts  of  the
         country in which the INID  terminals  have  not  been  rolled  out.
         Given this evidence, and the fact that the CSID has been a  feature
         of Iraqi society for so long, we do not accept that there will come
         a time at the end of this year when the CSID suddenly ceases to  be
         acceptable as proof of identity."


44. Mr Mohzam refers to the  June  2020  CPIN,  at  paragraph  2.6.16,  and
    submits the most recent material  available  establishes  that  "It  is
    highly unlikely that an individual would be able to obtain a CSID  from
    the Iraqi embassy while in the UK".  We have carefully considered  what
    is said at paragraphs 2.6.15 to 2.6.19 of the June 2020 CPIN and  Annex
    I thereto, which sets out the process of obtaining a CSID for a  failed
    asylum seeker from the Iraqi Embassy.  The June 2020 CPIN  states  that
    the Iraqi Embassy in London is advising Iraqi nationals in  the  UK  to
    apply for a 'Registration Document (1957)' which they can use to  apply
    for the documents such as passports or an  INID  card  once  they  have
    returned to Iraq.  Annex I describes the process:


              "The registration document (1957) must be applied for  on  the
         applicant's behalf by a nominated representative in Iraq. In  order
         to start the application, the  individual  requiring  documentation
         would normally provide at least one copy  of  a  national  identity
         document (see above list Q1, FAS) and complete a power of  attorney
         (to nominate a representative in Iraq) at the Iraqi  embassy  along
         with the embassy issued application forms.  If they have no  copies
         of identity documents they would also need to  complete  a  British
         power of attorney invalidated by the FCO and provide parents names,
         place and date of birth to their nominated representative in Iraq.


               Once  issued  the  nominated  representative  will  send  the
         registration document (1957)  to  the  applicant  in  the  UK.  The
         process takes 1 - 2 months."


45. Despite having attended the Iraqi  Consulate,  the  appellant  has  not
    provided any evidence that the Iraqi Consulate is  no  longer  able  or
    prepared to issue a CSID to Iraqi nationals.  Although  we  accept  the
    June 2020 CPIN states that it is highly  unlikely  that  an  individual
    would be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi embassy while in the  UK,
    that does not assist the appellant.  The June  2020  CPIN  states  that
    Iraqi nationals in the UK are being advised  instead  to  apply  for  a
    'Registration  Documents  (1957)'  and  there  is  no  reason  why  the
    appellant should not take immediate steps to  do  so.  It  appears  the
    process takes no longer  than  1  to  2  months.    Once  he  has  that
    document, it appears  the  appellant  will  be  able  to  obtain  other
    documents such as a CSID or INID card once he  has  returned  to  Iraq.
    The 'Registration Documents (1957)' appears to contain the  information
    relevant to an  individual's  identity.   It  is  a  document  that  is
    recommended by the Iraqi Embassy and there  is  nothing  before  us  to
    establish that the document would not be satisfactory evidence  of  the
    appellant's identity to pass through checkpoints.  Mr Mohzam was unable
    to draw our attention to any background material that establishes  that
    the appellant would be unable to safely make the journey  from  Baghdad
    to Tuz Khurmato or the IKR using the 'Registration Documents (1957)' as
    acceptable proof of identity.  In any event, here, we have  found  that
    there is no reason why the appellant's CSID could not be  sent  to  the
    appellant here in the UK or why the appellant could not be met  by  his
    family or relatives, in Baghdad, with the  CSID,  within  a  reasonable
    time of the appellant's  arrival  to  facilitate  safe  travel  between
    Baghdad and Tuz Khurmatu or the IKR.


46. It follows that we dismiss the appeal under the Refugee Convention  and
    on humanitarian protection grounds.  The Country Guidance in SMO points
    to the Article 3 risk that may be encountered by somebody making  their
    way from Baghdad to another place in Iraq to obtain a CSID or INID.  On
    the findings made, we reject the claim that the appellant  will  be  at
    risk in making the journey from Baghdad to his home area or the IKR and
    we find there will not be a breach of Article 3.


Article 8


47. As to the Article 8 claim, Judge Chapman recorded at paragraph [67]  of
    his decision that the Human Rights grounds were not being  pursued.   A
    separate Article 8 claim was not advanced by the  appellant  or  by  Mr
    Mohzam in his submissions before us.


48. For the avoidance of any doubt, we find that the appellant  has  failed
    to  establish  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to   the
    appellant's integration into Iraq.  Carrying  out  a  broad  evaluative
    assessment we note that the appellant spent the formative years of  his
    life living with his family in Iraq. We find that although he has  been
    absent from Iraq since July 2017, he  is  a  healthy  young  male,  who
    speaks Kurdish Sorani and has been able, on his own  account,  to  look
    after himself for a number of years.  His parents and  siblings  remain
    in Iraq, and he also has family in the IKR.  He will be able to turn to
    them for support. The appellant previously worked in Iraq, and we  find
    that it would be open to him to secure gainful employment upon  return.




49. There is no evidence before us regarding the private  life  established
    by the appellant in the UK.  Even if he has established a private life,
    and the decision to remove the appellant may have consequences of  such
    gravity as to engage the operation of Article 8,  we  accept  that  the
    interference is in accordance with the law.  We have considered whether
    the interference is proportionate to the legitimate public  end  sought
    to be achieved.


50. In reaching our decision we have had regard to the factors set  out  in
    s117B of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002,  and  note
    that the maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
    interest.  Although the appellant may prefer to remain in the UK,  that
    does not equate to a right to do so in law.  On the evidence before us,
    there are no exceptional circumstances capable of establishing that the
    removal  of  the  appellant  to  Iraq  amounts  to  a  disproportionate
    interference with the appellant's right to  enjoyment  of  his  private
    life.  Accordingly, we dismiss the appeal on Article 8 grounds.


NOTICE OF DECISION


51. The appeal is dismissed on Asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.


52. The appeal on Article 3 and Article 8 ECHR grounds is dismissed



    Signed        V. Mandalia               Date 19th May 2021




    Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia
