
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07594/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 February 2018                           |On 15 March 2018              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            Ms Editha Valenzuela
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms C Jaquiss, Counsel, instructed by Bespoke
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   In this decision the Appellant is  referred  to  as  the  Secretary  of
    State and the Respondent is referred to as the Claimant.

2.   The Claimant, a national of the Philippines, date  of  birth  27  April
    1969, appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 1 August  2017,
    to refuse an asylum and protection claim and to  refuse  to  allow  the
    Appellant to remain by virtue of a claim  to  a  private  life  in  the
    United Kingdom under the Immigration Rules and  Article  8  ECHR.   The
    appeal against that decision  came  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herbert, who allowed the appeal under the Immigration Rules  and  under
    Article 8 ECHR.  The Judge dismissed the appeals  in  relation  to  the
    need for asylum, Humanitarian Protection and under  Articles  2  and  3
    ECHR.  It is clear that no case was being run under either Article 3 or
    Article 8 ECHR in relation to the Appellant's physical or mental health
    as a basis on which she should remain in  the  UK.   The  Secretary  of
    State raises a significant number of different points of attack against
    the decision of the Judge and I do not set them all out  because  quite
    simply there is no need to do so.

3.   I follow the approach that it is inappropriate for the  Upper  Tribunal
    to intervene in a decision simply  because  it  might  have  reached  a
    different  decision.   What  is  required  of  course  is   a   careful
    consideration of the evidence and a proper application of  the  law  to
    it.  In this case I find that the Original Tribunal set out much of the
    evidence which is of the most general kind  concerning  the  nature  of
    concerns anyone who has lived in the United Kingdom for many years  may
    fear whether relocating to the  Philippines  or  elsewhere.   Naturally
    there are the inevitable consequences of being uprooted  from  familiar
    circumstances, returning to the home  country  on  one's  own  in  many
    cases, a lack of employment, housing and  various  other  matters  that
    flow from those difficulties.

4.   In this case the  Claimant's  position  is  that  she  has  been  in  a
    longstanding  partnership  with  a  Mr  [S  F],  a  national   of   the
    Philippines, date of birth 20 April 1962, therefore a few  years  older
    than  the  claimant.   Their  relationship,  the  Judge  accepted,  was
    genuine,  significant  and  that  they  are  emotionally  very   close.
    Similarly the  Judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant's  partner  has  a
    disability in that he is blind in one eye and has a limp in  his  right
    leg.  In fact, the Judge did not address the limp but I assume since he
    accepted the other evidence that the same applies.  However, the  Judge
    also noted and does not seem to have balanced it with that finding  the
    fact that the claimant's partner works six days a week as a cleaner and
    therefore the extent of his dependency upon the Claimant, let alone the
    extent of the disability being significant, does  not  really  seem  to
    have been scrutinised or at least explained.

5.   Ultimately, the Judge  having  recited  a  good  deal  of  the  law  in
    relation  to  considerations  that  may  arise  in  relation  to   very
    significant obstacles to return, insurmountable obstacles to return or,
    as he puts it, in other ways serious difficulties in making a life  for
    themselves  and  serious  hardship  or   unduly   harsh   consequences.
    Nevertheless the judge failed to give any real reasoning as to  why  he
    reaches the conclusions that he did.  The findings on the key areas are
    made but no analysis of why they might truly amount  to  insurmountable
    or very significant obstacles.  The matter is illustrated, for example,
    by the reference to the implications of protracted delay  in  effecting
    removal rather depends on the Secretary  of  State  knowing  where  the
    overstayer is.

6.   In this case it is quite clear from the immigration history,  which  Ms
    Jaquiss helpfully took me to, that the Claimant was determined to be in
    the United Kingdom for many,  many  years  unlawfully  and  sought  and
    failed on a number of occasions late  on  to  try  and  regularise  her
    status, all of which have failed.  It therefore seemed to me  harsh  to
    somehow say those failures and the lack of active steps  to  physically
    find the Claimant and remove her form the  basis  of  protracted  delay
    which has caused some measure of  disadvantage  and  prejudice  to  the
    Claimant.  On the contrary, such time as there has  been  has  been  is
    relied upon as reasoning for why she should not now be removed.

7.   The Judge also failed to give any proper analysis of why Mr [F]  cannot
    return to the Philippines with his partner nor why to do so  would  be,
    given his physical health and abilities, unduly harsh or insurmountable
    in terms of obstacles to him finding work in his home country.

8.   I conclude therefore that the Original Tribunal failed to  give  proper
    and adequate reasons sufficient to explain the decision how the  appeal
    could succeed under the Rules because quite simply making  the  finding
    that there are insurmountable obstacles is not sufficient.  A party  is
    entitled to know with reasons why a decision has  been  reached,  which
    applies both to the Secretary of State and to an Appellant.

9    The Original Tribunal's decision stands  in  relation  to  the  asylum,
    humanitarian protection and Articles 2 and 3 ECHR. There was  no  cross
    appeal on those findings. I form the view that the Original  Tribunal's
    decision simply does not contain sufficient and adequate reasons and as
    such is an error of law.  For these  reasons  the  original  Tribunal's
    decision cannot stand in relation to the application of the Immigration
    Rules/Appendix FM of the Immigration Rules and in relation to Article 8
    ECHR.

10. DECISION.

11. The appeal of the Secretary of State is allowed to the extent that  the
    private life claims will be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. DIRECTIONS.
    1)   list two hours;
    2)   issues claim under the Rules and whether or not Article 8
    3)   List, not before F-t T  Judge  Herbert  nor  before  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Davey.
    4)   Any further documentation relied upon in support of the Article  8
         ECHR claim to be lodged not less  than  fourteen  days  before  the
         further hearing.
    5)   No anonymity order.

No anonymity direction is made.
Signed                                  Date 6 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
