
                                    [pic]
I

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07513/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 12 March 2019                     |On 1 April 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                 Nurzat [N]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms P Solanki, counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Miss Willocks Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of Kyrgyzstan,  date  of  birth  11  November
    1986, appealed against the Respondent's decision, dated 21  July  2017,
    to refuse her asylum/protection claim made on 22 September 2015.

2.   Her appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris (the Judge)  on
    17  January  2019.   His  decision  [D]  dismissed  her  appeals.   Her
    protection claim was based on her being  trafficked,  at  risk  of  re-
    trafficked and her sexuality as a lesbian.  Permission  to  appeal  was
    given by First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison on 14 February 2019.



3.   On a consideration of this matter there was no  doubt  that  the  Judge
    wrote a long, and to some extent analytical, decision  on  elements  of
    the Appellant's claim.  Of particular complaint in the  grounds  were;-
    first, the Judge simply did not get to grips with the legal position as
    to what may constitute trafficking, Secondly, even on the  Judge's  own
    findings, it followed that the Appellant was a  victim  of  trafficking
    through being the subject of a forced  marriage,  sexual  exploitation:
    Leading to the conclusion that she could only have  been  a  victim  of
    slavery.

4.   On a careful  reading  of  the  [D]  the  Judge,  having  accepted  the
    Appellant's claim as to how she had been seized, forced into a marriage
    and raped, had  the  material  necessary  to  reach  a  conclusion  the
    Appellant as a victim of trafficking but erred  in  law.   I  find  the
    Judge failed to take into account not just that  factual  position  but
    also matters of fact  and  law.   There  was  other  supportive  expert
    evidence which the Judge did not address or give adequate or sufficient
    reasons why that evidence,  particularly  from  a  Miss  Flint  and  Mr
    Seddon, was rejected.

5.   It was further of concern that when the Judge was alert  to  the  issue
    of the Appellant's vulnerability, and  [D3.7]  made  reference  to  the
    same, yet, he wholly failed to address the material  evidence  from  Dr
    Chiedu Obuaya MBBS BSc MRCPsych MBA whose qualifications and experience
    were clearly set out. Dr Obuaya gave a clear opinion on the  bases  for
    and the impact of the Appellant's depression, its possible  causes  and
    potential implications of her  problems.   I  bear  in  mind  that  the
    Appellant was examined by the doctor and there was other evidence  from
    health professionals  which  confirmed  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    undergoing counselling and psychological therapy.

6.   Those matters were all pertinent to the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    Appellant's evidence and the assessment of her underlying claim to have
    been ill-treated in Kyrgyzstan.

7.   I conclude in any event that  the  failure  to  properly  address  that
    evidence was an error of law.  It also seemed to  me  most  unfortunate
    that the Judge should only have addressed Mr  Seddon's  report  on  the
    issue of internal relocation.  The Judge's analysis did not address the
    conclusion of Mr Seddon on the potential reliability of the Appellant's
    claim.

8.   Similarly whilst the Judge heard submissions  concerning  the  evidence
    of a Miss Nasim, the criticisms made by  the  Presenting  Officer  (see
    D6.4, 6.5 and 6.6) as well as the submissions made  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant (D6.9) the fact was that the Judge in  the  analysis  of  the
    findings really took no other point than the fact  that  the  Appellant
    was accepted by those persons,  including  those  who  had  written  in
    support, on the Appellant's say so and there had  been  an  absence  of
    objective evidence to demonstrate that she was  actively  pursuing  her
    sexuality in the UK.  It seemed to  me  the  Judge's  error  was  that,
    having made up his mind as to the  issue  of  whether  the  Appellant's
    sexuality was as claimed, simply gave the appearance of having rejected
    anything that was inconsistent  with  his  conclusion  on  that  issue.
    Rather it seemed to me that whilst on one hand it might be said he  was
    looking at all maters in the round, the fact was that he failed to deal
    with the evidence.  For example, Miss Nasim had known the Appellant and
    had regular contact with her over  a  two  year  period,  as  a  person
    working with LGBT issues and helping people, who had  formed  the  view
    that the Appellant was genuine in her claimed sexuality.  That was  not
    to say that it followed that Miss Nasim was inevitably right but it was
    a matter of weight that ought to be addressed in the analysis  provided
    by the Judge.

9.   I take into account also that the Judge was addressed, by reference  to
    other supporting evidence, of persons  who  have  known  the  Appellant
    which was simply not referred to.  On one hand, perhaps in  the  normal
    course of events might not matter, but when their evidence was directly
    on the issue of the Appellant's sexuality I found it an error of law to
    have failed to address relevant evidence.

10.  Without the need to go through each and  every  ground  I  reached  the
    conclusion that the Judge in addressing the evidence erred in  law  and
    failed to properly consider the claim being made  looking  at  all  the
    evidence in  addressing  the  issues  arising  from  the  negative  NRM
    outcome.  It was accepted that it was open to the Judge  to  do  so  in
    dealing with the protection claim by reference to the case of  ES  (s82
    NIA 2002; negative NRM) Albania [2018] UKUT 00335 which made plain  the
    correct approach was to consider all the evidence as  at  the  date  of
    hearing in the round and apply the lower standard of proof.

11.  For these reasons therefore, notwithstanding there  are  other  matters
    of complaint about the Judge's decision, I conclude that  the  Original
    Tribunal's decision cannot stand and the matter will have to be  remade
    in the First-tier Tribunal.

12.  It is extremely unfortunate that so much time has already been lost  in
    dealing with this matter since it was first subject to a claim in 2015.

DECISION

The appeal is allowed to the extent that  the  Original  Tribunal  does  not
stand. The appeal is to be remade in FtT (IAC).

DIRECTIONS

(1)  The matter is to be relisted for hearing in the First-tier Tribunal,
Hatton Cross, not before First-tier Tribunal Judge Norris.

(2)  List for hearing two and a half hours.  Any further evidence relied
upon in support of the Appellant's human rights based claim and/or asylum
claim to be served not later than ten clear working days before the resumed
hearing.

(3)  Any further reconsideration by the Respondent of the NRM position to
be notified to the Tribunal and Appellant's representative promptly.

(4)  The Respondent to notify the Tribunal if either the original decision
is withdrawn or if there is an alternative or supplementary decision that
will be relied upon at the further hearing.

(5)  Russian interpreter required.

No anonymity direction is made.

Signed   Date 21 March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey
