
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07181/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 28 January 2019                     |On 7 February 2019              |
|                                       |                                |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                  ILHAN [S]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms N Nnamani (counsel) instructed by Howe & Co,
                    solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chana promulgated on 28  August  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


3. The appellant was born on 23 August 1986 and  is  a  citizen  of  Turkey.
On 29 May 2018 the Secretary of State  refused  the  Appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Chana ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 14 December  2018  Designated
Judge Shaerf granted permission to appeal stating

      1. The appellant is a Turkish Kurd born in 1986. He  seeks  permission
      to appeal the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Chana
      promulgated on 28  August  2018  dismissing  his  appeal  against  the
      refusal of international surrogacy protection claimed on the basis  of
      his political opinion.


      2. The Judge made her findings of fact as she recited the evidence and
      accordingly the grounds of appeal relying on  M'banga  v  SSHD  [2005]
      EWCA Civ 367 are arguable.


      3. It is also arguable that the Judge erred at paragraph 44 in relying
      on Fatih Andic v SSHD [2004] EWCA Civ 557 which was a judgement handed
      down before the determination in IK(returnees- records-IFA) Turkey  CG
      [2004] UKIAT 00312.


      4. All the grounds disclose arguable errors of law and  permission  to
      appeal is granted.

The Hearing

5. (a) For the appellant, Ms Nnamani moved the grounds of appeal.  She  told
me that the appellant is a Turkish national of Kurdish ethnicity and  claims
he was involved in pro-Kurdish politics.  She  told  with  at  [33]  of  the
determination the Judge makes a material error of fact,  because  the  Judge
believed that the documents submitted by  the  appellant  was  a  membership
card for HDP when,  in  fact,  it  is  a  membership  card  from  a  Kurdish
community centre. Ms  Nnamani  told  me  that  the  Judge  confused  herself
because two separate documents were produced, one was a  membership  of  the
Kurdish community centre, the other is a  letter  from  HDP  confirming  the
appellants membership since 28 August 2014. She told me  that  [33]  of  the
decision demonstrates that the Judge did not understand the evidence.

(b) Ms Nnamani told me that the Judge's findings are set  out  between  [31]
and [52] of the decision. Between [33] and [36] the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant is neither a  credible  nor  a  reliable  witness.  The  appellant
relies on a medical report, which details scarring and provides a  diagnosis
of chronic PTSD. Ms Nnamani told me that at [42]  the  Judge  dismisses  the
medical report by relying on her credibility  findings  from  [33]  onwards.
She relied on M'banga v SSHD [2005] EWCA  Civ  367  and  told  me  that  the
Judge's assessment of the medical evidence and the appellant's  evidence  is
fundamentally flawed.

(c) Ms Nnamani told me that the Judge failed to follow  country  guidance  &
failed to engage with the objective background materials.  She  reminded  me
that the appellant's witness has been granted refugee  status  and  told  me
that there is no analysis  of  the  evidence  provided  by  the  appellant's
witness. Ms Nnamani concedes that the Judge refers to IK (Returnees-Records-
IFA) Turkey CG 2004 UKIAT 00312, but argued that the judge failed to  follow
the guidance given in that case.

(d) Ms Nnamani told me that the decision is tainted by  material  errors  of
law. She urged me to set the decision aside and remit the case to the First-
tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

6. (a) For the respondent, Mr Tarlow told me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors - material or otherwise. He  told  me  that  the  grounds  of
appeal amount to nothing more than a disagreement  with  the  Judge's  well-
reasoned findings. He told me that if there is any confusion at [33] of  the
decision it is not material to the conclusion that the Judge reached.

(b) Mr Tarlow took me to [36] and [39] of the decision, where, he  told  me,
the  Judge  reaches  conclusions  well  within  the  range   of   reasonable
conclusions. He told me that the Judge gave inadequate consideration to  the
psychiatric report at [42] of the decision. Mr Tarlow told me that  at  [48]
of the decision the Judge makes it clear that the appellant had not come  to
the adverse attention of the authorities in Turkey.  He  told  me  that  the
Judge's well-reasoned findings lead to [49] of the decision where the  Judge
finds that the appellant has fabricated his claim after  applications  under
the Ankara agreement were unsuccessful. He told me that at  [50]  the  Judge
correctly follows the country guidance case of IK.

(c) Mr Tarlow urged me to dismiss the  appeal  and  allow  the  decision  to
stand.

Analysis

7. The Judge's findings of fact start at [31] of the decision. Between  [33]
and [41] the Judge considers the appellant's evidence and  repeatedly  finds
that his credibility is damaged by various aspects  of  his  evidence.  Only
after finding the appellant is not a credible witness does  the  judge  turn
to the  psychiatric  report  found  between  documents  13  and  29  of  the
appellant's bundle.

8. The medical report that the appellant relies on finds that  the  scarring
on the appellant's forehead & left eye, and the scarring to  his  hands  and
forearms are typical of the manner  in  which  he  described  receiving  the
injuries.  The  author  of  the  report  finds  that  other  scars  on   the
appellant's body are consistent with the appellant's account. The author  of
the report finds that the appellant suffers from chronic PTSD.

9. The finding that injuries are typical of an account by reference  to  the
Istanbul protocol is the second strongest of  five  potential  findings.  At
[42] the Judge incorrectly records that the author of the report  finds  the
injuries to be consistent with the appellant's account.  Consistent  is  the
second lowest of the five potential findings under  the  Istanbul  protocol.
The report quite clearly finds  that  some  injuries  are  "consistent"  but
other injuries are "typical". The Judge does consider the  expert's  opinion
that some injuries are "typical" of the appellant's account.

10. The Judge deals with the psychiatric report at  [42]  of  the  decision.
The Judge finds that the report does not assist the appellant, but does  not
explain  why.  The  Judge  has  quite  clearly  reached  her  conclusion  on
credibility before considering the medical evidence.   At  paragraph  24  of
Mbanga v SSHD [2005] INLR 377 Wilson LJ said

      What the fact finder does at his peril is to  reach  a  conclusion  by
      reference only  to  the  applicant's  evidence  and  then,  if  it  be
      negative, to ask whether the  conclusion  should  be  shifted  by  the
      expert evidence.

11. One of the appellant's witnesses was [YM]. He is a Turkish national  who
has been granted refugee status in the UK because of his political  opinion.
At [29] the Judge records Mr [M]'s evidence, but nowhere in the decision  is
there any analysis of the evidence. It is implicit that  the  Judge  rejects
his evidence, but the Judge does  not  say  why  the  appellant's  witnesses
evidence is rejected.

12. The approach taken to the medical evidence is not just  superficial,  it
is a material error of law. The absence of analysis of the evidence  of  the
appellant's two witnesses is also a material error of law.

13.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

14. The Judge's findings of  fact  are  inadequately  reasoned.  That  is  a
material error of law. I set the decision  aside.  I  have  found  that  the
Judge's decision must be set aside because  his  fact-finding  exercise  was
inadequate. I  cannot  substitute  my  own  decision.  Further  fact-finding
exercise is necessary.



Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

15. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

16. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

17. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Hatton  Cross
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Chana.

Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

19. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  28  August  2018.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.



Signed
              Date 30 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle







