
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07752/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2018                         |On 9th January 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                 junaid [a]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Easty (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell (Home Office Presenting Officer)


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bart-Stewart,  promulgated  on  30th  August  2018,  following  a
    hearing at Taylor House on 3rd August 2018.  In the determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was born on 6th May
    1979.  He appealed against the decision of the  Respondent  dated  21st
    May 2018, refusing his claim to asylum and to humanitarian  protection,
    pursuant to paragraph 309C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he has a well-founded fear
    of persecution in Pakistan on account of his membership of a particular
    social group in that he is a gay man.  He became aware of his sexuality
    when he was 15 years old.  He touched the hand of a  friend,  [S],  and
    hugged him.  [S] asked him why he was so loving towards him and he told
    him of his sexuality although he was unaware of his friend's sexuality.
     In July 1993, while at college he was attracted to a  boy  named  [J],
    with whom he began a relationship.  Since arriving in  the  UK  he  has
    been in an openly gay relationship with a man called [HA], that  lasted
    for six to seven months (see paragraph 3 of the  determination).   This
    aside, the Appellant gave evidence that he has joined the  LGBT  Labour
    Club and London Friend.  He has told three friends in the UK about  his
    sexuality and there are an additional fifteen to twenty people he  goes
    clubbing with.  In October 2017 he had contact  with  his  brother  and
    father on the telephone.  They wanted him to return to Pakistan to  see
    his mother who was ill.  During the conversation he told them  that  he
    would not return as he is a homosexual.  The family then threatened  to
    kill him.  He no longer has contact with his family.  If he returns  he
    will be killed by his family, relatives, and law  enforcement  agencies
    (paragraph 4).

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge had regard to the fact that the Grounds of  Appeal  were  pro
    forma "and do not address the issues  raised  in  the  refusal  letter"
    (paragraph 20).  Nevertheless, the judge  considered  the  evidence  in
    relation to the Appellant's claim of being homosexual, when he  had  an
    attraction with [S], and  an  attraction  to  [J],  together  with  his
    present relationship with [HA] (see paragraphs 20 to  22).   The  judge
    observed that the Appellant stated that it was that he  went  to  clubs
    after arriving in the UK "but less frequently.  When he arrived he  was
    afraid of being rejected socially as he had been in Pakistan  which  is
    why he did not take the opportunities to enjoy the  freedoms  available
    to homosexuals as normal members of society" (paragraph 23).

 5. The judge also went on to consider  the  evidence  of  other  witnesses
    appearing before  him,  including  [HA],  who  made  a  statement  (see
    paragraphs 24 to  26).   The  evidence  of  [RR]  was  also  considered
    (paragraph 27).  Consideration  was  given  to  the  breakdown  in  the
    relationship with Mr Ali, with whom the Appellant claimed to  have  "an
    open relationship", and the judge observed that "there  is  no  special
    reason for the split but Mr Ali began to ignore him and was  interested
    in other boys" (paragraph 32), and this was  the  evidence  before  the
    judge.

 6. In the submissions before the judge, the Respondent  submitted  to  the
    Presenting Officer that "the Appellant was not in an open relationship"
    (paragraph 37).  This was because "he gave no information  about  doing
    anything with his partner.  It was artificial the way the evidence came
    across.  He would know certain things by familiarity as with a  friend.
    [RR] did  not  know  they  were  in  a  relationship"  (paragraph  37).
    Moreover, the evidence in relation to the family's reaction was  simply
    not plausible because the Appellant had told them that he was not going
    back to Pakistan, and so there  was  no  need  for  them  to  place  an
    announcement in the media saying that they had  disinherited  him,  and
    that his life would be at risk (paragraph 37).

 7. The  judge  also  recorded  that  the  submissions  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellant, on the other hand, was that

         "the evidence  of  the  Appellant  and  Mr  Ali  that  they  had  a
         superficial sexual relationship consisting of  sexual  contact  and
         clubbing.  It was not deeply emotional.  This is not evidence  that
         the account was not credible.  They gave  examples  of  clubs  they
         went to and  they  said  they  went  to  dinner.   All  three  were
         consistent that [RR] did not know of the  relationship"  (paragraph
         38).

 8. In his findings, the judge began by noting that the Appellant  came  to
    the UK as a student in 2011, and before this lived in Sialkot with  his
    parents and siblings (paragraph 41).  The Appellant  had  said  he  had
    never returned to Pakistan "because he was busy studying and had  never
    intended to go.  He claimed that within six months of arriving  in  the
    UK he had discovered gay clubs and that gay men could be open and free.
     By 2013 he also had a relationship with [HA]" (paragraph 42).

 9. However, the judge went on to say that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
    that he could not return to Pakistan because you could not live  in  an
    open and free relationship as a gay man in Pakistan, but "did not  make
    any application to remain on the basis of sexuality  until  June  2017.
    In the meantime he made two Leave To Remain applications  but  had  not
    made any reference to his claimed sexuality".  This  was  a  matter  of
    some significance for the judge because the  judge  concluded  that  "I
    consider that the Appellant's actions is inconsistent with his claim to
    have been a gay man, socialising within the  Asian  gay  community  and
    attending gay clubs since 2011" (paragraph 42).

10. The judge also held that the  Appellant's  account  during  the  asylum
    interview "was inconsistent and contradictory" because at  question  22
    he accepted that he had never intended to go back to  Pakistan  but  at
    question 24 he said that his plan was to get a good education and  then
    return to Pakistan (paragraph 43).  Importantly, the  judge  also  held
    that the Appellant's account of the realisation that he was gay at  the
    age of 15 "is vague", because "he claims that he touched  his  friend's
    hands and hugged him.  His friend said nothing but  at  that  point  he
    realised that something attracted him to males only it is not clear how
    this one incident made him instantly realise he was gay ..." (paragraph
    44).

11. In the same way it did not make sense  that  [J]  found  out  that  the
    Appellant was gay simply because the Appellant wished to sit  close  to
    him (paragraph 45).  Most importantly, the  judge  concluded  that  the
    claimed relationship with "[HA]" was one that raised  serious  concerns
    about the Appellant's credibility because "his oral  evidence  is  that
    he, [HA], and [RR] are part of the  same  friendship  group  and  visit
    clubs together.  It is not credible that [RR] would be unaware that the
    Appellant and [HA] had some form of relationship" (paragraph 46).

12. In the end, the judge did not find the Appellant to  be  credible,  and
    applied the leading jurisprudence in  this  area  by  reference  to  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31, and observed  that,  "I  remind  myself  that  I
    should not rely on stereotypes.  To the contrary I  consider  that  the
    Appellant is playing  upon  a  stereotype  of  promiscuity  and  sexual
    activity" (paragraph 50).

13. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

14. The grounds of application state that the judge failed  to  follow  the
    steps in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 in relation to the Appellant's  claim
    that he was gay.  The judge's full findings that the Appellant was  not
    a homosexual were not properly reasoned.  The judge also erred  in  his
    approach to credibility basing this  on  the  late  disclosure  of  the
    Appellant's sexuality.  The judge failed moreover to  take  account  of
    all the relevant evidence.

15. Permission to appeal was granted on 2nd October 2018 on the basis  that
    the judge additionally failed to take into account the evidence of  the
    two witnesses confirming the Appellant's sexuality.

16. A Rule 24 response was entered on  14th  November  2018  (which  I  was
    helpfully shown by Ms Easty appearing as Counsel before  me)  and  this
    states that adequate consideration  was  given  by  the  judge  to  the
    evidence.  The Appellant was not found  to  have  been  credible.   The
    judge did not have to consider how the Appellant would  behave  on  his
    return to Pakistan as she did not accept the Appellant's case  that  he
    was gay.  The judge did not accept that  the  Appellant  had  told  his
    family that he was gay and that they had rejected him as a result.

Submissions

17. At the hearing before me on 22nd November 2018, Ms Easty submitted that
    there were two witnesses  before  the  judge  and  they  had  not  been
    properly considered in terms of the evidence that  they  had  proffered
    and this was a serious error on the part of the  judge.   For  example,
    the judge states (at paragraph 32) that the  Appellant's  evidence  was
    that he had an open relationship with Mr Ali, and "they were in an open
    relationship, they  had  body  contact,  and  Mr  Ali  is  his  friend"
    (paragraph 32).  There is no finding of fact in relation to this aspect
    of the evidence.  It is not clear whether this witness is  believed  or
    not.  In the same way  (at  paragraph  46)  the  judge  refers  to  the
    evidence as not to be implausible when she states that,  "I  find  this
    further undermines the credibility of the  Appellant's  claim  to  have
    been in relationships with men" but  there  is  a  failure  here,  once
    again, to reach a specific finding in relation to  a  specific  witness
    and that witness' evidence.  As for the evidence that the Appellant had
    said that he never returned to Pakistan because he  was  busy  studying
    and never intended to go (paragraph 42) there was no inconsistency that
    was identified in this evidence.  The judge states that the Appellant's
    asylum interview "was inconsistent and  contradictory"  (paragraph  43)
    and attention is here drawn to question 22 of the asylum interview that
    the Appellant never intended to go back, but that at  question  24,  he
    said that he would get a good education and  return  to  Pakistan,  but
    this is by no means indicative of any inconsistency whatsoever.

18. Ms Easty helpfully handed up to me the trial bundle of  the  Appellant,
    which shows that there were witness statements here from the  Appellant
    (pages 55 to 59), from [RR] (at page 50), and from  [HA].   There  were
    also reference letters from three other people (pages 61  to  68).   Ms
    Easty submitted that if one looks at  the  contents  of  these  witness
    statements it is clear that full findings had to be made  with  respect
    to the testimony that was there set up.

19. For his part Mr Whitwell submitted that this was nothing  more  than  a
    disagreement with the findings of the judge.   The  judge  applied  the
    case law in HA (Iran) properly to the appeal (see paragraphs 38 to 40).
     The judge looked at the evidence of the witnesses in the  round.   The
    judge makes it clear why the evidence (at paragraph 44) was found to be
    "vague", because it was the Appellant's account  that  he  touched  his
    friend's hand and hugged him, and his friend said nothing, but that  at
    that point he realised that something attracted him to males only,  but
    the judge was clear in stating that

         "It is not clear why this one incident made him  instantly  realise
         he was gay particularly as in his response to question 33  he  said
         that you can touch the hands of the males, touch their hands, shake
         their hands on your normal routine there is nothing wrong with that
         and you can hug other males  there  is  nothing  wrong  with  that"
         (paragraph 44).

20. Furthermore, the Appellant stated that he was not  in  an  "openly  gay
    relationship" (paragraph 23) and this was the case  shortly  after  the
    Appellant arrived in the UK.  Subsequently, the evidence suggested,  as
    made clear by the Presenting Officer before the judge, that it was very
    much in doubt whether the Appellant was in an openly  gay  relationship
    at all thereafter.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    Appellant was not gay at all.  In relation to there being  a  delay  in
    the Appellant claiming asylum, this was a case where the Appellant  had
    made two leave to remain applications and made no reference at  all  to
    his claimed sexuality  (paragraph  42)  and  the  judge  was  perfectly
    entitled to come to that conclusion.




21. Finally, what  is  most  conspicuous  about  the  Appellant's  lack  of
    credibility in this appeal is the statement that  "[HA]  and  [RR]  are
    part of the same friendship group and visit clubs together",  but  that
    [RR] was  unaware  that  the  Appellant  and  [HA]  had  some  form  of
    relationship (paragraph 46) as the judge  made  clear.   In  fact,  the
    judge expressly stated that, "If it was no more than friendship  it  is
    unclear why both would refer to it as an open relationship rather  than
    casual sex" (paragraph 46).

22. In her reply, Ms Easty submitted that it was  well  established  (since
    the case of Mohd Amin) that a decision-maker must make  it  clear  what
    evidence he or she accepts, what is rejected, and the reasons for  this
    decision.  Second, the judge falls  into  the  error  of  treating  the
    evidence as lacking in "plausibility", whereas the proper test is  that
    of  "credibility".   Third,  the  judge  does  not  explain   why   the
    Appellant's conclusion that he was gay at the age of  15,  was  on  the
    basis of "vague" evidence.  Finally, the proper steps in HJ (Iran)  had
    simply not been followed.

No Error of Law

23. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the  decision.   In  fact,  the
    determination of Judge C Bart-Stewart, is a careful, comprehensive, and
    sophisticated in its determination of both the factual issues  and  the
    legal position, imploring upon the situation in Pakistan, the treatment
    of gay people there, and the Appellant's own immigration background  in
    this country.

24. First, there is no inconsistency whatsoever in  the  judge's  statement
    (at paragraph 23) that the Appellant "when he arrived he was afraid  of
    being rejected socially as he had been in Pakistan which is why he  did
    not take the opportunity to enjoy the freedoms available to homosexuals
    as normal members of society".  When this is compared  to  the  judge's
    statement (at paragraph 46),  the  judge  is  equally  clear  that  the
    Appellant was not in an "open relationship" at all because although  he
    and his two friends, [HA] and [RR], "are part of  the  same  friendship
    group and visit clubs together" the startling fact here was that  "[RR]
    would be unaware  that  the  Appellant  and  [HA]  have  some  form  of
    relationship" (paragraph 46).  Indeed, the judge  makes  the  situation
    absolutely clear when stating that in  response  to  question  89,  the
    Appellant had said, "I did have relationships and would meet each other
    once or  twice  during  the  week  but  I  did  not  have  a  dedicated
    relationship with anyone because they had  other  commitments".   There
    can be simply no criticism at all of the judge's conclusion  here  that
    "I find this further undermines  the  credibility  of  the  Appellant's
    claim to have been in a  relationship  with  men".   There  can  be  no
    criticism that the judge is focusing upon "plausibility",  because  the
    judge in turn states that "it  is  not  credible  that  [RR]  would  be
    unaware" (paragraph 46).  In fact, the sophisticated  and  far  sighted
    approach to this appeal is exhibited nowhere better than in the judge's
    final  conclusion  that,  whereas  she  herself  must   not   rely   on
    stereotypes, "I consider that the Appellant is playing upon stereotypes
    of promiscuity and sexual  activity"  (paragraph  50).   That  was  the
    conclusion that the judge was entitled to come on the evidence.

25. Second, it is not the case that the Appellant's  account   was  wrongly
    described as "being vague" when he said at the age of  15  he  realised
    that he was gay because by his own evidence he had said that  "you  can
    touch the hands of the males, touch their hands, shake their hands on a
    normal routine there  is  nothing  wrong  with  that",  and  the  judge
    accordingly properly concluded that "it  is  not  clear  how  this  one
    incident made him instantly realise he was gay" (paragraph 44).

26. Similarly, the Appellant states that he met [J] when he changed  school
    and

         "... he sat beside and studied and would sit nearby  to  watch  him
         change into his swimming trunks and get out of the  swimming  pool.
         He said he did not tell [J] that he was gay and he did not  have  a
         relationship with him.   [J]  found  out  from  his  behaviour  and
         suspected he was gay because he sat close to [J] and he was  warned
         off" (paragraph 45).

    The judge was entirely correct here in concluding that "it  is  not  at
    all clear how  or  why  [J]  suspected  that  the  Appellant  was  gay"
    (paragraph 45).

27. Third, no criticism whatsoever can be made in the judge's treatment  of
    the leading case of HJ (Iran) [2010] because the judge  is  clear  that
    the Appellant is not even gay as  he  claims  to  be,  so  that  it  is
    unnecessary to consider whether he would  suffer  persecution  or  ill-
    treatment, on account of having to lead a discreet  or  closeted  life,
    for fear of the state, or state authorities.  The case  on  that  basis
    comes nowhere remotely near the strictures set out in HJ (Iran).

28. Fourth, the Appellant claimed that his family,  including  his  brother
    and father, had sent him threatening SMS messages  due  to  his  sexual
    interests, and the judge was clear here that "this is not part  of  the
    Appellant's claim and he has not produced any  SMS  messages  from  his
    father or brother" (paragraph 48).  The judge was equally sceptical  of
    the claim that the family had disinherited and disowned him by  putting
    an advertisement in the newspaper within a day or two  of  finding  out
    from the Appellant that he was gay, as the  Appellant's  name  was  not
    mentioned so that "no-one would know why he was not  returning.   I  do
    not accept as credible the explanation that it  would  get  out  as  he
    suddenly was asked  by  people  from  his  area  about  his  sexuality"
    (paragraph 47).

29. Finally, the judge was entirely correct in  drawing  attention  to  the
    fact that there had been a delay in the  Appellant  making  his  claim.
    This is not a criticism of the Appellant on account  purely  of  having
    delayed in raising a sexual  orientation  claim  with  respect  to  his
    protection claim, it is to do with the fact that the Appellant had made
    two Leave to Remain applications "but had not made any reference to his
    claimed sexuality" (paragraph 42).  Accordingly, the appeal before this
    Tribunal is completely without foundation and there is no error of law.

No Error of Law

30. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law.





Notice of Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law.  The decision shall stand.

32. The appeal is dismissed.

33. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018




