
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07901/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 9 November 2017                  |On 29 November 2017                     |
|                                    |                                        |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RAMSHAW


                                   Between

                                     tVN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A H Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam whose date of birth is [ ]  1998.
    The appellant had applied for asylum  in  the  UK  and  his  claim  was
    refused by the Secretary of State by way  of  a  decision  made  on  25
    November 2014.  The appellant was issued with discretionary leave as an
    unaccompanied minor from 25 November 2014 to 12 March 2016.  Before the
    expiry of that leave he lodged an appeal against  the  refusal  of  the
    asylum claim on 15 December 2014 which was dismissed by the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 25 March 2015.  His applications for permission  to  appeal
    against  that  decision  were  refused  by  the  first  and  upper-tier
    Tribunals.

 3. The appellant made a further application for  leave  to  remain  on  11
    March 2016.  That was deemed to be an asylum claim. This was refused by
    the respondent on 11 July 2016 and it is against that decision that the
    appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and it is that Tribunal's
    decision that is appealed to this Tribunal.

The appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 4. In a decision promulgated on 13 March 2017  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Andonian dismissed the appellant's  appeal.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the appellant would not be at risk of persecution on  return
    to Vietnam.  The appellant applied for  permission  to  appeal  against
    that decision to the  Upper  Tribunal.   On  31  July  2017  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lambert refused to  grant  permission  to  appeal.   The
    appellant renewed his application for permission to appeal to the Upper
    Tribunal and on 15 September 2017 Upper Tribunal Judge  Kamara  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal.

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal

 5. The grounds of appeal  are  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  failed  to
    resolve a material issue in  the  appeal.   The  judge  has  failed  to
    consider the appellant's evidence with regard to his political opinion,
    his attendance at demonstrations in the United Kingdom  and  his  prior
    political activities in Vietnam (which form the core of the appellant's
    claim). This evidence has not been dealt with by the judge as the focus
    is solely on religious persecution.  It is asserted that the judge  has
    failed to make an assessment of whether the appellant will continue  to
    express his political opinion in the same manner in which he did before
    if he were to be returned to Vietnam.  The assessment of risk on return
    focuses solely on religious persecution and is silent on the matter  of
    how the appellant would  behave  on  return  to  Vietnam,  despite  his
    evidence being he would  continue  to  express  anti-Government  views,
    reference is made to the appellant's witness statement at paragraph 17.



 6. Ground 2 asserts that the judge failed to consider objective  evidence.
    The judge makes no reference to the objective  evidence  pertaining  to
    political opponents in Vietnam despite that evidence being contained at
    pages 79 to 98 of the appellant's bundle.  It is a finding of fact,  as
    per the principles of  Devaseelan  (Second  Appeals  -  ECHR  -  Extra-
    Territorial Effect) Sri Lanka * [2002] UKIAT 00702 that  the  appellant
    participated   in   demonstrations,   distributed   leaflets   at   the
    demonstrations and was arrested and detained as a result.  In  addition
    it is the appellant's account that he would  continue  to  express  his
    political opinions on return  to  Vietnam.   The  respondent's  country
    policy information note on political opponents was updated in  November
    2016 after  the  first  determination  of  Immigration  Judge  Cameron.
    Therefore that any findings with regard  to  the  appellant's  risk  on
    return on the basis of his political beliefs need to be  considered  in
    light of the current objective evidence which indicates that conditions
    are worsening for such individuals.  The judge's finding  at  paragraph
    20 that "The appellant had not expressed any extreme or activist  views
    in relation to either political or religious matters" is flawed.  There
    is nothing in the objective evidence that indicates that risk on return
    is limited to those with extreme views.  The policy summary states:

         "Vietnam  actively  suppresses  political   dissent.    Those   who
         criticise the Government or who use the internet to  publish  ideas
         on Government policies, political pluralism and human rights or who
         otherwise express views which are seen as posing a  threat  to  the
         Government or communist party of Vietnam are at risk  of  arbitrary
         arrest and detention on account of their political opinion".

 7. Mr Khan submitted  that  there  is  no  evidence  that  the  judge  has
    considered the witness statement of the appellant made on  20  February
    2017.  The only reference in the decision was to the witness  statement
    made in 2016.  The judge has ignored this statement and has not engaged
    with the political aspects apart from a brief mention  at  paragraph  6
    which refers to the earlier statement and the photographs that were  in
    the bundle.  He submitted that the appellant is  a  political  activist
    and that this is the substantial part of his claim for asylum.  He  has
    developed a resentment whilst in the UK with regard  to  the  political
    situation in Vietnam, and as indicated in his evidence he would not  be
    entitled to the same political rights in  Vietnam  as  he  has  in  the
    United Kingdom.

 8. Mr Nath referred to paragraph 20 of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision
    and submitted that the view reached by the judge was open to  him.   He
    referred to paragraph 31 of the decision and submitted that it is clear
    that the judge did consider the points raised  by  the  appellant  with
    regard to what his political view is.  It is clear from that  paragraph
    that the appellant's main concern was with his practice of religion and
    issues connected to  it.   That  was  the  height  of  the  appellant's
    political activity whilst in Vietnam.  He left Vietnam when he  was  13
    years old and has not at any stage indicated that he  was  involved  in
    anything other than  a  demonstration  against  taking  land  from  the
    church.  He submitted that at paragraph 38 the  judge  clearly  had  in
    mind the appellant's alleged political activities and he has dealt with
    those in his findings.

 9. Mr Khan referred to paragraph 6 and submitted that it is clear that the
    judge, by referring to his recent statement of 8  March  2016  has  not
    considered his later statement so that there is a gap in the  evidence.
    He submitted that this is a material error of law as it might have  led
    to a gap in the findings on the political  aspect  of  the  appellant's
    claim.  He referred to paragraph 31 of the most recent statement  which
    demonstrates that the appellant used to disagree as a  child  with  the
    Government and intends to continue to do that.  The judge had  followed
    the first decision of Tribunal Judge Cameron and  had  failed  to  take
    into account the current political activities in the United Kingdom and
    had failed to undertake an up-to-date assessment.

Discussion

10. The first ground of appeal argues that the judge failed to consider the
    appellant's claim on the  basis  of  his  political  opinion  focussing
    solely on the claim to fear religious persecution. It is  important  to
    consider how the judge dealt with the evidence. The First-tier Tribunal
    set out:

         "8.   The  appellant  confirmed  to  me  that   he   had   attended
             demonstrations in 2012 in Vietnam  when  he  Waa  (sic)  [was]
             about 13 years of age, and was involved in  a protest  to  try
             and keep the land for the church as that was where  he  lived.
             He stated that he was helping to distribute  leaflets  to  the
             catholic people.  The leaflets were  about  the  demonstration
             and he had been asked by the priest to  hand  them  out.   The
             appellant had said that he was not in contact with the  priest
             since he left Vietnam.   The  priest  went  with  him  to  the
             airport but  he  was  stopped  and  could  not  accompany  the
             appellant.  I say this because the  appellant  said  that  the
             plan was that the priest would attend with him and  make  sure
             he arrives safely.  However, he was turned back at the airport
             and that was the last time he saw the  priest.   He  does  not
             know what has happened to him.

         9.   The appellant was asked by the  presenting  officer  what  had
             been written on the leaflets.  He said that he did not have  a
             look at the leaflets to read what they said.  He said  he  was
             not sure, but he was asked by the Father to give them  out  to
             the  Catholic  people.   He  said  he  knew  they  were  about
             demonstrations.  It is possible that as a 13-year-old or there
             about then, may not have been bothered to read the details  in
             the leaflets.  Suffice it that he and  the  parishioners  knew
             the church had to be saved from compulsory acquisition of  the
             land and he was told to distribute leaflets which  were  about
             that protest."

11. The judge set out in a number of paragraphs the background  information
    with regard to the oppression of practitioners of  the  Catholic  faith
    indicating that the appellant  would  not  be  at  risk  and  would  be
    permitted to practice his religion.  At paragraph 16 and following  the
    judge found:

         "16. The respondent accepts as I did [the] appellant's age as given
             and that he comes from  Vietnam.   The  appellant  provided  a
             limited  amount  of  information  on  his  religion,   however
             considering his age, life experience  and  education  and  his
             current attendance at church in the UK the respondent accepted
             that he is a Catholic.  I have no reason to disbelieve that he
             is a Catholic.  The immigration Judge at first  instance  also
             considered that he is  a  Catholic.   There  are  millions  of
             Catholics  living  in  Vietnam  however  who  practice   their
             religion without  being  harassed,  and  I  had  to  see  what
             distinguishes this appellant from the other Catholics.

         17.  There are circumstances where the Government has seized church
             land  and  I  can  well  understand   that   Catholics   could
             demonstrate about that.  So, on the lower standard of proof  I
             accept that the appellant may  have  been  detained  for  that
             reason whilst demonstrating  with  a  large  crowd  of  others
             there, but he was not mistreated, and was held with others who
             had been demonstrating.  He was held  overnight  according  to
             his  evidence  and  then  released.   The  priest   had   also
             demonstrated and then released.

         18.  By the appellant's  own  previous  account,  he  had  not  had
             difficulties practicing his religion in  Vietnam,  aside  from
             the problem  he  stated  he  experienced  attending  the  2012
             demonstrations.  I note from  the  objectivise  evidence  that
             citizens of Vietnam can practice any religion.   The  evidence
             shows that all religions are equal before the law.   In  fact,
             it appears that the Roman Catholic Church can now  select  its
             own bishops and priests, but they  must  be  approved  by  the
             government.  I also note that many restrictions on  charitable
             activities have bene (sic) [been] lifted.

         ...

         20.  The appellant had not expressed any extreme or activist  views
             in relation to either political or religious matters.

         21.  Furthermore, the appellant did not  take  up  in  any  further
             actives [(sic) [activities] after the June 2012 demonstration,
             which would have brought him adversely to the attention of the
             authorities.   Despite   some   discrimination   against   the
             Catholics the objective evidence does not  indicate  that  the
             appellant would not be able to practice his  religion  Vietnam
             (sic).

         ...

         31.  The appellant was  asked  what  his  opinion  of  the  Vietnam
             government was and he stated he felt he did not understand why
             they would want to  take  the  land  from  the  church  as  it
             belonged  to  the  church.   ...  In  cross  examination,  the
             appellant was referred to the answers he had given  about  the
             leaflets and he said he did not have a look at the leaflets so
             he did not know what they  were  about  but  they  were  about
             encouraging people to demonstrate.

         32.  The appellant was asked if the leaflets  had  anything  to  do
             with the Catholic religion and he said that the leaflets  were
             given to him by the father priest who asked him to  give  them
             out to Catholic people."

12. The appellant criticises both Judge  Cameron  and  Judge  Andonian  for
    failing to  consider  separately  his  claim  based  on  his  political
    opinion. The appellant attended 2 demonstrations in connection with his
    local church in Vietnam when he was a child aged 13. The demonstrations
    were concerned with the seizure of  church  land.  He  had  handed  out
    leaflets to the congregation during mass and at the demonstrations.  He
    was arrested and detained overnight, was not ill-treated  and  released
    without charge. He moved to another church in Hanoi because the  priest
    said that the police were looking for them where he remained until told
    he should leave Vietnam with the priest. Any reference to risk  because
    of his political opinion was linked to these events. Simply adding  the
    words 'political opinion' without any specific  basis  for  a  separate
    fear does not lead to the conclusion that a separate basis of claim was
    made as suggested  by  Mr  Khan  in  oral  submissions  namely  -  'the
    appellant used to disagree  as  a  child  with  the  Government  ...the
    appellant is a political activist and that this is the substantial part
    of his claim for asylum'   There  was  no  evidence  at  all  that  the
    appellant expressed any anti Government political opinions beyond  what
    might be a criticism of the Government for seizure of church land which
    is hardly surprising given he was 13 years old. His claim was based  on
    fear of religious persecution and that is how  it  was  pleaded  before
    First-tier Tribunal judge Cameron in 2015. The findings of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal in 2015 are the starting point. First-tier Tribunal judge
    Cameron found:

         '80 ...Taking into  account  the  profile  I  have  found  for  the
         appellant, that is he is an ordinary practicing Catholic who  would
         not be seen as an activist or having views  the  authorities  would
         consider to be destabilising towards the government, and given that
         I am not satisfied that he has shown that he would  be  of  adverse
         interest to the authorities on return,  I  am  not  satisfied  that
         there is a real risk that he would suffer serious harm on return to
         Vietnam'

13. It is incorrect to suggest that the  substantial  part  of  his  asylum
    claim is  his  political  opinion.  Before  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    Andonian the claim was focused on the religious  persecution.  However,
    the appellant in both his witness statements refers specifically to his
    political activities in the UK. He refers in his witness  statement  of
    March 2016 to not having attended any  demonstrations  in  the  UK  but
    wanting to attend a demonstration in May (2016), that  the  purpose  of
    the demonstration is to ask for human rights and democracy and  to  ask
    Vietnam to release political prisoners  and  that  he  is  against  the
    Vietnamese Government and the communist party  since  they  have  taken
    away basic rights.  In  his  witness  statement  of  February  2017  he
    mentions that he did not attend the demonstration in May because he was
    misinformed of the time but he took  part  in  a  demonstration  on  11
    December 2016 and that he intends to attend more demonstrations in  the
    future.

14. At paragraph 17 of his 2017 witness statement he says:

         'I cannot return to Vietnam as I was involved in demonstrations  in
         Vietnam and  was  arrested  whilst  distributing  leaflets  at  the
         demonstration. I continue to be  active  to  express  my  political
         belief against  the  Vietnamese  government  and  had  done  so  by
         attending demonstration in the United Kingdom.  If  I  go  back  to
         Vietnam I will continue  to  attend  demonstration  to  express  my
         political views against the Vietnamese Government'

15. At paragraph 6 and following the judge set out:

         "6.  The appellant said in his recent statement that he worked as a
             nail technician part time in Woodford green (sic).  He said he
             had not taken part in any demonstrations in the UK because  he
             said he spoke limited English and had not been aware  of  'the
             such demonstrations'.  He then said that he knew there was one
             in May which he wanted to attend.  This is after he  had  said
             that he had not attended demonstrations in the UK  because  'I
             speak limited English'.  See  paragraph  8  of  his  statement
             signed  8th  March  2016.   He  said  the   purpose   of   the
             demonstration was to ask the Vietnamese government to  release
             political prisoners.   I  did  not  consider  the  appellant's
             evidence about demonstrations to be credible.   One  does  not
             have to speak English to go on a  demonstration,  particularly
             since as  here  the  appellant  would  be  demonstrating  with
             Vietnamese nationals from  his  country.   Any  demonstrations
             that he attended here were  merely  self-serving  I  refer  to
             section  B  of  the  appellant's  bundle  as   regards   those
             demonstrations.

         7.   The appellant had said that he wishes to stay  in  the  UK  to
             practice  his  religion  freely  as  in  Vietnam  people   are
             oppressed in that regard.  He said that if  he  goes  back  to
             Vietnam he would be put in  prison  as  he  had  in  the  past
             because of his political and religious beliefs."

16. As set out above the judge records that the appellant  at  the  hearing
    when asked what his opinion of the Vietnam  government  was  stated  he
    felt he did not understand why they would want to take  the  land  from
    the church as it belonged to the church and found  that  the  appellant
    had not expressed any extreme or activist views in relation  to  either
    political or religious matters. That finding was one that was  entirely
    open to the judge on the evidence  in  this  case.  The  appellant  has
    attended one demonstration in the UK. He has been here since 2014.  His
    claim was based on his religious beliefs and he has very  late  in  the
    day attended a demonstration in the UK. The judge found that  this  was
    merely self-serving, a finding open to the judge on the evidence.

17. It is asserted that the judge does not appear to have  taken  the  2017
    witness statement into account. It is not clear whether the  judge  did
    or did not take it into account. However, the judge clearly  was  aware
    that he had attended a demonstration as he refers to him attending  and
    to  the  documentary  evidence  of  his  attendance  contained  in  the
    appellant's bundle. I do not consider that even if the  judge  did  not
    take that statement into account it would amount to a material error of
    law as the judge found that the appellant had not expressed any extreme
    or activist views and that this late claim to hold and express an anti-
    government political opinion was merely self-serving.

18. The appellant asserts that the judge erred by requiring  the  appellant
    to hold 'extreme' views in order to be considered at  risk  on  return-
    the risk on return is not limited to those with extreme view. The judge
    did not essentially raise the threshold for risk on return by requiring
    an extreme view to be held. The judge referred to extreme  or  activist
    views.

19. There were no material error of law such that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal should be set aside.

20. Given my conclusions on the above the second  ground  of  appeal  falls
    away.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the Secretary of State stands.


Signed   P M Ramshaw   Date 27 November 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Ramshaw
