
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07599/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields                   |   Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20 March 2018                         |   On 01 May 2018                   |
|                                         |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                    T A T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Solicitor, Iris Law Firm (Gateshead)
For the Respondent:    Ms M Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant, a national of Vietnam, has permission to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Hands of the First-tier Tribunal sent on  27  October
    2017 dismissing her appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The grounds contend that there was procedural unfairness  in  that  the
    appellant did not receive a notice of the hearing  held  on  17  August
    2017.  I consider this ground is made out.  The notice  of  pre-hearing
    review and hearing sent on 10 August 2017  gives  an  address  for  the
    appellant which on the evidence of the file record has never  been  her
    address.  This notice was also sent  to  her  then  solicitors,  Duncan
    Lewis, but the file  shows  that  they  ceased  being  the  appellant's
    solicitors on 21 August 2017.  The present solicitors,  Iris,  did  not
    come onto the record until 31 August 2017.

3.   The judge's decision records a concern about whether the appellant  had
    been sent notice of hearing to her correct  address  and  of  inquiries
    made by both the respondent and Tribunal administration but it is  very
    difficult to follow from the anonymised way the judge puts matters what
    the checks revealed.  The respondent's  checks  appear  from  what  the
    judge says at paragraph 2, to reveal that notice had not been  sent  to
    the address the respondent held.

4.   In such circumstances there is a very real possibility notice  was  not
    sent to the appellant's  correct  address  and  that  the  simultaneous
    notice sent to her solicitors was not acted  on  due  to  the  previous
    solicitors coming off the record.

5.   For the above reasons (and whether or not the judge had  sight  of  the
    full information) there has been an error  of  process  constituting  a
    material error of law, necessitating  that  I  set  aside  the  judge's
    decision.

6.   To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed:                                 Date: 26 April 2018

        [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

