
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07384/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 20 March 2018                     |On 23 March 2018                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              Mr LUTCHER ALBANO
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with  permission  granted  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Mailer on 4 December 2017 against the  decision  and
         reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fowell who had  dismissed  the
         Appellant's protection and human rights appeal in  a  decision  and
         reasons promulgated on 21 October 2017.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Angola.  He had claimed he was  a
         political activist, supporting human rights, and hence was at  risk
         from the oppressive government in power there.  The  Appellant  was
         unrepresented before the judge.  The decision and reasons shows the
         care which the judge took to enable the Appellant  to  present  his
         appeal, including assisting him to prepare his response to the Home
         Office Presenting Officer's closing submissions.   The judge  found
         that the Appellant's claims were  not  supported  by  such  current
         country background evidence as was available,  and  were  otherwise
         lacking  in  credibility.   The  Appellant  was  not  from  Cabinda
         province, which was subject to a long running  dispute.   Thus  the
         Appellant was found not to have discharged the burden of proof  and
         the appeal was dismissed.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted to the Appellant out of time by
         First-tier Tribunal Judge Mailer because  he  considered  that  the
         judge  had  arguably  erred  by  failing  consider  the  Angola  CG
         decision: MB (Cabinda risk) CG [2014] UKUT 434.

    4.     Standard directions were made by the tribunal.

    5.     When the  appeal  was  called  on  for  hearing,  there  was  no
         appearance  by  the  Appellant  or  his  representative   nor   any
         application for an adjournment in  consequence.   Having  satisfied
         itself that notice of the time, date and place of the  hearing  had
         been duly served on the Respondent, the tribunal  decided  that  it
         should proceed in the Respondent's absence and that it was just and
         fair to do so.

    Submissions

    6.     Ms Isherwood for the Respondent  submitted  that  there  was  no
         error of law at all.  The Appellant was not  from  Cabinda  as  the
         judge had found and there was no scope for MB (above) to apply. The
         onwards appeal should be dismissed.

    Discussion - no error of law

    7.     No further communication had been received  from  the  Appellant
         nor  any  representative  by  the  time  this   determination   was
         prepared.   The  tribunal  accepts  the  submissions  made  by   Ms
         Isherwood.  It is not easy to see  why  permission  to  appeal  was
         granted.  Not only was it no part of the Appellant's case  that  he
         was from Cabinda province, making that Upper Tribunal  CG  decision
         irrelevant, the judge had examined all of the most  recent  country
         background material available when reaching his decision,  and  had
         actively  sought  the  Appellant's  response  and  comments.    The
         current information signally  failed  to  support  the  Appellant's
         claims.  The burden of proof was at all stages on the Appellant and
         the  judge  was  right  to  find  that  the  burden  had  not  been
         discharged.  There can  be  no  doubt  that  anxious  scrutiny  was
         applied and that the Appellant's evidence was examined  with  great
         care.  Indeed, the judge adopted a clear and  independent  approach
         and differed in part from the Home Office's views.   There  was  no
         error of law in the decision and the appeal must be dismissed.

    DECISION

    The onwards appeal is dismissed

    The original decision and reasons stands unchanged




    Signed Dated 20 March 2018


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell


