
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07144/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29 November 2017                           |On 14 December 2017           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J M HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. A.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bahja, Counsel, instructed by Lords Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, who is accepted by the Respondent to  be  a  citizen  of
    Somalia, entered the UK unlawfully and claimed  asylum  on  13  January
    2016 with the help of his local Social Services team from whom  he  had
    sought protection and support as a child.  The Respondent  refused  the
    protection claim on 24  June  2016  and  the  Appellant  duly  appealed
    against that decision to the  First  tier  Tribunal.  His  appeal  came
    before Judge Nolan at  Taylor  House  on  19  June  2016,  and  it  was
    dismissed on all grounds in a decision promulgated on 3 July 2017.

 2. In the course of her decision it is plain that Judge  Nolan  failed  to
    grapple with the disputed issue of  the  Appellant's  clan  membership.
    That is only one of a number of challenges advanced  by  the  Appellant
    towards this decision in the course of seven grounds to the application
    for permission to appeal which themselves extend over a large number of
    pages.  The  challenges  to  Judge  Nolan's  decision  were   initially
    dismissed  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on   consideration   of   the
    application for permission to appeal as mere  disagreements  with  that
    decision, but when those grounds were renewed upon an  application  for
    permission to the Upper Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer accepted
    on 20 September 2017 that they did raise an arguable  case.   Thus  the
    matter comes before me.

 3.  Having  considered  the  decision  with   the   assistance   of   both
    representatives this morning it is  plain  that  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Plimmer's  analysis  of  the  challenges  raised  against  the  Judge's
    decision was the correct one.  Although  the  Respondent  had  accepted
    that the Appellant was a national of Somalia she had  accepted  nothing
    else of his case beyond his claimed name and date of birth.  Even  when
    the decision is read as a whole and having given the Judge the greatest
    leeway in terms of analysis of its content, I am unable to identify any
    finding of fact that results from an adequate analysis of the  evidence
    as to what the Appellant's true clan membership is.

 4. It follows that the rest of the Judge's analysis  of  the  evidence  is
    infected by a failure to start from the correct point.  It also follows
    that the analysis of the application of the current country guidance in
    MOJ & Ors (Return  to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  (CG)  [2014]  UKUT  442  is
    necessarily likewise flawed. The flaws are not  cured  by  the  Judge's
    references to K.A.B. v. Sweden in the European Court of  Human  Rights,
    No 886-11, September 2013, or Sufi and Elmi v. the United Kingdom.

 5. Put shortly, the assessment of whether the Appellant was at risk in his
    home area is inadequate. There is also no adequate analysis of  whether
    the Appellant could safely travel from the point of return at Mogadishu
    Airport to his home area, and no adequate analysis of whether he  could
    reasonably be expected to internally relocate within Mogadishu,  taking
    advantage of  the  economic  opportunities  that  the  current  country
    guidance concludes are available to those  returning  to  Somalia  from
    Western Europe. Thus there is no adequate analysis of whether  in  fact
    the Appellant would be forced into residence in  an  IDP  camp  on  the
    outskirts of Mogadishu and reduced to conditions of  destitution  which
    would engage with his Article 3 rights.

 6. That being the case, both parties  are  agreed  that  the  only  course
    available to me is to remit the appeal to the First-tier  Tribunal  for
    rehearing with no findings of fact to be preserved. That is the  course
    I shall take. The decision discloses  a  material  error  of  law  that
    requires it to be set aside and remade. I have in  these  circumstances
    considered whether or not  to  remit  the  appeal  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal for it to be reheard, or whether to proceed to  remake  it  in
    the Upper Tribunal. In circumstances where it  would  appear  that  the
    relevant evidence has not properly been considered by  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal, the effect of that error of  law  has  been  to  deprive  the
    Appellant of the opportunity for her case to be properly considered  by
    the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(a) of the Practice Statement  of
    25 September 2012. Moreover the extent of  the  judicial  fact  finding
    exercise is such that having regard to the over-riding objective, it is
    appropriate that the appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First  Tier
    Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement  of  25  September
    2012. Having reached that conclusion, with the agreement of the parties
    I make the following directions;

           i) The appeal is to be relisted for rehearing at Taylor House.

          ii) A Kibajuni interpreter should be booked for that hearing  and
              the hearing can be listed on the  first  available  date.  No
              additional evidence is expected  to  be  filed,  and  so  the
              matter can be listed at short notice.

Notice of decision

 7. The decision promulgated on 3 July 2017 did involve the  making  of  an
    error of law sufficient to require the decision to  be  set  aside  and
    reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier  Tribunal
    for rehearing de novo with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J M Holmes


