
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07727/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 8th March 2018                       |On 27th March 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                     MRF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Oliver
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 15th September 2017.

 2. The appellant came to the UK  unlawfully  on  30th  November  2016  and
    claimed asylum on arrival on the grounds that he feared persecution  on
    return to Iran because of his conversion from  Islam  to  Christianity.
    The Secretary of State refused his application on 18th July 2017.   She
    did  not  believe  that  the  appellant  had  in  fact   converted   to
    Christianity and accordingly concluded that he would not be of interest
    to the authorities.

 3. The judge set out the evidence, which included medical evidence from  a
    doctor who concluded that the appellant suffered from a schizoaffective
    disorder and PTSD.

 4. The judge stated, at paragraph 31, that the appellant was in the  early
    stages of his conversion and had never  sought  to  convert  others  in
    Iran.  Later, at paragraph 36, he said that he could not rule  out  the
    possibility that he may  well  be  interested  in  converting  but  the
    background evidence did not establish that he would  be  at  risk.   He
    dismissed the appeal.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal on a number of grounds.

 6. First, it was said that there had been an agreement between the parties
    that  a  genuine  conversion  would  put  the  appellant  at  risk   of
    prosecution but that agreement was not recorded in  the  determination.
    Counsel produced her note of the hearing which states that  the  issues
    had been narrowed down to the  issue  of  credibility  and  record  the
    Presenting Officer's submission that it  was  accepted  that  Christian
    converts would be at risk of  prosecution  on  a  return  even  if  not
    persecution.  It was therefore a matter for the judge to decide whether
    prosecution for apostacy would engage the Convention, which he did  not
    do.

 7. Furthermore he had failed to make factual findings on material  matters
    in issue, failed to properly apply the case law and had failed to treat
    the appellant as a vulnerable witness.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  Judge  Pickup  but  upon
    renewal was granted by Judge Coker on 23rd January 2018.

 9. At the hearing Mr Walker said that he was in a  difficult  position  so
    far as Counsel's note was concerned because there was  nothing  in  the
    Presenting Officer's notes in  relation  to  any  concession.   He  did
    however accept that the judge had been ambiguous  in  his  findings  in
    relation to the conversion which was a material error of law.

10. The decision of Judge Oliver is set aside.

11. He erred in law in failing to make clear findings on  material  matters
    in issue.  There may well have been further errors in his approach  but
    it is unnecessary to make a decision on them since it has been accepted
    by the respondent that the decision needs to be remade by a judge other
    than Judge Oliver.

12. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a  de
    novo hearing at Taylor House on a date to be notified.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed[pic]                             Date 25 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
















