
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07732/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|                                                |                             |
|Heard at: Field House                           |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                                |Promulgated                  |
|On : 22 February 2021                           |On : 5 March 2021            |
|                                                |                             |

                                   Before


                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     BH
                         (Anonymity Direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which there has  been  no  objection
      from the parties. The form of remote hearing was skype for business. A
      face to face hearing was not held because it was not practicable,  and
      all issues could be determined in a remote hearing.

   2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on 23 November 1978. He
      has been given permission to appeal against the decision of First-tier
      Tribunal Judge McIntosh dismissing his appeal against the respondent's
      decision to refuse his asylum and human rights claim.

   3. The appellant claimed to have arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  on  1
      January 2005, entering  illegally  with  an  agent,  and  subsequently
      travelled to France where he claimed asylum but left before  receiving
      the outcome and returned to the UK after a month. On 1 March  2008  he
      made an application for leave to remain outside the immigration  rules
      on compassionate grounds on the basis of being Bihari  and  stateless.
      His application was refused on  30  November  2009  with  a  right  of
      appeal, but he withdrew his appeal after lodging it, on 18  May  2010.
      On 7 January 2012 the appellant made an Article 8 human  rights  claim
      which was refused with a right of appeal on 7 August 2013. His  appeal
      against that decision was dismissed in the First-tier  Tribunal  on  9
      October 2013 and he became appeal rights exhausted on 23 October 2013.
      After being encountered during  an  enforcement  visit  to  an  Indian
      restaurant, the appellant made further  submissions  on  23  September
      2015 which were rejected under paragraph 353 of the immigration  rules
      on 15 April 2016, followed by a further human rights claim, which  was
      also rejected under paragraph 353 on 4 April 2017.

   4. After being encountered once again during an  immigration  enforcement
      visit in an Indian restaurant and served with removal  papers,  on  24
      April 2019, the appellant claimed asylum on the basis of his sexuality
      and submitted a psychological report in  support  of  his  claim.  His
      claim was refused on 26 July 2019.  It  is  his  appeal  against  that
      decision which has given rise to these proceedings.

   5. The appellant claimed to fear  persecution  on  return  to  Bangladesh
      because he was gay. He claimed to have realised he was gay when he was
      about 16 or  17  and  to  have  had  his  first  gay  relationship  in
      Bangladesh when he was 17. He claimed to have had a  relationship,  in
      secret, with MK from 1997/98 until MK left Bangladesh in 2000  and  to
      have been living openly as a gay man since arriving in the UK. He  was
      in a relationship with MM from May/ June 2014 until February 2016  and
      then  with  JA  from  June  2017.  The  appellant   claimed   in   his
      supplementary interview that he had told his friend about  his  asylum
      claim after his previous interview in June 2019  and  his  friend  had
      told other people as well his brother in Bangladesh, as  a  result  of
      which his brother had threatened to cut him if he returned  there.  He
      therefore feared his  own  family,  as  well  as  the  government  and
      religious extremist groups in Bangladesh.

   6. The respondent did not accept that the appellant was gay, noting  that
      his account was vague, that there were inconsistencies in his evidence
      and that he had made no mention of his sexuality when claiming  asylum
      in France or when previously applying for leave to remain in  the  UK.
      The respondent considered that the appellant would be at  no  risk  on
      return to Bangladesh and that his removal would not breach  his  human
      rights.

   7. The appellant's appeal was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh
      on 31 January 2020, following an initial start on 3 January 2020 which
      was discontinued due to difficulties  understanding  the  interpreter.
      For the appeal, the appellant submitted photographs  of  himself  with
      his partner and various supporting letters, including confirmation  of
      his membership of a British Bangladeshi  LGBT  organisation  known  as
      APONGHOR and his attendance at gay clubs and a letter purporting to be
      from his previous partner JA. The judge heard from appellant and  four
      other witnesses, S, MS, J and K. It was recorded by the judge that the
      appellant claimed to no longer be in a relationship with JA. The judge
      noted that the appellant's claim in France had been on  the  basis  of
      his political beliefs and his application for leave to remain  in  the
      UK had been on the basis of his Bihari ethnicity. The  judge  gave  no
      weight to the evidence of the witnesses whom he found to  be  credible
      but to have  been  manipulated  by  the  appellant  and  rejected  the
      appellant's claim to be gay. He found that the appellant would  be  at
      no risk on return to Bangladesh and he dismissed the appeal.

   8. Permission was sought by the appellant to appeal to the Upper Tribunal
      on three grounds: that the  judge  had  failed  to  give  reasons  for
      rejecting the witnesses'  evidence;  that  the  judge  had  failed  to
      consider the evidence of S; and that the judge had raised the standard
      of proof too high. Permission was refused by the  First-tier  Tribunal
      but was subsequently granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor  on
      a renewed application, as follows:

   1. "The  appellant  is  said  by  the  respondent  to  be  a  citizen  of
      Bangladesh, although he himself asserts that  he  is  stateless.   The
      First-tier Tribunal clearly regarded him as being Bangladeshi.   There
      is no challenge to this in the grounds of appeal.


   2. The appellant seeks permission to appeal against the decision of First-
      tier Tribunal Judge McIntosh, promulgated  on  24  February  2020,  by
      which she dismissed the appellant's appeal  against  the  respondent's
      refusal of his protection and human rights claims.  The  core  of  the
      protection claim was the assertion that  the  appellant  was  gay  and
      would face persecution and/or treatment contrary to Article 3 ECHR  on
      return to Bangladesh.  The judge did not accept that he  was  in  fact
      gay.

   3. Ground 1 asserts that the judge failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
      rejecting the evidence of supporting witnesses.  In  fact,  the  judge
      expressly stated that she found the  witnesses  to  be  credible  (see
      [52]).  She found that  the  appellant  had  "manipulated"  them  into
      providing support for his case and that they had no "objective  means"
      of verifying what he had told them.  In light of the evidence that the
      relevant witnesses had provided (according to what is  stated  earlier
      on in the judge's decision), it is arguable that there is  a  lack  of
      adequate reasoning as to why their credible testimony was deemed to be
      of no probative value to the assessment of whether the  appellant  was
      in fact gay.  It is  unclear  what  the  judge  meant  by  the  phrase
      "objective means", and it is arguable that this was not  a  sufficient
      basis to discount the entirety of the witnesses' evidence.

   4. Ground 2 refers to the evidence of  "Ms"  Saifullah  and  the  judge's
      failure to consider it.  In fact, the witness  in  question  was  "Md"
      Saifullah.  It is arguable that the judge failed to take his  evidence
      from a previous hearing into account,  or  that  she  failed  to  give
      reasons for not doing so.

   5. Ground 3 contends that the judge applied too high a standard of  proof
      by stating at [60] that two  of  the  witnesses  could  not  say  with
      "certainty" what the appellant's sexuality was.  Whilst  I  am  always
      very cautious about assertions on the standard of proof,  particularly
      bearing in mind that judge's decisions must be read in the  round,  in
      the  present  case  it  is  arguable  that  the   judge   applied   an
      impermissible threshold to potentially material evidence.

   6. In granting permission, the appellant will no doubt be aware that  the
      judge made a number of other adverse credibility findings against  him
      which have not specifically been challenged in the grounds of  appeal.
      When the Upper Tribunal comes  to  consider  whether  the  judge  made
      errors of law, the appellant will need to satisfy  it  not  only  that
      such errors are made out, but that they are  material  to  the  extent
      that the decision should be set aside.

   7. I am of the provisional view that the questions of whether the  First-
      tier Tribunal erred in law and,  if  it  did,  whether  it's  decision
      should be set aside, can fairly be dealt  with  by  way  of  a  remote
      hearing."

   9. The matter then came before me for a hearing,  by  way  of  skype  for
      business. Both parties made submissions before me, Mr Reza relying  on
      and expanding upon the grounds of appeal, and  Ms  Everett  submitting
      that the judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the  appellant  had
      manipulated the witnesses and therefore to accord their  evidence  the
      weight that she did.

  10. For the reasons given by Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor at [3]  of
      his decision granting permission, I cannot agree with Ms Everett  that
      the grounds amount to a simple disagreement with the weight the  judge
      gave to the evidence of the witnesses. It seems  to  me  that,  absent
      further explanation, the judge's finding, at [52], that the  witnesses
      were all  credible,  is  incompatible  with  his  finding  that  their
      evidence was of no probative value to the assessment  of  whether  the
      appellant was gay.

  11. By referring, at [52], to the witnesses having no objective  means  of
      verifying the information the appellant had disclosed  to  them  about
      his sexuality, the implication in the judge's reasoning was  that  the
      witnesses had no knowledge of the appellant's sexuality other than the
      information he gave to them. Whilst that could well be the  case  with
      the evidence of S, it is of note that the evidence of MS, J and K  was
      that they each had direct  knowledge  of  the  appellant's  sexuality,
      either by being sexually intimate with him  or  by  seeing  him  being
      sexually intimate with other men. The same applies to the evidence  of
      JA who claimed to have been in  a  relationship  with  the  appellant,
      although he did not give oral evidence before  the  judge.  The  judge
      made no findings on the evidence of  JA.  In  addition,  she  made  no
      specific findings on the claims of the other witnesses to have had, or
      to have had direct knowledge of, intimate contact with the  appellant.
      In the circumstances it is not clear in what way, and to what  extent,
      the judge accepted their evidence and  believed  that  they  had  been
      manipulated by the appellant.

  12. Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor, at [6] of his grant of permission,
      suggested that that was not necessarily a material error on  the  part
      of the judge requiring the decision to be set aside, given the  other,
      unchallenged adverse credibility findings based  upon  inconsistencies
      and discrepancies in the evidence. However,  I  cannot  see  how  such
      errors in her decision could not be considered  sufficiently  material
      for her decision to be set aside. Her  positive  credibility  findings
      simply cannot be reconciled with her adverse findings and it seems  to
      me that the case has to be heard afresh by another judge, in order for
      a full assessment of the witnesses'  evidence  to  be  undertaken  and
      clear findings to be made.

  13.  I therefore set aside Judge McIntosh's decision in its entirety, with
      no findings preserved and remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal to
      be heard de novo before a different judge.

DECISION

  14. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law and the decision  is  set  aside.
      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal pursuant to  section
      12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
      Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before any  judge  aside
      from Judge McIntosh.

         Anonymity

     The anonymity direction made by the First-tier Tribunal is maintained.




Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                           Dated: 22 February
2021
