
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
              (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07333/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined at Field House without a hearing |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 5 March 2019                             |On 3 April 2019                |
|                                            |                               |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     T B
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. On 15 February 2019 I gave the following directions: -

    "1.    In the light of the grant of permission by FtTJ Dineen  and  the
         rule 24 response dated 14 February 2019 accepting  that  there  was
         procedural unfairness, I am of the provisional view that  there  is
         an error of law in the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such
         that the decision should be set aside. Having regard  to  paragraph
         7.2 of the  Practice  Statements  of  the  Immigration  and  Asylum
         Chambers of the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper  Tribunal,  I  am
         also of the provisional view that the case remitted to  the  First-
         tier Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues.

    2.     In the absence of any written submissions to the contrary, which
         must be received by the  Upper  Tribunal  within  7  days  of  this
         permission decision being sent, the Upper Tribunal intends (without
         holding a hearing) to set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal and to remake it by allowing the appeal.

 2. There has been no response to these directions by either party but by a
    letter dated 14 February 2018, the respondent stated that he considered
    that the appeal should be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal and heard
    de novo.

 3. Accordingly, I am satisfied that neither party objects  to  the  matter
    being determined without a hearing and has nothing further to say. I am
    satisfied that that the determination of the  First-tier  Tribunal  did
    involve the making of an error of law for the reasons  set  out  above,
    and must therefore be set aside.  In  the  circumstances,  owing  to  a
    procedural unfairness, the appellant did not receive  a  fair  hearing,
    and the appropriate course is to remit the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a fresh decision on all issues

Summary of conclusions

      1. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making
         of an error of law and I set it aside.

      2. The appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
         decision on all issues.


Signed                                             Date:  5 March 2019
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul


