
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07201/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 March 2018                              |On 30 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                    A G K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Khan, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AGK, is a male citizen of Iran.  His  age  is  disputed.
    He claimed asylum in January 2016 but his application  was  refused  by
    the Secretary of State on 29 June 2016.  He appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Moxon) which, in a decision  promulgated  on  27  March
    2017, dismissed his appeal.  He now appeals, with  permission,  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.

 2. The grounds of appeal challenge the judge's decision  in  a  number  of
    respects.  At [49], Judge Moxon wrote:

         "I  note  that  the  appellant  did  give  some,  albeit   limited,
         information in relation to the PJAK.  The level of knowledge  could
         easily have been learned  especially  in  light  of  the  appellant
         having lived most of his life in Iran.  I found the lack of general
         knowledge of PJAK  has  undermined  the  appellant  given  that  he
         asserts that he inactively supported them for almost a  year.   His
         purported commitment to the cause had been such that  he  knowingly
         risked his life.  Whether literate or  not  I  find  he  will  have
         sought to obtain as much information as possible from, for  example
         his friends, who he  claims  were  also  involved.   I  accept  the
         respondent's submission that it is implausible that he did not know
         whether O was a member of the PJAK or not given that it was  O  who
         influenced him to assist the party and with him that he had done so
         for almost a year."

 3. The judge is challenged on the basis that he has  substituted  his  own
    reasoning for that of the appellant himself.  In particular, the  judge
    failed to realise the wide support enjoyed by the PJAK.

 4. I find that the ground has no merit. I shall deal with the question  of
    the appellant's age later, but I am satisfied that the judge has  taken
    into account the appellant's youth and  has  viewed  all  the  evidence
    holistically before reaching any findings of fact.  In  particular,  it
    was open to the judge to find that, had the appellant  been  an  active
    supporter of the PJAK and willing to place his  own  life  at  risk  in
    support of the organisation, then he would have had a greater knowledge
    of the organisation.  The  judge  points  out,  that  finding  is  made
    irrespective of the question as to whether the appellant is literate or
    not.  The ground is little more than  a  disagreement  with  a  finding
    which was open to the judge.

 5. At [50], Judge Moxon wrote:

         "I  also  find  it   significantly   undermines   the   appellant's
         credibility that he has not had  any  political  involvement  since
         arriving in the United Kingdom which is  over  twelve  months  ago.
         Whilst I accept the submissions that  he  has  been  encouraged  by
         another in Iran it is clear from  his  evidence  that  he  strongly
         supports the pro-Kurdistan cause and  he  risked  his  life  for  a
         prolonged period in Iran to  support  them.   This  risk  signifies
         strong feelings towards the cause.   I  find  it  damaging  to  his
         credibility that he has not undertaken any research as  to  how  he
         could become involved in the United Kingdom.  Even if  his  account
         of being illiterate were accepted, he could have had  no  doubt  to
         ask the people who have supported him in the United  Kingdom  since
         his arrival over a year ago.  I therefore reject his assertion that
         his failure to become involved in  pro-Kurdistan  activity  in  the
         United Kingdom was because he had no assistance and also reject his
         assertion that he has a lack of time to become involved, given that
         he appears to have more spare time now than  he  did  when  he  was
         actively involved in Iran."

 6. The grounds make the somewhat obvious point that the  appellant  claims
    that his activities in Iran rather than  in  the  United  Kingdom  have
    exposed him to risk.  However, that misses the point which the judge is
    making at [50].  It was open to the judge to draw attention to the fact
    that an individual claims to be an ideologically committed supporter of
    Kurdish rights in Iran should have apparently done  nothing  to  become
    involved in that cause whilst in the United Kingdom.  The judge has not
    "required the appellant to demonstrate sur place  activities"  (as  the
    grounds assert); rather,  he  has,  having  regard  to  the  particular
    circumstances of this appellant and his claim as regards past events in
    Iran drawn attention to the fact that the appellant's  conduct  in  the
    United Kingdom is not consistent with his account of past events.

 7. At [51], the judge wrote

         "I find the appellant's account of his  identity  documents  to  be
         significantly undermining to his  credibility.   He  was  asked  by
         documentation in his screening interview and clearly indicated that
         it should be at home  [in  Iran].   However,  he  has  subsequently
         stated that he knew his documentation had been taken  and  that  he
         knew this before  he  reached  the  United  Kingdom  and  therefore
         substantial period prior to that interview."

 8.  The grounds of appeal complain that the judge failed to have regard to
    the  appellant's  "likely  condition  at  the  time  of  his  screening
    interview".  There was nothing before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which
    indicated that the appellant's condition  at  the  screening  interview
    should in any way have affected the answers which he gave.  It  is  not
    for the judge  to  assume  that  the  appellant  had  problems  at  the
    interview if he has given no evidence to show that that  might  be  the
    case.  The judge correctly  concluded  that  the  appellant  had  given
    inconsistent evidence.   Quite  properly,  the  judge  found  that  the
    inconsistent evidence impacted his credibility as a witness.

 9. As I have noted above, there was a dispute as to the  appellant's  age.
    The Secretary of State considers that the appellant  is  aged  over  18
    years.  The appellant claims that he was a minor when  he  entered  the
    United Kingdom and been born on 12 January 1999.  At [30-31], the judge
    indicated to the parties and their representatives that he  found  that
    there  was  "no  evidence  ...  that  [the  appellant]  had  ever  been
    inconsistent about [his claimed date of  birth].   The  respondent  had
    considered that the appellant had been born in or around January  1997.
    For the purposes of the hearing, the judge stated  explicitly  that  he
    would treat the appellant as a minor which I take it to mean  that  the
    judge intended to adopt court procedures appropriate to  an  individual
    who was under 18 years old.  Later  in  the  decision  [54]  the  judge
    concluded that the appellant was not a  minor.   The  grounds  complain
    that that finding was against all the evidence and that the  judge  has
    applied  an  inappropriate  standard  of  proof  in   determining   the
    appellant's age.

10. I find that the ground has no merit.  The judge did not arguably err in
    law by treating the appellant  as  a  minor  for  the  purpose  of  the
    hearing; indeed, if the judge had determined the appellant's age before
    he had considered all the relevant evidence, he may well have erred  in
    law.  It was open to the judge to make a finding as to the  appellant's
    age.  He did so having heard all the evidence  and,  crucially,  having
    properly taken all the evidence into account in a holistic way,  as  he
    makes clear at [54].  The appellant has failed to show that any part of
    the procedure adopted by the judge which was flawed by legal error.

11. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 20 April 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 20 APRIL 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
