

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)
      Appeal Number: PA/07806/2019 (V)

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC via Skype                 |Decisions & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 November 2020                               |On 10 December 2020            |
|                                                  |                               |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER

                                   Between

                                     OE
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the appellant:      Ms Bayoumi, Counsel
For the respondent:     Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (V)

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI2008/269) an Anonymity Order is made. Unless the Upper Tribunal or  Court
orders otherwise, no report of any proceedings or any  form  of  publication
thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original  Appellant.  This
prohibition applies to, amongst others, all parties.

       1. The appellant is a citizen of Egypt, who  claims  that  he  has  a
          well-founded fear of persecution there  for  reasons  relating  to
          anti-regime activities  in  Egypt  and  the  UK,  in  relation  to
          activities  linked  to  the  Muslim  Brotherhood  ('MB')  and  the
          Freedom  and  Justice  Party,  and  his  sentence   of   4   years
          imprisonment for MB membership after a trial  in  his  absence  in
          Egypt.
       2. I have anonymised  the  appellant's  name  because  this  decision
          refers to his asylum claim.


       3. The appellant has appealed against a decision  of  the  First-tier
          Tribunal ('FTT') Judge Myers sent on 29 May  2020  dismissing  his
          appeal on international protection and human rights grounds.   The
          FTT rejected  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's  account  and
          concluded that his low level political  activities  would  not  in
          any event result in a real risk of persecution.

       4. When granting permission to appeal in a decision dated  14  August
          2020, FTT Judge O'Brien considered all the grounds  of  appeal  to
          be arguable.  At the  beginning  of  the  hearing  before  me,  Ms
          Everett conceded that the FTT decision contains errors of law  for
          the reasons set out in the grounds of appeal, such  that  it  must
          be set aside and remade by another FTT  other  than  Judge  Myers.
          Ms Everett was correct to make this concession.   I  am  satisfied
          that the FTT has  erred  in  law.   In  all  the  circumstances  I
          consider it  appropriate  to  make  my  decision  by  consent  and
          pursuant to rule 39 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
          Rules 2008.  For this  reason  I  can  summarise  my  reasons  for
          accepting that each ground of appeal is made out.

       5. For the reasons provided in  ground  1  the  FTT  failed  to  take
          relevant evidence into account  before  reaching  adverse  factual
          findings on the appellant's claim  to  have  suffered  a  shoulder
          injury and to  have  been  convicted  in  absentia  at  [29].   In
          particular, the FTT was wrong to state  that  the  appellant  only
          mentioned a hernia at  screening  interview  ('SI')  and  not  the
          shoulder injury when 4.1 of the SI clearly  refers  to  this.   In
          addition, the FTT has not taken into account  that  the  appellant
          clearly referred to his conviction in his preliminary  information
          questionnaire ('PIQ') (pg 16/19) dated 31 January 2019 and it  was
          therefore inaccurate to state that he "now"  relied  on  it.   The
          FTT also failed to take into account all the relevant  answers  to
          the questions at the asylum  interview  regarding  his  family  in
          Egypt, and made an adverse finding  at  [30]  unsupported  by  the
          evidence before it.

       6. For the reasons set out  in  ground  2  the  FTT  gave  inadequate
          reasons for rejecting the court documents.  It is  unclear,  given
          the applicable low standard of proof, why  the  FTT  required  the
          court documents to be accompanied by evidence from a lawyer.

       7. As submitted  in  ground  3,  the  FTT's  findings  regarding  the
          relevant country background evidence at  [38]  and  [39]  entirely
          fail to address the evidence to the contrary effect  contained  in
          the appellant's bundle, including the respondent's own guidance.

       8. Both parties consented to the appeal being allowed and  the  FTT's
          decision being set  aside.   They  also  agreed  that  the  appeal
          should be remitted to be remade by the FTT de novo.   I  have  had
          regard to para 7.2 of the  relevant  Senior  President's  Practice
          Statement and the  nature  and  extent  of  the  factual  findings
          required in remaking the decision, and I have  decided  that  this
          is an appropriate case to remit to the FTT to make fresh  findings
          of fact  de  novo.   None  of  the  FTT's  findings  of  fact  are
          preserved.

Decision

       9. The decision of the FTT involved the making of  a  material  error
          of law.  Its decision cannot stand and is set aside.

      10. The appeal shall be remade by the FTT (a judge  other  than  Judge
          Myers) de novo.



Signed:  Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated: 23 November 2020

