
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07283/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Royal Courts of Justice     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 November 2019                  |On 03 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    V L T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Mahmud, Counsel instructed by Norton Folgate
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
      2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any
      matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
      Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of  court.  I  make
      this order because the  Appellant  is  an  asylum  seeker  and  so  is
      entitled to privacy.

   2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Vietnam against a  decision  of  the
      First-tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a  decision  of  the
      respondent  on  17  July  2019  refusing  him   asylum,   humanitarian
      protection and leave to remain on human rights grounds.

   3. The short point is that the appellant lost his appeal because  he  was
      disbelieved and Mr Mahmud argues that the reasons for disbelieving the
      appellant are unlawful.  Having reflected on those submissions and  on
      Mr Kotas' contrary arguments I  have  come  to  the  conclusion  that,
      broadly, Mr Mahmud is right.

   4. The essential problem is that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  has  not
      engaged with the appellant's case.  Two main reasons are advanced  for
      disbelieving him.  The first is that he was untruthful about  his  age
      in  a  screening  interview  and  the  second  is  that  there  was  a
      considerable delay in his claiming asylum and the claim appeared to be
      prompted by his being discovered by  an  illegal  working  enforcement
      unit at a nail bar.

   5. However, there are important counter arguments that do not  appear  to
      have been considered.

   6. First, although there is clear evidence  of  inconsistency  about  the
      appellant's age the evidence is not of a  particularly  high  quality.
      It appears to be based on a difference between  something  said  in  a
      screening interview and something said in a full asylum interview.  It
      is  well-known  that  screening  interviews  are  primarily  for   the
      convenience of the Secretary of State to ensure that an application is
      allocated correctly and is  therefore  mistakes  by  the  interviewing
      officer on matters of detail may be excusable.  It is the  appellant's
      case that he told the truth and there was mistranslation. Importantly,
      there is no obvious advantage to him in telling lies  about  his  age.
      Certainly, by the time the present claim was considered,  he  was,  on
      any version of events, an adult.

   7. I am far from saying that  the  appellant  has  given  a  satisfactory
      explanation for the differences in the recorded evidence  but  he  has
      given an explanation and there is no indication in the  decision  that
      it has been considered.

   8. Second, although this asylum claim was prompted precisely as indicated
      by the appellant being found working, it is the appellant's case  that
      he has previously claimed  asylum.   This  much  is  accepted  by  the
      Secretary of State who considered if the "second claim" was a claim at
      all with reference to paragraph 353 of HC 395.

   9. The appellant claimed asylum here on 24 November 2017 and said that he
      had entered on the day that he claimed asylum.   He  was  released  in
      April 2017.  The Secretary of  State  said  that  he  absconded.   The
      appellant said that he had made a claim and was waiting  its  outcome.
      Again, I am not suggesting that  this  is  a  compelling  or  powerful
      explanation but it is an explanation and it does not  appear  to  have
      been considered.

  10. I ask myself if, in fact, the case is hopeless even if  the  appellant
      is telling the truth.  It does not seem a strong claim  taken  at  its
      highest.  It  is  based  on  his  being  ill-treated  at  a  political
      demonstration some years ago but if he is telling the truth then it is
      reasonable to think he has been persecuted in the past and  particular
      care is needed before deciding that he could return to the country  or
      some part of it safely.  Paragraph 19  of  the  Decision  and  Reasons
      includes the following sentence:

  "The Tribunal finds that in the context of being of no interest he  would
  not have taken the drastic step of forfeiting the deeds of his house as a
  16 year old to come to the UK.  The Tribunal finds that  he  is  actually
  born in 1994 and was deliberately smuggled into the UK to work, hence  he
  absconded after his first claim in the  location  where  he  was  finally
  encountered".

  11. I do not understand why the judge has written off the suggestion  that
      the appellant at a tender age forfeited the  deeds  of  his  house  to
      travel to the  United  Kingdom.   As  Mr  Mahmud  submitted,  I  found
      entirely appropriately, his youth could have made  him  vulnerable  to
      the wiles of those who brought him into the United  Kingdom.   He  may
      simply have made a bad deal. I recognise that  this  is  a  matter  of
      argument  rather  than  legal  error  but  the  judge's  reasoning  is
      unsatisfactory because it is based on a premise that the appellant was
      not of interest. It is his  case  that  he  is  of  interest  and  the
      evidence has not been considered in the round.

  12. The use of the phrase "deliberately smuggled into the UK" is one  that
      should ring alarm bells in the case of a young person from Vietnam.  I
      must  hope  that  his  representatives   have   given   very   careful
      consideration  to  their  instructions  and  are  satisfied  that  the
      appellant is not a victim of trafficking.

  13. That said, I do not wish to raise the appellant's  hopes.   There  are
      obvious difficulties in his case but I am satisfied that the  decision
      for the reasons given is unsatisfactory.  It is set aside and I direct
      the appeal will be heard again in the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

  14. The appeal is allowed. I set aside  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
      Tribunal and I direct that the case is heard again by  the  First-tier
      Tribunal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 29 November 2019               |



