
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07658/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2018                      |On 30 January 2018                   |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                    l c r
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr C Jowett instructed by UK Migration
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure or publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica who was born on  4  August  1973.
    He entered the United Kingdom on 17  February  1999  with  leave  as  a
    visitor.  His leave was extended, as  a  student,  until  30  September
    2000.

 3. On 18 December 2000, he was convicted at the Inner London  Crown  Court
    of possessing a class A controlled drug with intent to supply.  He  was
    sentenced to five years' imprisonment and recommended for  deportation.



 4. On 29 August 2000, a deportation order was signed  against  him.   That
    decision was served on the appellant on 31 October 2002.  The appellant
    did not seek to appeal and on  7  February  2003  he  was  deported  to
    Jamaica.

 5. It would appear that the appellant  then  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    sometime in 2004 in breach of the deportation order.

 6. On 23 June 2011, the  appellant  applied  for  leave  to  remain  on  a
    discretionary  basis  outside  the  Rules.    Following   the   further
    submission of information, the appellant's application was refused on 6
    February 2017.

 7. On 16 February 2017, the appellant was detained  with  a  view  to  his
    deportation from the United Kingdom.  On 1 March  2017,  the  appellant
    was served with removal directions set for 8 March 2017.   However,  on
    that date he refused to leave his cell and the removal directions  were
    deferred.

 8. On 15 March 2017, the appellant claimed asylum.   Following  an  asylum
    interview on 25 April 2017, the Secretary of  State  on  25  July  2017
    refused the appellant's claims for asylum, humanitarian protection  and
    under Art 8 of the ECHR.  The Secretary of  State  also  certified  the
    appellant's asylum claim under s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration and
    Asylum Act 2002 (the "NIA Act 2002").

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

 9. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a  determination
    sent on 3 October 2014,  Judge  M  A  Khan  dismissed  the  appellant's
    appeal.  The judge made an adverse  credibility  finding  and  did  not
    accept that the appellant was at risk  on  return  to  Jamaica,  as  he
    claimed, on the basis that he had witnessed a gang in Jamaica murdering
    his brother in October 1998.  At the conclusion of his decision,  Judge
    Khan dismissed the appellant's appeal under the Immigration  Rules  and
    under Arts 2 and 3 of the ECHR and also the  appellant's  "human  (sic)
    protection appeal".

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

10. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  First, the judge had failed to make any decision on
    whether to allow  or  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  under  Art  8.
    Secondly, in considering the appellant's Art 8  claim,  the  judge  had
    failed properly to have regard to the best interests of the appellant's
    children in the UK.  Thirdly, in rejecting the  appellant's  protection
    claim and in reaching his adverse credibility finding,  the  judge  had
    failed to have regard to documentary evidence provided  in  support  of
    the appellant's  claim,  namely  a  copy  of  a  coroner's  certificate
    supporting his claim that his brother  had  been  murdered  in  October
    1998.  Fourthly, the judge had erred in law by taking into  account  as
    relevant under Art 8, the certification under s.72 of the NIA Act 2002.



11. On 7 November 2017, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  The respondent filed a rule 24  notice
    dated 22 November 2017.  In that notice, the respondent  accepted  that
    the judge had erred in law by failing to indicate  whether  the  Art  8
    appeal  was  allowed  or  dismissed  and  in  failing  to  give  proper
    consideration to the best interests of the appellant's children and the
    impact upon them of his deportation.  However, the respondent sought to
    uphold the judge's adverse credibility finding and his rejection of the
    appellant's asylum claim.

12. Before me,  Mr  Richards,  who  represented  the  Secretary  of  State,
    conceded in line with the rule 24 notice that the judge  had  erred  in
    law in his consideration of Art 8 and a fresh decision should  be  made
    in respect of Art 8.  Relying  on  the  rule  24  notice,  however,  Mr
    Richards sought to defend the judge's adverse decision in  relation  to
    the appellant's asylum claim.

Discussion

13. Central to the appellant's asylum claim was his case that his  brothers
    had been killed by two gangs in Jamaica.  He had been present  and  had
    witnessed one of his brothers being shot and killed by  a  gang  member
    but he had managed to run away.   He  claimed  that,  as  a  result  of
    witnessing his brother's killing, he was at risk on return.

14. The judge made an adverse credibility finding.  His reasons are set out
    at paras 50 - 59 of his determination.  He made, as Mr Richards pointed
    out, a number of adverse conclusions on the appellant's evidence.   So,
    for example, at para 53 the judge, having heard the appellant  and  his
    wife give evidence,  considered  that  their  evidence  was  "extremely
    vague" and that they were "evasive witnesses"  such  he  did  not  find
    their evidence "credible or consistent".

15. Then at para 54, the judge turned to the incident which  the  appellant
    claimed specifically put him at risk,  namely  his  witnessing  of  his
    brother's murder:

         "54. The appellant said that he claimed asylum in fear of two gangs
             in Jamaica, his two brothers had been killed by  these  gangs.
             They tried to harm him by attempting to kidnap him.   He  said
             when one of his  brother's  (sic)  was  killed,  he  with  his
             brother when gang members shot his brother and killed him,  he
             managed to ran away.  His evidence is that they are now trying
             to kill him because he was a  witness  when  his  brother  was
             shot.  I do not find  the  appellant's  evidence  credible  or
             consistent.  If has  he  claims,  he  was  a  witness  to  his
             brother's killing, the gang member would have killed him there
             and then with his  brother  and  not  let  him  escape  as  he
             claims."

16. At paras 55 -  58  the  judge  identified  other  deficiencies  in  the
    evidence.  Then, at para 59 he concluded as follows:

         "59. On the evidence before, I do not accept the appellant's  claim
             that he has any fear of the claimed criminal gangs in Jamaica.
              I do not accept the appellant's whole evidence as credible or
             consistent.  I find that he has simply fabricated and made  up
             whole of his evidence in order to make out an asylum claim  to
             stay in the UK."

17. Contained within both the respondent's bundle (at  page  I25)  and  the
    appellant's bundle (at page B1) was a photocopy of  a  "certificate  of
    coroner" which, on the face of it, related to the  appellant's  brother
    whom he claimed had been murdered in October 1998.   That  stated  that
    the appellant's brother's death had occurred on "3 October,  1998"  and
    that the cause of death  was  "multiple  gunshot  wounds  to  head  and
    chest".  It was accepted before me that Judge Khan made no reference to
    this document, which was relied  upon  as  supporting  the  appellant's
    account before him.

18. Mr Jowett, on behalf of  the  appellant,  submitted  that  this  was  a
    material error by the  judge.   The  incident  concerning  the  claimed
    murder of the appellant's brother was a core aspect of the  appellant's
    claim and this document was, if  genuine,  potentially  of  fundamental
    significance  in  corroborating  the  appellant's  case.    Mr   Jowett
    submitted that if it's authenticity was  accepted,  there  was  a  real
    prospect that a different decision would have been reached  in  respect
    of the credibility of the appellant's claim despite the  other  reasons
    given by the judge for doubting the appellant's account.

19. Mr Richards submitted that there was no material error of law  made  by
    the judge simply by failing to make direct reference to this  piece  of
    evidence.  First, he submitted that the judge had found  the  appellant
    to be a thoroughly dishonest witness.  Second, he  submitted  that,  in
    fact, in para 54, the judge had not rejected  the  appellant's  account
    that  his  brother  had  been  killed  but  rather  had  rejected   the
    appellant's account that he was present and had witnessed his brother's
    murder.  The document  was,  therefore,  not  central  to  the  judge's
    adverse finding.

20. I do not accept this latter submission made by Mr Richards.  First,  it
    is not, in my judgment, the proper interpretation  of  what  the  judge
    said at para 54 of his decision.  Secondly, in any event, it  is  plain
    that the judge rejected the appellant's account overall.  In  para  59,
    he said that the appellant's account had been "simply  fabricated"  and
    that he had "made up [the] whole of his evidence in order to  make  out
    an asylum claim to stay in the UK".  In fabricating and making  up  the
    whole of his evidence, the judge can only  properly  be  understood  to
    have rejected not only the appellant's presence at the  murder  of  his
    brother but also that his brother was murdered at  all.   Consequently,
    contrary to Mr Richards' submissions, the coroner's report was relevant
    to the judge's reasoning and his adverse credibility finding  rejecting
    the whole of the appellant's evidence.

21. Whilst I accept that the judge gave a number of reasons at paras  50  -
    59 for his adverse credibility finding,  the  coroner's  report  was  a
    potentially corroborative  document  relating  to,  perhaps,  the  core
    incident that the appellant claimed put him at risk on return.  It  was
    clearly relied upon by the appellant's (then) Counsel before the  judge
    and is referred to in para 24 of her skeleton argument.  It was plainly
    an issue before the judge whether the document was  reliable.   In  the
    refusal decision the respondent had found it not to  be  reliable  (see
    paras 109 - 110).  It was, in my judgment, incumbent upon Judge Khan to
    grapple with the reliability of this  document  given  its  potentially
    corroborative impact upon a core aspect of the appellant's  claim.   He
    simply failed to do so and that was, in my judgment, an error of law.

22.  Despite  the  other  reasons  given  for  doubting   the   appellant's
    credibility, given the centrality of this document to a core aspect  of
    the appellant's account, I  am  not  persuaded  that  the  judge  would
    necessarily have reached the same adverse credibility finding if he had
    grappled with (and considered the reliability of) the coroner's record.



23. For that reason, therefore, the judge's adverse credibility finding and
    his dismissal of  the  appellant's  asylum  claim  cannot  stand.   The
    judge's adverse findings and his decision in respect of the appellant's
    asylum claim are, as a consequence, set aside.

Decision

24. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal involved the making of a material error of law.   That  decision
    is set aside.

25. Given the nature and extent of the fact-finding  required,  and  having
    regard to paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's  Practice  Statement,
    the appropriate disposal of this appeal is to remit it  to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal for a de novo rehearing before a judge other than Judge M
    A Khan.



                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             26 January 2018







