
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07248/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2 January 2019                             |On 24 January 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AE
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Davison, Ison Harrison Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AE, was born in 1992 and is a  male  citizen  of  Egypt.
    The appellant claimed asylum in the United Kingdom on 23 February 2017.
     By a decision dated 25 May 2018, the Secretary of  State  refused  the
    appellant international protection.   He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge T R Smith) which, in a decision promulgated on 25  July
    2018,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant   now   appeals,   with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are two grounds of appeal.   The  second  addresses  whether  the
    appellant, whom the judge found  had  been  arrested  by  the  Egyptian
    authorities on three occasions, had been subjected to persecution.  The
    grounds assert that the judge had failed to consider  whether  repeated
    raids on  the  appellant's  home  in  Egypt  and  the  threatening  and
    detention of  family  members  constituted  a  "sustainable  systematic
    denial of core human rights" (Ravichandran [1996] Imm AR 97).   I  make
    no finding in respect of the second ground  of  appeal  because  (i)  I
    intend to allow this appeal and set aside  the  decision  having  found
    that the first ground of appeal is made out and (ii) the entire account
    given by the appellant will be the subject of a de novo  consideration.
    It will be for the First-tier Tribunal hearing the appeal  de  novo  to
    determine whether or not, if it finds that the appellant and his family
    have suffered the  treatment  described  in  the  appellant's  account,
    suffered persecution or ill-treatment which would  infringe  Article  3
    ECHR.

 3. The first ground of appeal concerns a mistake as to the facts  made  by
    the judge.  At [84], the judge  recorded  that  "[the  appellant]  said
    that, having arrived in the United Kingdom on 8 February 2017 with  the
    support of the British Council he intended to  return  to  Egypt  on  1
    March but only decided to claim asylum after his father was arrested on
    or about 21 February 2017".  The appellant's evidence had clearly  been
    (in both statement and in interview) that  his  family  home  had  been
    raided on 21 February 2017; the appellant's father had been arrested in
    November 2017.  The grounds assert that at [87], the  judge  fell  into
    error as a result of his  misunderstanding  of  the  evidence  when  he
    stated that "no information was  given  suggesting  any  form  of  ill-
    treatment to the appellant's father or that the  security  forces  made
    any threats to the appellant in the presence of the appellant's father.
     No steps had been taken, for example,  to  persecute  the  appellant's
    family in order to try and persuade the appellant to return to  Egypt".
    As the grounds point out, this finding  "sits  uncomfortably  with  the
    'turning point' for the appellant that led  to  his  claiming  asylum",
    namely the raid on his home in February  2017.   The  judge  fell  into
    further error because he had misunderstood when the appellant's  father
    had been arrested.  At [88], the judge noted that there  was  a  "clear
    evidential contradiction given that the email was  written  before  the
    date of the appellant's father's arrest".  The email  in  question  was
    written by the appellant on  30  November  2017.   In  the  email,  the
    appellant stated that "my dad was arrested by the national security  in
    Egypt last Friday".  The appellant's evidence is consistent; the  judge
    has found an "evidential contradiction" when none existed.   The  judge
    was also wrong at [93-94] when he "attached weight  to  the  fact  that
    until the appellant's father was arrested [the appellant]  was  content
    to return to Egypt".  As  had  already  been  stated,  the  appellant's
    father's arrest took place in  November  2017  some  months  after  the
    appellant had made his claim for asylum (February 2017).

 4. Mrs Pettersen, who appeared for the Secretary of State, did not dispute
    that the judge had made errors of  fact  in  the  decision.   Her  only
    submission was to draw attention to the finding by the  judge  at  [96]
    that the appellant was not of  interest  to  the  Egyptian  authorities
    because he had been able to leave Egypt  on  his  own  passport.   That
    submission and the judge's finding ignore the fact that  the  appellant
    has always claimed that the Egyptian authorities became  interested  in
    him after he had left Egypt.   Given  that  circumstance,  it  was  not
    surprising, therefore, that he had been able to leave Egypt  using  his
    own passport.

 5. I find that the decision of the judge  should  be  set  aside.   It  is
    impossible to determine to what extent the judge's misunderstanding  of
    the evidence has affected his analysis generally.  It is necessary  for
    there to be a new fact-finding exercise which is  better  conducted  by
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

 6. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated  on  25
    July 2018 is set aside.  None of the findings of fact shall stand.  The
    appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge T R Smith) for
    that Tribunal to re-make the decision.

 7.  An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane




No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
