
                                    [pic]


    Upper Tribunal
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07220/2018




                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS




    |Heard at Birmingham                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th January 2020                         |On 30th January 2020          |
|                                             |                              |




                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between


                                     AAF
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and




                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent




    Representation:


    For the Appellant:         Mr V Madanhi, CB Solicitors
    For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer




                            DECISION AND REASONS



      1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"),
         and as this a protection claim, it is appropriate that a  direction
         is made. Unless and until a Tribunal or  Court  directs  otherwise,
         AAF is granted anonymity. No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
         directly or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his  family.
         This direction applies amongst others to all  parties.  Failure  to
         comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
         proceedings.


      2. The appellant is a  national  of  Egypt.  His  appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision of 20th May 2018  to  refuse  his  claim  for
         asylum and humanitarian  protection  was  dismissed  by  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Bristow ("the judge")  for  reasons  set  out  in  a
         decision promulgated on 12th December 2018.


      3. The appellant claims the decision of the judge is vitiated  by  one
         or more errors of law that were material  to  the  outcome  of  the
         appeal.  Permission to appeal was granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Bird on 7th January 2019.


      4. The appellant claims  the  judge  erroneously  identified  a  minor
         inconsistency in the account given by the appellant  regarding  the
         duration of his detention in 2015 as undermining the credibility of
         the  appellant's   account.    Mr   Madanhi   submits   the   minor
         inconsistency should have been considered by the Judge  in light of
         the medical evidence that was before the  Tribunal  confirming  the
         appellant suffers with 'anxiety and depression'.  He  submits,  the
         judge  accepted  at  paragraph  [33]  of  the  decision,  that  the
         appellant had been  diagnosed  with  anxiety  and  depression.   Mr
         Madanhi submits  the  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's  evidence
         regarding the duration of his detention  in  2015  that  the  judge
         refers to, was not material and was insignificant  when  viewed  in
         light of the medical evidence and the background of the appellant's
         experiences.  The appellant had claimed that he  was  detained  and
         tortured in 2015 and during his detention boiling water was  poured
         onto his genitals.  The judge noted  at  paragraph  [27]  that  the
         letter from Prestbury Medical Practice  dated  21st  December  2016
         refers to the author having "... seen old  burn  marks  around  his
         genital area...".  The medical  evidence  therefore  supported  the
         appellant's claim that he has been detained and tortured.


      5. Mr Madanhi submits the judge also failed to give  anxious  scrutiny
         to the claim made by the  appellant  by  failing  to  consider  the
         appellant's account of how he was able  to  provide  a  copy  of  a
         membership card for the Freedom and Justice Party. Furthermore, the
         judge erred in concluding, at paragraph [31] of the  decision  that
         he can place no reliance upon the document from the  South  Beheira
         Criminal Court that was relied upon by the appellant.   Mr  Madanhi
         submits there was no allegation that the document relied upon is  a
         forgery and the judge erred in seeking to go behind the content  of
         the document.  The appellant could not be expected to know why  the
         court had dealt with the matter in the  way  it  did.  Finally,  Mr
         Madanhi submits the judge erroneously  considered  the  appellant's
         account that he has left his wife and children in  Egypt,  and  his
         failure to claim asylum earlier during his journey to  the  UK,  as
         undermining the credibility of his account of events. He submits it
         was irrational for the Judge to conclude that  it is  not  credible
         that the appellant would leave  behind  a  wife,  in  circumstances
         where the appellant was going  to  undertake  a  long  and  arduous
         journey to ensure his safety, with every intention  that  his  wife
         and children would join him once they  were  able  to  do  so,  and
         family reunion was possible.


      6. In reply, Mrs Aboni submits the judge  directed  himself  correctly
         and gave adequate reasons for the findings  reached.   She  submits
         the judge carefully considered the claim made by the appellant  and
         it was open to the Judge to conclude, at  [24],  that  on  his  own
         account, the appellant's involvement with  the  Muslim  Brotherhood
         cannot be described as significant.  The judge carefully considered
         the appellant's claim that  his membership card for the Freedom and
         Justice Party was destroyed and his account of how he was  able  to
         obtain a copy. It was open to the Judge to conclude  that  she  did
         not find the appellant's explanation as  to  why  he  was  able  to
         provide a copy  of the membership card, to be at all  credible  and
         to find that the document is not reliable.


      7. Mrs Aboni submits there was adequate consideration of the appellant
         account that he was detained and torture in 2015.  She submits  the
         letter from Prestbury Medical Practice dated 21st December 2016 had
         been before the respondent and considered by the respondent in  the
         decision to refuse the claim  for  international  protection  dated
         20th May 2018. The respondent had noted the letter states that  the
         appellant suffers from a 'deviated septum' and refers to burn marks
         around the appellant's genital area. The respondent had stated that
         the appellant had failed to provide a medical report as evidence of
         the torture that  he  claimed  to  have  been  subjected  to.   The
         appellant had failed to adduce  any  further  medical  evidence  in
         support of his appeal.  The judge noted, at [27], that  the  author
         of the letter confirms that they have "seen old burn  marks  around
         his genital area", and the judge was entitled to note that there is
         no discussion about the asserted mechanism of the injury  and  that
         the author does not appear to have any  expertise  in  scarring  or
         diagnosis of injuries related to torture.


    Discussion


      8. I have carefully read the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge
         and  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  Tribunal.   The   judge
         concluded, at paragraph [36], as follows:


                "I have carefully considered all of the evidence even  if  I
                have not referred to it directly. I have reflected  on  that
                evidence in the light of  Miss  Sandal's  and  Mr  Madanhi's
                submissions. I have given the evidence anxious  scrutiny.  I
                have taken a view of the evidence 'in the round'. I  do  not
                find the appellant's account to be at all credible. I am not
                satisfied that the appellant has proved his account  to  the
                lower standard. I am not satisfied that he has proved to the
                lower standard that he has been tortured, that   a  sentence
                of imprisonment has been passed upon him in Egypt  and  that
                he has a well-founded fear of persecution for reason of  his
                imputed or actual political opinion."

      9. That was in my judgement, a conclusion that was  properly  open  to
         the Judge for the reasons identified in the decision. I reject  the
         claim that in reaching that decision, the judge simply relied  upon
         a minor inconsistency in the appellant's account of the duration of
         his detention in 2015. It was in my judgement open to the Judge  to
         have regard to the unexplained  inconsistency  in  the  appellant's
         evidence.  Although there was medical evidence before the Tribunal,
         that evidence was wholly lacking.  There was a  letter  before  the
         Tribunal from Dr Hamdy dated 23rd March 2017,  which simply states:


                "[AAF] Suffers with anxiety and  depression,  his  sleep  is
                interrupted with nightmares, he has lost appetite,  he  also
                feels tired and he has become forgetful..."

     10. That very limited evidence does not provide any explanation for the
         appellant's inability to provide a consistent account regarding the
         core of his claim.


     11. The judge  referred  to  the  letter  from  the  Prestbury  Medical
         Practice at paragraph [27] of her decision.    That  letter  simply
         states:


                    "He  seeks  a  report  detailing  injuries  he  says  he
                sustained during incarceration in Egypt. I can confirm  that
                he has a deviated septum to his nose which he says  occurred
                when he was beaten by police in Egypt. I have also seen  old
                burn marks  around  his  genital  area,  which  he  says  he
                sustained when boiling water was poured on him, again by the
                police in Egypt."

     12. The judge found, at [27],  that  letter  is  wholly  inadequate  as
         evidence of injuries arising from torture. The Judge properly noted
         the author makes no comment on  the  veracity  of  the  appellant's
         asserted mechanism for the injury and there is no discussion as  to
         other possible causes.  The judge noted the author does not  appear
         to have any expertise in scarring  or  the  diagnosis  of  injuries
         related to torture.   The judge also noted, at [28], the  appellant
         was referred to Freedom from Torture in June 2017 and the appellant
         has attended individual's therapy sessions. It was in my  judgement
         open to the Judge to note that  in  all  the  circumstances  it  is
         surprising there is no detailed expert  evidence  relating  to  the
         scars and the mechanism of the injuries.


     13. In my judgement a careful reading of the decision demonstrates  the
         judge also had regard to the documents relied upon by the appellant
         in support of his claim.  In Ahmed -v- SSHD [2002] Imm.  A.R.  318,
         Mr Justice Collins  set  out  guidance  as  to  the  assessment  of
         documents relied upon;  It  was  for  the  appellant  to  show  the
         reliability of the documents relied  upon  and  for  the  judge  to
         decide whether the documents were reliable after looking at all the
         available evidence.  The judge properly considered  the  membership
         card for the Freedom and Justice Party and the appellant's  account
         that the original was destroyed, and he was able to obtain  a  copy
         that been left on his computer.  It was in my judgement open to the
         Judge to find the appellant's explanation as to why he was able  to
         provide a copy, not to be credible  for  the  reasons  set  out  at
         paragraph [26] of the decision.  It was equally open to  the  judge
         to conclude that no weight could be attached to the  document  that
         purports to be from  the  South  Beheira  Criminal  Court  for  the
         reasons set out at paragraph [31] of her decision.


       14. In JT (Cameroon) -v- SSHD [2008] EWCA  Civ  878,  the  Court  of
           Appeal confirmed that The Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
           Claimants, etc.) Act 2004 s.8 was no more  than  a  reminder  to
           fact-finding Tribunals that conduct coming within the categories
           stated  therein  had  to  be  considered  when   assessing   the
           credibility of an asylum seeker. The FtT judge was  entitled  to
           have regard to the conduct of the appellant and the  explanation
           provided. While such  conduct  had  to  be  considered  and  was
           capable of damaging credibility, the Court of  Appeal  confirmed
           that s8 did not dictate that damage  to  credibility  inevitably
           resulted, and the weight to be given to the conduct was entirely
           a matter for the judge.


       15. The assessment of credibility and the risk upon return is always
           a highly  fact  sensitive  task.   The  judge  was  required  to
           consider the evidence as a whole.  The findings and  conclusions
           reached by the judge were neither irrational nor unreasonable in
           the Wednesbury sense, or findings and  conclusions  that  were
           wholly unsupported by the evidence.


        16. In my judgement it was properly open to the Judge to dismiss the
            appeal for the reasons set out in her  decision  promulgated  on
            12th December  2018.   It  follows  that  in  my  judgement  the
            decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow is not tainted  by
            a material error of law and the appeal is dismissed.


     Notice of Decision


        17. The appeal is dismissed


        18. The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Bristow stands.





    Signed                                  Date     27th January 2020




         Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


