
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07158/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 21st August 2018                  |On 26th February 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                Mr Frank [O]
                       (ANONYMITY direction not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A McVeety (Senior HOPO)
For the Respondent:    No Legal Representation


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McGinty, promulgated on 14th September 2017, following the  hearing  at
    Manchester Piccadilly on 29th August 2017.  In the decision, the  judge
    allowed the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon the Respondent Secretary
    of State, subsequently applied for,  and  was  granted,  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.  For
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were referred to in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Nigeria, and  was  born  on  20th
    April 1980.  He appeals against the decision of the  Respondent,  dated
    9th  June  2017,  refusing  his  application  for   asylum,   and   for
    humanitarian protection, on the basis of his fear  of  his  family  and
    other non-state agents.  The refusal letter stated that these were non-
    Convention reasons as far as the claim for protection was concerned.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence of the Appellant's claim is that he will be killed  by  his
    family, especially an uncle, with  whom  he  worked  on  a  project  in
    Nigeria in 2010.  He also fears he will be killed by the person to whom
    he owes money.  He claims that his uncle and Mr [E] wants to kill  him.
    These claims are rejected by the Respondent.  Even so,  the  Respondent
    did give consideration to the issue of protection, and  concluded  that
    protection would  be  available  to  the  Appellant  because  he  could
    relocate within Nigeria and avoid  both  his  uncle  and  Mr  [E]  (see
    paragraph 83 of the refusal letter).

The Judge's Decision

 4. The judge focused essentially on the Appellant's family.  His wife  was
    a Canadian national.  His children also were Canadian  nationals.   His
    wife, [SY], had been on discretionary leave to  remain  up  until  30th
    March 2012, and had been a dependant of the  Appellant.  His  wife  had
    been in the UK as a student.  The Appellant had been a dependant on his
    wife.  The student leave had  expired.   There  were  children  of  the
    family.  These were [N],  the  eldest  child,  who  was  born  on  24th
    November 2010, and was aged at the time of the decision by the judge, 6
    years.  There were [D], who was born on 27th May 2013, and was  aged  4
    years at the time of the decision.  Finally, there  was  [E],  who  was
    born on 1st July 2015, and  was  aged  2  years  at  the  time  of  the
    decision.  Judge McGinty also had regard to the  fact  that  there  had
    been a prior decision by Judge Eldridge which  had  found  against  the
    Appellant, and this was his starting point (see paragraphs 31 to 32).

 5. The judge went on to record how, although the Appellant himself was  of
    Nigerian citizenship, no application had been made for the children  to
    apply for Nigerian citizenship (paragraph 33).  He also  observed  that
    none of the children are over 7 years of age and that "I find that none
    of them have therefore established a significant private life of  their
    own in the UK, despite the fact that I do accept the evidence given  by
    Miss [Y] that the 2 older children are now at school"  (paragraph  34).
    However, he then went on to conclude that, on  the  basis  of  evidence
    produced as exhibit FN017, in respect of the requirements for Miss  [Y]
    to be able to sponsor the Appellant to live  in  Canada,  there  was  a
    financial requirement.  The judge went on to record that:-

         "As correctly stated by Miss [Y],  it  is  clearly  stated  on  the
         financial evaluation form which is part of the application form for
         entry into Canada, that if the  amount  earned  is  less  than  the
         amount of the minimum necessary income requirements such  that  you
         would not meet the sponsorship  eligibility  requirements,  do  not
         send your application" (paragraph 35).

 6. He went on to observe how the basic income requirement for five members
    of the family would be a  minimum  of  some  $50,000  Canadian  dollars
    (paragraph 36).  Moreover, neither the Appellant nor Miss [Y] had  been
    allowed to work in the UK for the preceding twelve months  and  so  did
    not have the income (paragraph 37).

 7. The judge ultimately concluded that  it  was  not  reasonable  for  the
    Appellant to be separated from his children (paragraph 39).  There  was
    no guarantee that the Appellant's wife would be able to find  childcare
    in Canada or to be able to earn the amount in  excess  of  the  minimum
    income requirement so as to be able to sponsor the Appellant (paragraph
    39).  The Appellant could not relocate to Nigeria  either  because  the
    Foreign Office advice was against travel to several  areas  of  Nigeria
    where the risks of kidnapping and crime, particularly in the north-east
    of the country (paragraph 41).  Accordingly, even though  the  children
    were not qualified children (paragraph 42), and even though  they  have
    not been in the UK for seven years and had no  private  life  of  their
    own, the appeal fell to be allowed, bearing in mind  the  Section  117B
    considerations.  This was because the Home Office Rules had  themselves
    prevented the Appellant from working in the  way  that  he  could  earn
    enough money to be able to ensure that a sponsorship application  could
    be made by his wife to enable them all to go to Canada.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of appeal state that the judge had erred in  light  of  the
    appeal with respect to the issue of relocation to Nigeria, as  well  as
    relocation to Canada.

 9. On 29th March 2018 the Upper Tribunal granted permission to appeal.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 21st August 2018, Mr McVeety, appearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent Secretary of State, submitted that  the  judge
    had fundamentally erred with respect to the right  of  the  Appellant's
    wife, Miss [Y], to return to Canada, as a Canadian citizen, and to then
    sponsor her husband to join her there.  The error occurred because  the
    judge had referred to exhibit FN017 "in respect of the requirements for
    Miss [Y] to be able  to  sponsor  the  Appellant  to  live  in  Canada"
    (paragraph 35).

11. However, if one looks at the Rules with respect to financial evaluation
    form (IMM 1283) to which the judge clearly had regard, they make  quite
    clear that any financial  requirement  only  applies  with  respect  to
    someone sponsoring a  person  other  than  his  spouse  or  common  law
    partner.  They do not apply to Miss [Y] if she was simply  planning  to
    sponsor the Appellant to join her as  her  husband.   The  guidance  is
    clear that, "if you are sponsoring a person other  than:  your  spouse,
    common law or conjugal partner who has no  family  members,  ..."  then
    "you must prove that you have an annual income that is at  least  equal
    to the minimum necessary income to support the group of persons ...".

12. It then goes on to say that the  required  level  of  income  for  five
    persons would be $52,583  Canadian  dollars.   This,  of  course,  only
    applies to an application for a person other than "your spouse,  common
    law or a conjugal partner", which is  not  the  case  as  far  as  this
    Appellant is concerned.  Plainly  therefore,  the  judge  had  actually
    misread the "financial  evaluation".   That  being  so,  there  was  no
    obstacle to the Appellant returning to the Canada with  his  wife.   He
    had the option either to join his wife in Canada, or to go to  Nigeria,
    where it was simply not the case that the whole of Nigeria was  subject
    to a risk of kidnap or violence.  The advice given by the  Foreign  and
    Commonwealth Office in the United Kingdom, that people should not go to
    Nigeria, was for British citizens.   It  was  not  advice  to  Nigerian
    citizens, of which the Appellant was one.

13. Mr McVeety submitted that he did not have to take matters  any  further
    although it was the case that there were a number of other errors,  for
    example in the way in which the judge had placed the burden of proof on
    the Respondent Secretary of State to prove why the Appellant could  not
    go to Canada with his wife.  Moreover, the judge had  stated  that  the
    Appellant will have difficulty in getting a job in Canada, as would his
    wife, but the same applies in this country.  The Appellant  would  have
    to get a job in the UK as well.  He would have to get a job  in  Canada
    in the same way.

14. In representing himself, Mr [O] read out a pre-prepared statement.   He
    submitted that he had actually contacted the Canadian Embassy.  He  had
    actually been told that he had to show funds in the  order  of  between
    $52,000 and $65,000 Canadian dollars.  He said that  he  had  presented
    this written communications to the  Home  Office.   He  said  that  the
    decision made by the judge should be upheld.  Moreover, he had now  got
    a right to be with his family.  Furthermore, if he was forced to return
    to Nigeria he would suffer Article 3 violation of his human rights.

Error of Law

15. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  involved
    the making of an error on a point of law (see  Section  12(1)  of  TCEA
    2007) such that I should set aside the decision.   My  reasons  are  as
    follows.  First, this is a case  where  the  Appellant  is  a  Nigerian
    national.  His wife is a Canadian citizen.  The remaining children were
    at the date of the hearing Canadian  citizens.   Neither  of  them  had
    valid leave to remain in the  UK.   Second,  Canada  does  not  have  a
    financial requirement, in  the  way  accepted  by  the  judge,  on  the
    evidence presented to him, applying to a spouse of a Canadian  citizen.
    In fact, the financial requirement is a feature of UK law, and it is  a
    stringent requirement, in a way that is  not  the  case  with  Canadian
    nationals.  That being so, there was no obstacle in  the  path  of  the
    Appellant going either with his wife and  children  to  Canada,  (given
    that they were Canadian citizens), or to  returning  back  to  Nigeria,
    (given that neither of them had any leave), and given that at the  time
    of the decision the children were not  qualified  children,  so  as  to
    retain their right to family life intact.

16. I accept that as of November 2017 '[N]' is now  a  "qualifying  child",
    but this must be a matter for a future  consideration,  on  any  future
    application.  It cannot be said, on the basis of  the  evidence  before
    the original judge at the time of the hearing, that  the  position  was
    anything other than what the Respondent now maintains, namely, that the
    judge was considering an appeal with respect  to  parties  before  him,
    neither of whom were citizens of this  country,  neither  of  whom  had
    leave to remain in this country, and in neither case was there a  child
    over 7 years of age.  Most importantly, the issue of whether there is a
    financial bar preventing the Appellant from  going  with  his  wife  to
    Canada is not a viable issue that arises.  Accordingly, for  all  these
    reasons, the decision must be set aside.

17. There has been a delay in sending out this Determination to the parties
    concerned, because although it was dictated on the day of the Hearing,
    and typed up shortly thereafter, it appears to have been held up in the
    system, before promulgation.

Notice of Decision

18. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and subsequently should be set aside.  I set aside the  decision
    of the original judge.  I remake the decision as follows.  This  appeal
    is allowed to the extent that it is remitted  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, to be determined by a judge other than Judge McGinty, on  the
    basis of Practice Statement 7.2(b).

19. No anonymity direction is made.

20. This appeal is allowed on behalf of the Secretary of State.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 25th February 2019



