
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07242/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 10 April 2018                         |On 24 April 2018                  |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     EP
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms G Mellon, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
                    Hartigan
For the respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is  a  remade  decision  following  the  identification  of  a
        material legal error in the decision of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Fletcher-Hill (the judge), promulgated on 4 October  2017,
        in  which  she  allowed  the   appellant's   appeal   against   the
        respondent's decision, dated 13 July 2017, to refuse his protection
        and human rights claim.






   Background

     2. The appellant, a national of Albania, was born in 1997. He  arrived
        in the UK on 23 December 2013 aged 16 years old. He made an  asylum
        claim based on his fear of serious ill-treatment  from  his  father
        and, although this was refused on 17 November 2014, he was  granted
        limited leave to remain in accordance with the Home  Office  Asylum
        Policy Instruction on Discretionary Leave (DL) because  he  was  an
        unaccompanied minor. He was granted DL until 19 April 2015 and,  on
        17 April 2015, he made an application for further leave  to  remain
        in the UK. The refusal of this application on 13 July 2017  led  to
        the present appeal.

     3. In both of her Reasons For Refusal Letters the respondent  accepted
        the core elements of the appellant's account  that  caused  him  to
        leave Albania and make his protection claim in the UK. From a  very
        young age the appellant had been abused by his father. When he  was
        12 years old the appellant's father broke his legs.  The  appellant
        was forced to leave school by his father. In August 2013 his father
        sexually abused him for the first  time.  The  respondent  accepted
        that there was a reasonable degree of likelihood that the appellant
        had been abused by his father.  This  was  principally  based  upon
        consistency in the appellant's account  both  internally  and  with
        respect to background material.  The  respondent  was  not  however
        satisfied that the appellant, who was now an adult, would be unable
        to avail himself of a sufficiency of protection and found  that  he
        could, in any event,  avail  himself  of  the  internal  relocation
        alternative. I  shall  consider  the  evidence  relied  on  by  the
        respondent in due course.

     4.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  judge  heard  oral  evidence  from  the
        appellant and was invited by  the  respondent's  representative  to
        consider  extracts  of  background   evidence   relating   to   the
        availability of  a  sufficiency  of  protection  contained  in  the
        Reasons For Refusal Letter dated 17 November 2014 (incorporated  by
        reference into the July  2017  decision)  and  in  the  appellant's
        'Objective Bundle', including the  Country  of  Origin  Information
        Report (COIR) of July 2017. The Judge  was  also  invited  by  both
        representatives to consider an expert country  report  relating  to
        Albania prepared by Ms Antonia Young  which  was  dated  27  August
        2015. This  report  accompanied  the  appellant's  application  for
        further leave to remain and was considered by the respondent in her
        July 2017 decision. The judge found the appellant to be a  credible
        witness  and  resolved  the  only  outstanding  credibility  issue,
        whether he reported the abuse he suffered to the local  police,  in
        the appellant's favour. The judge considered that Ms Young's report
        was preferable to the evidence  relied  on  by  the  respondent  in
        respect of the availability of  a  sufficiency  of  protection  and
        internal relocation.

     5. In its error of law decision, promulgated on 13 February 2018,  the
        Upper Tribunal found that the  judge  failed  to  provide  adequate
        reasons for preferring Ms Young's expert report to  the  background
        country evidence relied on by the respondent.  In  concluding  that
        there was no sufficiency of protection the judge repeated  some  of
        the conclusions reached by Ms Young but failed to adequately engage
        with the evidence relied on by  the  respondent  relating  to  this
        issue. While the background evidence relied on by  the  respondent,
        identified in her decisions dated 17  November  2014  and  13  July
        2017, was of a general nature it did suggest that a sufficiency  of
        protection  was  generally  available,  and  this  conclusion   was
        supported by the aged Country Guidance case of DM  (Sufficiency  of
        Protection - PSG - Women - Domestic  Violence)  Albania  CG  [2004]
        UKIAT 00059. The judge failed to undertake a satisfactory  analysis
        of the background evidence relied  on  by  the  respondent  and  no
        attempt  was  made  to  explain  why  the  expert's  evidence   was
        preferred.  The  absence  of  any  such  explanation  rendered  the
        decision unsafe.

     6. Although the respondent's grounds also criticised Ms  Young  as  an
        expert and argued that the judge was not entitled to find that  the
        appellant's father would  continue  to  look  for  him,  the  Upper
        Tribunal  found  these  criticisms  lacked  merit.  Nor   did   the
        respondent take issue in  respect  of  any  of  the  judge's  other
        credibility findings, reflecting the respondent's  position  before
        the First-tier Tribunal. In the error of  law  decision  The  Upper
        Tribunal indicated that the factual findings at paragraph 78 of the
        judge's decision would stand, save that there may be an issue as to
        whether the judge was entitled to  conclude  that  the  appellant's
        father would have access to information throughout  Albania  simply
        based on his previous military conscription. The retained  findings
        of fact included a finding that the appellant did attempt to report
        his father's abuse to the police, and that the respondent's  father
        would continue to have an adverse interest in him.

     7. The appeal was listed for a rehearing to determine whether, on  the
        accepted  facts,  a  sufficiency  of  protection  existed  in   the
        appellant's home area, and, if not, whether internal relocation was
        available.  The  adjourned  hearing   would   also   consider   the
        appellant's article 8 claim.

The resumed hearing

     8. At the hearing, and pursuant  to  rule  15  (2A)  of  the  Tribunal
        Procedure (Upper Tribunal)  Rules  2008,  the  appellant  served  a
        supplementary bundle consisting of a further letter dated 28  March
        2018 from Donna Maynard, employed by the London Borough of Richmond
        Upon Thames as the appellant's Personal Advisor,  and  an  Addendum
        expert report  from  Ms  Antonia  Young  dated  6  April  2018.   I
        additionally received a skeleton argument from Ms Mellon.

     9. In addition to the new evidence, the Upper Tribunal considered  the
        two bundles of documents relied on by the appellant in  his  appeal
        before the First-tier Tribunal. One  bundle  included  his  witness
        statement dated 21 August 2017, a letter dated 22 August 2017  from
        Donna Maynard, a clinical psychology report  produced  by  Dr  Heke
        dated 21 August 2017,  and  Antonia  Young's  2015  expert  country
        report. The other bundle contained background evidence including  a
        Country  Policy  and  Information  Note  -  'Albania  -  Background
        information,  including  actors   of   protection,   and   internal
        relocation', July 2017 (CPIN).

    10. The appellant did not give any oral evidence.  Ms  Maynard  adopted
        her two letters as her evidence-in-chief and underwent examination-
        in-chief and cross-examination. I will consider her evidence as and
        when  appropriate  in  my  assessment  of  the  availability  of  a
        sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation.  Both  parties
        made  their  submissions  which  I  have  recorded  and   carefully
        considered.

Assessment of the availability of a sufficiency of protection

    11. I must first consider whether the appellant faces a  real  risk  of
        persecution in his home area, the burden of proof resting  on  him,
        albeit to the lower standard. In determining whether  the  Albanian
        authorities  can  provide  a  sufficiency  of  protection  to  this
        particular appellant it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the  accepted
        factual matrix in a little more detail.

    12. The appellant hails from the town of Has, in northern  Albania.  He
        previously lived with his mother, his father, his older sister  and
        two younger brothers. The appellant's father was an odd job man. He
        underwent mandatory military service,  which  lasted  for  2  to  3
        years, when he  was  in  his  early  20s.  The  appellant's  father
        established strong friendships during  his  military  service  with
        people from different regions of  Albania  with  whom  he  kept  in
        touch. The appellant's father was visited by these friends  and  he
        sometimes visited them.

    13. The appellant's father did not believe that the appellant  was  his
        son and would frequently and  violently  beat  him.  Some  beatings
        would be inflicted with a belt or a broom. When the  appellant  was
        12 years old his father broke both his legs during an assault  with
        a broom. This injury  required  an  operation  in  Tirana  and  the
        appellant had to remain in bed for a year. Although  the  appellant
        did not undergo any physical beating during this period, his father
        continued to subject him to verbal abuse. The appellant  still  has
        problems with his legs and has had  appointments  with  orthopaedic
        specialists in the UK. The beatings resumed once the appellant  was
        well enough to get out of bed. On 24 August  2013  the  appellant's
        father sexually abused him for  the  1st  time  and  these  attacks
        continued until he left Albania in December 2013.  The  appellant's
        mother and his siblings were scared of the appellant's  father  and
        could not protect him or help him.

    14. The appellant went to the police  station  in  Has  to  report  his
        father's abuse. The police officer knew the appellant's father and,
        when the appellant confirmed his relationship,  the  appellant  was
        kicked and chased out of the police station. He was not allowed  to
        register  a  complaint  against  his  father.  The  police  officer
        informed the appellant's father of the attempt to lodge a complaint
        and when the appellant returned home his father beat him badly  and
        threatened to kill him if he ever reported him again. The appellant
        maintained that his father had friends in the police.  The  nearest
        other police station was in Kukes, a 3 to 4 hour journey by foot. I
        take judicial notice that Kukes is also in the north of Albania.

    15. The appellant was able to  leave  Albania  with  the  help  of  his
        maternal uncle who located an agent. The appellant however  had  to
        wait  until  his  maternal  uncle  amassed  sufficient   funds   to
        facilitate his escape and during  this  time  he  continued  to  be
        abused. The appellant fears his father will continue  to  look  for
        him because he does not want to  risk  the  appellant  speaking  to
        anyone else about what he did, and  to  punish  the  appellant  for
        trying to report him and for leaving. The appellant's father  would
        search for him and seek to kill him because of the dishonour caused
        by the appellant's allegations.

    16. The following are the essential elements to be distilled  from  the
        accepted factual matrix: the appellant has been subjected  to  very
        serious ill treatment from his father; his father has threatened to
        kill him and will continue to look for him in Albania; and  he  has
        already tried to obtain protection from  the  police  in  his  home
        area. It has been accepted by the respondent, a point  acknowledged
        by Mr Nath at the hearing, that the appellant is at risk of serious
        ill harm from his father should he  return  to  his  home  area  of
        Albania. It remains to be determined whether  the  authorities  are
        able to offer the appellant a sufficiency of protection in his home
        area.

    17. In submitting that a sufficiency of protection is available in  the
        appellant's home area the respondent relies on the decision  in  DM
        (Sufficiency of Protection -  PSG  -  Women  -  Domestic  Violence)
        Albania CG [2004] UKIAT 00059. Although DM is of some  vintage,  it
        remains a Country Guidance case. This short  decision  however  did
        not engage in the detailed analysis now generally seen  in  Country
        Guidance cases and was primarily concerned  with  the  position  of
        female victims of domestic violence, not male victims, and  whether
        there was sufficient evidence that women,  per  se,  constituted  a
        Particular Social Group. Nor was any expert report provided to  the
        Tribunal. The Tribunal nevertheless  considered  the  October  2003
        Country  Information  and  Policy  Unit  report  on  Albania  which
        detailed training received by the  Albanian  police  on  issues  of
        gender and treatment of female victims of  domestic  violence,  and
        noted that, although there was no definition of  domestic  violence
        in Albanian law or any specific law against domestic violence,  the
        authorities were able to use general laws against violence  in  the
        context of domestic abuse. The Tribunal also found that, if a woman
        reported a crime and the police  did  nothing,  she  could  file  a
        criminal law suit against the police as well as a  request  against
        them via the People's Advocate Office for violation of her  rights.
        The Tribunal noted that the Women's Bar Association  offered  legal
        aid and legal counselling for women having legal problems, and that
        there were NGOs in Albania offering services  to  abused  women.  I
        consider the assessment undertaken in DM and its conclusions as  my
        starting point.

    18. In her Reasons For Refusal Letter dated 13 July 2017 the respondent
        provides extracts from the Criminal Code  of  Albania  relating  to
        Domestic Violence (Article 130) setting out the nature of  domestic
        violence offences and the  available  punishments.  This  indicates
        that there  are  now  specific  provisions  of  the  Criminal  Code
        criminalising domestic violence against close relatives that result
        in injury or a violation of the relative's physical,  psycho-social
        and economic integrity. The respondent also relies on the  decision
        in DM, and quoted from the US State Department report 2014  and  an
        Interpol document in respect of the structure and  organisation  of
        the Albanian police.

    19. The respondent additionally  provides  an  extract  from  the  Data
        Centrum Institute report of October 2012 'Baseline Study Report  on
        Domestic Violence and Albanian State Police', which concludes  that
        there is a "well-structured and  functional  vertical  organisation
        and reporting line regarding domestic violence within the  Albanian
        state police." The same document  describes  central  and  regional
        Child Protection and  Domestic  Violence  sectors.  The  respondent
        previously referred to the Data Centrum Study in her decision dated
        17 November  2014,  which  was  incorporated  into  her  July  2017
        decision. In her earlier decision  the  respondent  quoted  from  a
        Canadian Immigration  and  Refugee  Board  report  indicating  that
        police arrested 119 people for domestic violence in 2012,  up  from
        63 in 2011. The same report, referring to the Data  Centrum  Study,
        indicates that there are Child  Protection  and  Domestic  Violence
        units in Tirana (consisting of 4 employees), in  Fieri  (consisting
        of 2 employees, and one employee each  of  the  remaining  regional
        units in Shkodra, Dibra, Kukes, Lezha, Vlora,  Gjirokastra,  Korca,
        Berat, Durres and  Elbasan.  Several  sources  indicated  that  100
        police officers had received training on domestic  violence  as  of
        April 2013 as well as 1800 health and social workers.

    20. The respondent also relies  on  the  CPIN  of  July  2017,  and  in
        particular the issue of protection at section 2.2 and  specifically
        at 2.2.6 which indicates that, in general, a  person  fearing  non-
        state actors is  likely  to  be  able  to  obtain  effective  state
        protection, but that each case has to  be  determined  on  its  own
        facts. The CPIN document dated July 2017 indicates,  at  2.2,  that
        Albania has a fully functioning police and  judicial  system,  that
        civilian authorities generally maintain effective control over  the
        police but there are instances of  corruption  and  of  the  police
        having  committed  abuses,  that  the   government   has   internal
        mechanisms to investigate and punish police abuse  and  corruption,
        that Albania  also  has  an  independent  ombudsman  who  processes
        complaints including those against police  officers,  and  that  in
        general, a  person  fearing  non-state  (including  'rogue'  state)
        actors is likely to be able to obtain effective  state  protection,
        although each case has to be determined on its own facts.

    21. In her July 2017 decision, while accepting that corruption remained
        a  problem  within  the  Albanian  police  force,  the   respondent
        considers that anticorruption efforts are being imposed in  Albania
        and supports her assertion by reference to  several  extracts  from
        the Country  Information  and  Guidance  (CIG)  document  'Albania:
        Background  Information,  including  actors  of   protection,   and
        internal  relocation'  Version  1.0  August  2015.  The  respondent
        additionally cites information gleaned  from  the  Information  and
        Refugee Board of Canada in respect of the right to complain against
        police officers and the process for doing so.

    22. In her 2017 decision the respondent considers  Ms  Young's  country
        report dated 27 August 2015 and, having  accepted  that  she  is  a
        suitable expert, concludes, having  regard  to  the  aforementioned
        evidence, that there is a sufficiency of protection to the  Horvath
        [2000] UKHL 37 standard in Albania.

    23. Having considered the above  evidence  I  find  that  the  Albanian
        authorities have  enacted  legislative  provisions  to  criminalise
        domestic violence and that they have established  Child  Protection
        and Domestic Violence units at a regional  level.  I  note  however
        that there is no unit in the appellant's home area. I  additionally
        note the limited number of staff associated  with  these  units.  I
        fully accept that there has been large-scale training of the police
        in respect of domestic violence, but, other than by reference to an
        increase in the number of people  arrested  for  domestic  violence
        between 2011 and 2012, the background evidence advanced and  relied
        on  by  the  respondent  does  not  describe  how  the  legislative
        provisions and the Domestic Violence units operate in practice. Nor
        does the background evidence relied on by the  respondent  describe
        societal attitudes towards domestic violence, particularly  in  the
        north of the country.

    24. In Part 3 of her addendum  expert  report  Ms  Young  states  that,
        despite legislation, domestic violence remains  a  major  issue  in
        Albania. Ms Young maintain that society in northern Albania is more
        conservative and traditional in  attitude  than  the  rest  of  the
        country, an observation supported by evidence in earlier  CG  cases
        (EH (blood feuds) Albania CG [2012] UKUT 00348 (IAC) and TD and  AD
        (Trafficked women) CG [2016] UKUT 00092 (IAC)). The  expert  states
        that  domestic  violence  is  extremely  common  in   Albania   and
        considered to be a matter of solely family concern. In areas  where
        traditional Kannun law is  observed,  particularly  in  the  North,
        violence within the family has  never  been  considered  to  be  of
        relevance to outsiders. It is hard to change this attitude and  the
        attitude of family members that the reporting  of  family  violence
        itself brings shame to the family. She supports her  assertions  by
        reference to several reports including the Journal of  Law,  Policy
        and Globalisation,  volume  13,  2013,  which  maintains  that  the
        culture  of  impunity  in  respect  of  domestic  violence  remains
        problematic. These observations are in  turn  consistent  with  the
        evidence given  by  the  appellant  to  the  effect  that  domestic
        violence and abuse is considered a family issue in Albania and that
        the police are reluctant to intervene, a  view  reinforced  by  the
        (in)actions appellant's mother and paternal uncle.

    25. Ms Young  explains  that  the  severe  domestic  and  sexual  abuse
        suffered by the appellant is likely to be a source of stigma rather
        than sympathy or support in Albania. She quotes from a Home  Office
        fact-finding  mission  dated  February  2018   which   noted   that
        traditional values do sometimes impact on police thinking and  that
        there had been cases where the police tried to negotiate  with  the
        victim to go back to the perpetrator of the  violence.  The  expert
        also quotes from an Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada  report
        dealing with domestic violence in Albania,  dated  30  April  2014,
        stating that domestic violence is widespread and  survivors  rarely
        receive  justice,  and  notes  the  findings  of  a  Working  Paper
        "Understanding Trafficking of Girls and Women from Albania",  2017,
        that implementation of the  legal  and  policy  frameworks  remains
        problematic and that commitments on  paper  not  always  translated
        into practice. The expert concludes that Albanian society and state
        agents in practice are likely  to  consider  that  the  appellant's
        rightful place is with his family. She additionally states that, to
        her own knowledge, she does not know of any vulnerable men who have
        been  allocated  accommodation  by  the  state  and  that,  despite
        assurances by directors of shelters for women that  such  provision
        is made, her  contacts  have  all  denied  the  existence  of  such
        provision.

    26. Ms Young quotes from TD and AD (Trafficked women)  CG  [2016]  UKUT
        00092 (IAC) and the South-East European Leadership for  Development
        and Integrity report, 2016, in respect of the  continued  existence
        of corruption, and the perception of corruption, within Albania. In
        reliance upon a number of reports, including those by  Transparency
        International, she states that corruption at all levels of Albanian
        society is endemic, despite considerable attempts  to  address  it.
        This  includes  police  corruption.  She   notes   a   Transparency
        International 2016 assessment on Albania which  stated  that,  "the
        culture of impunity, lack of rule of law and rampant corruption are
        issues to be dealt with urgently." In part 4 of her report Ms Young
        quotes from the US State Department 2014  Human  Rights  Report  on
        Albania which states  that  personal  associations,  political  and
        criminal connections, poor infrastructure, lack of  equipment,  and
        inadequate supervision often influenced enforcement  of  laws,  and
        low salaries,  poor  motivation  and  leadership,  and  a  lack  of
        diversity in the workforce contributed to continued corruption  and
        unprofessional  behaviour.  The  Transparency  International   2016
        report indicated that the positive impact of pay rises was hampered
        by high staff turnover and that there was one  police  officer  per
        400 inhabitants.

    27. I find there is no material conflict between the facts set  out  in
        the various documents  relied  on  by  the  respondent,  and  those
        considered and relied on by Ms Young. Rather,  the  country  expert
        has  considered  the  manner   in   which   the   legislative   and
        administrative protections afforded to victims of domestic violence
        have been implemented in  the  particular  context  of  a  socially
        conservative part of Albania. Ms Young's report is,  for  the  most
        part, adequately referenced and her expertise was accepted  by  the
        respondent in her July 2017 decision (at paragraph 21).

    28. Having considered and evaluated the documentary evidence relied  on
        by both parties and applying the Horvath [2000]  UKHL  37  test  in
        respect of the availability of a sufficiency of protection  I  find
        that, although there is in general a sufficiency of protection  for
        victims of domestic violence, a sufficiency of  protection  is  not
        available to this particular appellant in his home area.  Following
        the  very  serious  abuse  the  appellant  did  attempt  to  obtain
        protection from the police but he was not  allowed  to  register  a
        complaint and his father was informed of his attempt to  do  so.  I
        attach weight to  the  evidence  contained  in  Ms  Young's  report
        concerning the conservative nature of the appellant's home area and
        the widespread belief that issues of domestic violence are  matters
        solely for family concern. I  additionally  attach  weight  to  her
        observation,  supported  by  appropriate   references,   that   the
        legislative  provisions   criminalising   domestic   violence   and
        protecting victims suffer from problematic implementation. This  is
        reinforced by reference to the evidence, common to both the  expert
        report and the documentation relied on by the  respondent,  of  the
        widespread corruption in Albania. I  am  persuaded,  on  the  lower
        standard of proof, having cumulative regard to these factors,  that
        the  authorities  in  the  appellant's  home  area  are  unable  or
        unwilling to provide him with a sufficiency of protection.

Internal relocation

    29. I must now consider whether it  would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
        harsh to expect this appellant to avail  himself  of  the  internal
        relocation alternative. Such an assessment must take  into  account
        the appellant's particular characteristics.

    30. I note first the findings of Dr Sarah Heke, a  Consultant  Clinical
        Psychologist, in her report on the appellant dated 21 August  2017.
        This report was based on a 1� hour interview with the appellant and
        was written with sight of the witness statements, the  two  Reasons
        For Refusal Letters,  the  appellant's  asylum  interview  and  his
        medical evidence. The medical expert  diagnosed  the  appellant  as
        suffering from moderately severe  Post  Traumatic  Stress  Disorder
        (PTSD) and a Major Depressive Disorder. If he is unable to  receive
        appropriate treatment he will continue to  suffer  from  moderately
        severe  PTSD  which  is  having  a  detrimental   impact   on   his
        functioning,  well-being  and  quality  of  life.  The   Consultant
        Psychologist found that the appellant is highly  dependent  on  the
        support of others and although he can engage in some  daily  living
        skills independently he lacks the coping resources to  be  able  to
        fend  for  himself,  particularly  in  relation  to   gaining   any
        employment, finding accommodation  etc.  Dr  Keke  found  that  the
        appellant lacks  resources  and  skills  to  protect  himself  from
        exploitation  by  others  and,  facing  destitution,  he  would  be
        potentially vulnerable to exploitation. He is said  to  be  a  very
        traumatised young man who is overwhelmed by the intrusive images of
        the past abuse and experiences significant shame.  Although  he  is
        able tolerate this in a highly supportive  environment  in  the  UK
        this is likely  to  be  considerably  more  difficult  for  him  to
        tolerate if alone and potentially destitute in Albania without  his
        family network.

    31. In her letter dated 28 March 2018 Donna Maynard confirmed that  the
        appellant is a former Looked After Child  who  is  currently  being
        supported by the Royal Borough of Kingston upon Thames as  a  Child
        Leaving Care under the Children Leaving  Care  Act  2000.  She  has
        personally been working with  the  appellant  since  May  2016  and
        remains as his permanent personal adviser in the Leaving  Care/UASC
        Team. She stated that the appellant finds  it  difficult  to  build
        good relationships with other professionals and needs to meet  them
        several times before he is sufficiently comfortable  to  meet  them
        alone. She meets the appellant more regularly than any other  young
        person  with  whom  she  works,  which  is  an  indication  of  his
        vulnerability. The appellant rings her on a daily basis  for  minor
        issues which indicates to Ms Maynard that he would not be  able  to
        live independently at this time. He is dependent on the team and on
        Ms Maynard for activities that he should be able  to  complete  for
        himself at  his  age,  such  as  registering  with  a  dentist  and
        attending hospital  appointments.  He  needs  a  lot  of  emotional
        support from his friends and the professionals around him  and,  at
        times, he appears extremely vulnerable. As  a  result,  he  is  not
        ready to be moved to independent accommodation. The appellant finds
        it very difficult to talk about his family and his life  before  he
        came to the UK. On occasions when Ms Maynard has tried  to  discuss
        the appellant's history with him he has  "shutdown"  and  tries  to
        leave the room. It was felt that the appellant  is  going  to  need
        ongoing support until at least the age of 25 years old and possibly
        longer. He does not have the independence skills for his case to be
        closed and for him to live on his own by the  age  of  21.  In  her
        opinion Ms Maynard did not think that the appellant would  be  able
        to cope well if returned to Albania as he is not  confident  enough
        in his abilities to be able to live without support. At the end  of
        her letter she states that the appellant is nowhere near  ready  to
        be living independently in the UK or in Albania.

    32. In oral evidence Ms Maynard confirmed her experience over the  past
        10 years of dealing with an unaccompanied  asylum-seeking  children
        and confirmed that her current caseload consists of 27 individuals.
        Her contact with the appellant was far in excess of  that  she  had
        with her other charges. She spoke to the  appellant  on  an  almost
        daily basis. When asked how many other young people would be unable
        to live independently by the age of 25 she stated that, out of  300
        children that she dealt with, only 2 or 3 would be unable.  It  was
        her professional view that the appellant will  still  be  supported
        after his 25th birthday. This was based on an assessment  based  on
        an independent skills  checklist  which  included  the  ability  to
        arrange  and  pay,  arrange  a  tenancy,   cooking   and   changing
        lightbulbs. She did not believe that the appellant would be capable
        of looking after himself without support  in  Albania.  She  stated
        that the appellant was a vulnerable young  man  who  wanted  to  be
        liked by a lot of people and that  he  could  be  easily  led.  The
        possibility of counselling had been discussed and they were waiting
        to see if he would get it.

    33. I have carefully considered the Consultant Clinical  Psychologist's
        report and the evidence from Ms Maynard. I find that the  appellant
        is a vulnerable and traumatised  young  man  who  requires  a  high
        degree of support and is potentially vulnerable to exploitation.  I
        attach particular significance  to  the  professional  view  of  Ms
        Maynard who believes that the appellant is currently unable to live
        independently and that this may continue for some years. This is  a
        significant factor to bear in mind  when  considering  whether  the
        appellant can reasonably be expected to live  in  another  part  of
        Albania.

    34. The accepted factual matrix indicates that the appellant's maternal
        uncle, who lives in Tirana, has his own family,  including  a  wife
        and 5 children. At no stage when the appellant lived in Albania did
        his uncle offer to permanently accommodate him, and the uncle  only
        agreed to help the appellant because his mother had  requested  it.
        In any event, the  appellant  fears  that  if  he  lived  with  his
        maternal uncle his father would become aware of this and  that  the
        appellant's safety, and that of his maternal uncle and his  family,
        would be put in jeopardy.  Given  the  very  serious  ill-treatment
        suffered by the appellant and the threats to kill him issued by his
        father, I find there is a real risk  that  the  appellant's  father
        would locate him if he lived with his uncle and that the  appellant
        and his uncle's family may be exposed to a  real  risk  of  serious
        harm. I consequently find that it is unreasonable, or unduly harsh,
        to expect the appellant to live with his maternal uncle.  Moreover,
        given these concerns there is a  real  risk  that  the  appellant's
        uncle would not be willing to financially  support  the  appellant,
        even if he were able to do so. Although the maternal uncle  owns  a
        fuel station there is nothing to indicate that he  is  particularly
        wealthy and he has  his  own  large  family  to  support.  I  note,
        according to the appellant's evidence, that it  took  the  maternal
        uncle some time to amass the funds needed to send the appellant  to
        the UK. The evidence indicates  that  the  appellant's  mother  and
        sister, who appear to continue to live with the appellant's father,
        are fearful of the appellant's father and that they would be unable
        to support the appellant in any material manner.  His  two  younger
        brothers are only around 14 years old and  10  years  old  and  are
        therefore unable to provide  any  support  to  the  appellant.  I'm
        satisfied, on the lower standard of proof, that the appellant  does
        not  have  access  to  a  family  support  network.  Although   the
        respondent contends that the appellant  would  be  able  to  access
        shelters for victims of domestic violence, the documentation relied
        on by  the  respondent  appears  to  solely  relate  to  women  and
        children. As Mr Nath accepted, the respondent has not produced  any
        evidence that shelters for adult male victims of domestic  violence
        are available, and Ms Young indicated that no such shelters are, to
        her knowledge, available.

    35. In  her  addendum  expert  report  Ms  Young  highlights  the  high
        unemployment level in Albania  and  notes  that  jobs  are  usually
        obtained through family connections or through bribes, an assertion
        supported  by  reference  to  email  correspondence  and  the  2016
        Transparency  International  report.  The  appellant  is  therefore
        likely to encounter significant difficulties in finding employment.
        She also maintains, with supporting  reference,  that  people  with
        disabilities both physical and mental,  especially  those  with  no
        support  family  network,  are  severely  ostracised  by   Albanian
        society. She also refers to the US State Department report for 2016
        which indicates that there is pervasive corruption in all  branches
        of government, particularly in  the  healthcare  systems.  Although
        public healthcare is supposed to be free  riding  doctors  for  the
        services is  a  widespread  phenomenon.  The  appellant  remains  a
        vulnerable  and  traumatised  young  man  with  relatively  limited
        qualifications (he has studied carpentry, maths and English but  at
        a relatively low level), no family network and no  work  experience
        who, in the view of a professional social worker, lacks the  skills
        to live independently, who requires a high level of support and who
        is potentially susceptible to exploitation. I am satisfied,  having
        considered the evidence before me on the lower standard  of  proof,
        that these factors  cumulatively  render  the  internal  relocation
        option unreasonable or unduly harsh.

    36. Having found that the appellant will be exposed to a real  risk  of
        persecution in his home area, and  that  he  cannot  be  reasonably
        expected to avail himself of the internal relocation alternative, I
        find that the appellant succeeds in his protection claim.


Article 8

    37. In light of my assessment of the protection  appeal,  I  need  only
        deal briefly with the separate article 8 claim. In paragraph 276ADE
        of the immigration rules the respondent considers where the  proper
        balance lies in respect of a claim made on the basis of the private
        life established by a person. In  order  to  be  granted  leave  to
        remain on the basis of their private life rights  paragraph  276ADE
        (1)(vi) requires a person who is aged 18 years  or  above  and  has
        lived continuously in the UK for less than 20 years to  demonstrate
        that there are 'very significant obstacles'  to  their  integration
        into the country  of  origin.  I'm  satisfied,  primarily  for  the
        reasons set out in paragraphs 30 to 35 above, that there  are  very
        significant obstacles to the appellant's integration in Albania  in
        light of his mental health diagnosis, his vulnerability,  his  high
        support needs, his inability to live independently, his lack of any
        family support, the difficulties he  will  encounter  in  accessing
        accommodation and employment, and his abiding fear that he will  be
        discovered by his father.

Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal's decision is  set  aside;  I  remake  the  decision
allowing the appellant's appeal in respect of his protection claim  and  his
human rights claim.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]    23 April 2018
Signed   Date

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum

