
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07655/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 13 March 2019                |On 15 March 2019                |
|                                |                                |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PLIMMER


                                   Between

                                     AS
                          ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Hussain, Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr Diwyncz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless  the  Upper  Tribunal  or  a
Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  the  original
appellant in this decision identified as AS.




Introduction

      1. In a decision sent on 5  July  2018  Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
         Pickup found that the First-tier Tribunal ('FTT') erred in law, and
         that the decision should be set  aside  and  remade  by  the  Upper
         Tribunal ('UT') at an adjourned hearing.

Summary of asylum claim

      2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq, of Kurdish origin.  He was born
         in Kirkuk and lived there for many years, but his family had  homes
         in both Kirkuk and in Sulaymaniyah, in the Kurdistan Region of Iraq
         ('IKR').  The appellant is  educated  to  degree  level  and  began
         working in the media in 2008.

      3. The appellant lived mostly in  Kirkuk  but  moved  to  Sulaymaniyah
         after he was attacked for reasons relating to his activities  as  a
         journalist.  He was involved in a documentary about the  oppression
         of women, which was perceived as un-Islamic.   This was released in
         April 2016.  Shortly after this, he was beaten up  and  threatened.
         His  home  was  then  attacked  by  gunshots  and  he  received   a
         threatening phone call.  He therefore left Kirkuk for  Sulaymaniyah
         on 21 April 2016.

      4. Shortly after moving  to  Sulaymaniyah,  the  appellant  was  again
         targeted.  His car was fired at on 17 May 2016 and he fled Iraq  on
         19 May 2016.  The appellant believes that he  was  targeted  by  an
         extremist Islamic group and the  Iraqi  and  IKR  authorities  were
         unable or unwilling to  provide  him  with  sufficient  protection,
         given his activities as a journalist.

      5. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on  14  June  2016  and
         claimed asylum on arrival.

Issues

      6. At the beginning of the hearing there were preliminary  discussions
         clarifying the evidence available and the  disputed  issues  to  be
         determined.  Both representatives agreed the following matters:

          i) As noted by Judge Pickup at  [7]  of  his  decision,  the  FTT
             accepted the entirety  of  the  appellant's  account  of  what
             happened to him in Iraq, which then led to his departure.  The
             FTT found the appellant to be  a  "broadly  credible  witness"
             whose real problems began because  of  his  involvement  in  a
             video in which he voiced  provocative  and  un-Islamic  views.
             The FTT accepted that consistent with the  country  background
             evidence,  the  appellant  was  targeted  for   this   reason.
             Although the FTT did not expressly address the continuation of
             the  adverse  interest  in  the  appellant  from   Kirkuk   to
             Sulaymaniyah, Mr Diwyncz accepted that the  FTT  accepted  the
             appellant's account of what happened in Iraq in  its  entirety
             and these are properly to be regarded as preserved findings of
             fact.

         ii) The FTT  did  not  address  the  country  background  evidence
             supporting the appellant's claim that his fear that  he  would
             continue to be targeted for serious harm in the IKR  is  well-
             founded.

        iii) The appellant has a CSID that is being kept by the respondent.
              Dr Fateh has considered  a  scanned  copy  of  the  CSID  and
             outlined in a report dated 27 November 2018 numerous  concerns
             about the authenticity of the CSID,  such  that  he  concluded
             that the document lacks the main characteristics of a reliable
             CSID.  Notwithstanding this,  the  appellant  maintains  in  a
             witness statement dated 11 March 2019, that  he  obtained  the
             CSID using the proper channels and it is a  genuine  document.
             In any event, the appellant is  in  contact  with  his  family
             members in the KAA.  His father has a CSID, national  identity
             card and a nationality certificate.  It was therefore accepted
             that in line with the accepted evidence provided by  Dr  Fateh
             in AAH (Iraqi Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT
             212 (IAC), the appellant would be able to obtain a  CSID  from
             the Iraqi Consulate in the UK - see in particular [26] to [28]
             of AAH.  The appellant could therefore be returned to Baghdad,
             from where he could travel to the IKR.  Mr  Diwyncz  confirmed
             that the respondent only sought to argue  that  the  appellant
             would not face a real  risk  of  persecution  in  the  IKR  or
             alternatively could internally relocate there, and as such  it
             is not necessary to examine his circumstances in Baghdad.   Mr
             Diwyncz also  accepted  that  in  accordance  with  the  FTT's
             findings, the appellant  is  at  risk  in  Kirkuk  and  it  is
             undisputed that the appellant cannot safely return there,  and
             as such the sole focus is now upon the IKR.

         iv) The  FTT  did  not  make  any  clear  findings  on  the  well-
             foundedness of the appellant's fear of persecution in the IKR.
              This does not depend upon  the  appellant's  credibility,  as
             this has been accepted.  Rather, the issue in  dispute  to  be
             determined by me is whether the  appellant's  subjective  fear
             that he will be targeted for serious harm again in the IKR  is
             well-founded.  Both representatives agreed this would turn  on
             an assessment of the country background evidence, and  that  I
             must assess prospective risk by using the  lower  standard  of
             proof applicable to claims of international protection.

          v) If the appellant's fear in the IKR is well  founded,  that  is
             the end of the matter.  If accepted, he  would  have  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution for reasons relating to an imputed
             political opinion in both Kirkuk and the IKR.

Evidence

      7. Having agreed the ambit  of  the  appeal,  Mr  Hussain  called  the
         appellant to give evidence.  He confirmed his most  recent  witness
         statement.

      8. Mr Diwyncz cross-examined the appellant very  briefly  and  on  one
         matter only: his visit to the Iraqi Embassy on  7  March  2019.   I
         intervened because the parties had  already  agreed  that  whatever
         happened on that visit, the appellant would be  able  to  obtain  a
         CSID before being returned to Iraq,  given  his  knowledge  of  the
         necessary information required to obtain one.  Mr Diwyncz  did  not
         ask any further questions.

      9. The appellant also  relied  upon  two  bundles  containing  country
         background evidence, together with two reports from Dr  Fateh.   Dr
         Fateh's report dealing with  the  appellant's  CSID  is  of  little
         relevance given the parties' agreement that he could obtain another
         one if necessary.

     10. Dr Fateh's second report analysed the appellant's risk upon  return
         to Iraq and the IKR.  As I said at the hearing,  the  Tribunal  has
         repeatedly found Dr Fateh to be an experienced and helpful  country
         expert on Iraq - see more recently [91] of AAH.  However,  in  this
         case Dr Fateh's report on the appellant's activities  and  risk  on
         return contains omissions and generalisations, such that I am  only
         attach limited weight to it.  Dr Fateh summarised  the  appellant's
         account in a superficial manner.  He failed to acknowledge that the
         harm perpetrated upon the appellant continued to Sulaymaniyah.   He
         addressed the risk to journalists in a very general manner and  did
         not directly address the risk to journalists involved in  the  type
         of  activities  the  appellant  was  involved  in,  in   the   IKR.
         Similarly, Dr Fateh failed to address sufficiency of protection  in
         the IKR in these circumstances.  Finally, Dr Fateh  seems  to  have
         ignored the accepted  fact  that  the  appellant  has  many  family
         members he can turn to for support in the IKR.

Submissions

     11. I heard brief submissions from  each  representative.   Mr  Diwyncz
         submitted that the appellant's activities were of a low profile and
         of some vintage, such that he would not be viewed with any on-going
         adverse interest upon his return to the IKR.

     12. Mr Hussain relied upon his skeleton argument and invited me to find
         that the appellant's fear of being persecuted on return to the  IKR
         is well-founded, and that  is  sufficient  for  his  appeal  to  be
         allowed.

     13. After hearing submissions from both representatives, I reserved  my
         decision, which I now provide with reasons.

Re-making the decision

     14. On the preserved  findings  of  fact,  the  appellant  has  clearly
         suffered past persecution in both  Kirkuk  and  Sulaymaniyah.   The
         appellant has already been subject to serious harm in the past, and
         I must assess whether there are good reasons to consider that  such
         harm will not be repeated (see para 339K of the Immigration Rules).



     15.  I  acknowledge  that  the  appellant's  media   and   journalistic
         activities  cannot  be  said  to  be  high  profile  or  well-known
         throughout Iraq and the IKR.  However they have been considered  of
         sufficient concern that almost  immediately  after  the  video  was
         released, the appellant was targeted in different ways and  in  two
         different regions. Within days of the  video  being  released,  the
         appellant was subjected to a beating, threats and  a  shot  on  his
         home.  Within a month of moving to Sulaymaniyah his  car  was  shot
         at.

     16. There is extensive country background evidence submitted on  behalf
         of the appellant in support of the submission that as at that  time
         in 2016 and continuing, journalists, whose  work  is  perceived  to
         breach religious / political / cultural  mores,  are  targeted  for
         serious harm by government officials and non-state actors, and that
         the  KRI  will  be  unable  or  unwilling  to  provide   sufficient
         protection to journalists who have been  targeted,  given  the  dim
         view taken and treatment toward many journalists, by the government
         in the KRI.  This includes the following:

          a) In a Human Rights Watch ('HRW') report dated 9  February  2013
             "Iraqi Kurdistan: Free Speech Under Attack" there are  several
             examples  of  the   KAA   government   arbitrarily   detaining
             journalists for criticising public officials.

          b) The 2017 HRW report on Iraq refers  to  a  2016  International
             Federation of Journalists report that deems  Iraq  to  be  the
             deadliest country in the world for journalists.

          c) The 2017 Amnesty International  report  describes  journalists
             throughout Iraq working in a dangerous environment at risk  of
             abduction, intimidation,  harassment  and  death  threats  for
             covering topics deemed sensitive.

          d) The 2017 US State  Department  report  describes  in  detailed
             terms numerous beatings, detentions and death threats  against
             media workers throughout the IKR.  This report also  describes
             extremists and armed groups limiting freedom of expression.

     17. Mr Diwyncz did not take me to any evidence to undermine the general
         proposition  or  the  evidence  set  out  above,  to  support   his
         submission that the passage of  time  would  obviate  the  risk  of
         serious harm in the IKR for this appellant.  Mr Diwyncz referred me
         to the Home Office's Country Policy and Information  Note  on  Iraq
         dated February 2019, but did not take me to a single  paragraph  to
         undermine the very dismal picture for journalists,  as  painted  by
         the other country background evidence.  I am  satisfied  that  when
         the lower standard of proof is applied there are no good reasons to
         consider that  the  serious  harm  that  befell  the  appellant  in
         Sulaymaniyah  in  2016  will  not  be  repeated  either  there,  or
         elsewhere in the IKR.

     18. Mr Diwyncz faintly submitted that the appellant would  be  able  to
         obtain the  protection  of  the  authorities  in  the  IKR  outside
         Sulaymaniyah but was unable to take me to  any  country  background
         evidence to support this  submission.   I  am  satisfied  that  the
         appellant has displaced the burden on him of establishing  that  he
         has a well-founded fear of persecution for reasons relating  to  an
         imputed  political  opinion  throughout  the  IKR.    The   country
         background evidence describes the sustained  targeting  by  way  of
         inter alia, beatings, arbitrary arrests,  abductions,  threats,  of
         those working in the media by  both  non-state  and  state  actors,
         throughout Iraq and the IKR.

Decision

     19. I remake the decision by allowing the appellant's appeal  and  find
         that his removal would breach the Refugee Convention and Article  3
         of the ECHR.


Signed:  UTJ Plimmer

Ms M. Plimmer
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Date:
14 March 2019

