
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07703/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined under rule 34             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29 September 2020                 |On 07 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE STEPHEN SMITH


                                   Between

                                     EY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

This is a paper  determination  which  has  not  been  objected  to  by  the
parties.  The form of remote hearing was P (paper determination that is  not
provisional). A face to face  hearing  was  not  held  because  it  was  not
practicable, and all issues could be determined on paper.


The documents that I was referred to  by  the  parties  were  primarily  the
report of Dr S. Bekalo dated 11 November 2019, the decision  of  the  First-
tier Tribunal, the grounds and  grant  of  permission  to  appeal,  and  the
written submissions of the appellant and respondent, the contents  of  which
I have recorded.


The order made is described at the end of these reasons.


 1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Nazir
    promulgated on 10 March 2020 dismissing  an  appeal  by  the  appellant
    against a decision of the respondent dated 31 July 2019 to  refuse  his
    asylum and humanitarian protection claim.
Factual background

 2. The appellant claims to be a citizen of Eritrea. That was  disputed  by
    the respondent, and a central issue in his asylum appeal was  his  true
    nationality.  The  appellant  relied  on  a  birth  certificate  and  a
    repatriation card said to have been issued by the Eritrean authorities,
    but the judge did not find either document to be  reliable.  The  judge
    noted concerns raised by the respondent in the course of  the  decision
    under challenge, some of which concerned the format and presentation of
    the documents, observing that the appellant had not responded to  those
    concerns: see [38] and [39].

 3. In addition to rejecting the reliability of the birth certificate,  the
    judge had a number of other credibility concerns.

 4. The appellant was granted permission to appeal by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Bird, who considered that it was  arguable  that  the  judge  had
    overlooked a report dated 11 November 2019 of a  Dr  Samuel  Bekalo,  a
    regional expert, which opined that the birth certificate "seems  to  me
    to be genuine/valid".  Dr Bekalo's report stated that the contents  and
    format of the birth certificate were consistent with  those  issued  by
    the appellant's claimed hometown in Eritrea, Assab.  It was also signed
    by the relevant official, commented Dr Bekalo.  The report  added  that
    Eritrean birth certificates "in the past" were  not  routinely  issued,
    and that there was no automatic entitlement to be issued with  one,  in
    contrast to the position in many other countries.  In relation  to  the
    repatriation card, Dr Bekalo concluded, "not with absolute certainty in
    the strict sense of the word, but on the balance of  higher  degree  of
    probability... seems to me to be genuine".

Consideration under rule 34

 5. Judge Norton-Taylor gave directions stating that it was his provisional
    view that the questions of  whether  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal involved the making of an error of law, and,  if  so,  whether
    the decision should  be  set  aside,  could  be  determined  without  a
    hearing. The parties were directed to exchange further  submissions  on
    those points.

 6. Paragraph 4 of  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunal's  Pilot  Practice
    Direction: Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the
    Upper Tribunal dated 19 March 2020 provides that,  "where  a  chamber's
    procedure rules allow decisions to be made without a hearing, decisions
    should usually be made in this way, provided this is in accordance with
    the overriding objective, the parties' ECHR  rights  in  the  chamber's
    procedure rules about notice and consent."  Rule  34  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 provides, where relevant:

         "(1)     Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal  may
             make any decision without a hearing.

         (2)      The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view  expressed
             by a party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider
             any matter, and the form of any such hearing."

 7. The starting point for my consideration  as  to  whether  it  would  be
    appropriate to determine the issues identified by  Judge  Norton-Taylor
    without a hearing  is  the  overriding  objective.  Rule  2(1)  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  provides  that  the
    overriding objective of the Upper  Tribunal  is  to  "deal  with  cases
    fairly and justly".  That includes, at (2)(c),  "ensuring,  so  far  as
    practicable, that the parties are able  to  participate  fully  in  the
    proceedings", and, at (d), "using any special expertise  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal effectively". Also relevant is the need to avoid delay, so far
    as compatible with proper consideration of the  issues:  see  paragraph
    (2)(e).

 8. In light of the requirements  of  the  overriding  objective,  and  the
    clarity  of  the  issues  which  require  resolution  under   rule   34
    (particularly in light of the respondent's written submissions dated 13
    August 2018, to which I return  below),  I  am  satisfied  that  it  is
    consistent with the overriding objective to determine  this  matter  on
    the papers. An oral hearing would provide no additional  procedural  or
    substantive benefit to either party, and  would  only  introduce  delay
    into the proceedings.  Each has contributed to this  written  procedure
    in a substantive manner.

Discussion

 9. In written submissions dated 13 August 2020, Mr Ian Jarvis on behalf of
    the Secretary of State accepted that the judge's failure to engage with
    the contents of the report in  his  operative  analysis  of  the  birth
    certificate at [38], and in relation to the "repatriation card"  relied
    upon by the appellant, was a  material  error  of  law  such  that  the
    decision should be set aside, if the Upper Tribunal agreed.

10. I agree with the Secretary of State and find that the  decision  should
    be set aside.  While the judge did refer to  the  submissions  made  by
    each party in reliance upon the report at [14] and [21], the  reasoning
    relied upon by the judge to reject the reliability of  the  appellant's
    claimed birth certificate and the repatriation card did  not  refer  to
    the opinion expressed by the expert at all.  I consider  the  Secretary
    of State's concession to have been made appropriately.  Of  course,  it
    may be the judge may have considered the document and had good  reasons
    for ascribing little weight to  its  conclusions.  The  difficulty  is,
    however, that the judge did not give any reasons for  ascribing  little
    weight to it. The judge either failed to take into account  a  material
    consideration or failed to give sufficient reasons  for  his  findings;
    either way, the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making
    of an error of law.

11. While, as the Secretary  of  State's  written  submissions  suggest,  a
    number of observations may properly be made  about  the  weight  to  be
    attached to Dr Bekalo's report, such analysis must take place  as  part
    of a holistic assessment  of  the  appellant's  credibility.   Such  an
    assessment cannot be said properly to have taken place.   This  was  an
    error of law such that the decision must be set aside.

12. In light of this finding, it is not necessary  to  address  the  second
    ground of appeal relied upon by the appellant  concerning  the  judge's
    application of ST (Ethnic Eritrean - nationality - return) Ethiopia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC).

13. It follows that the matter must be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal,
    to be heard by a judge other than Judge Nazir, with no findings of fact
    preserved.

14. I maintain the order for anonymity made by Judge Nazir.

Notice of Decision

The decision  of  Judge  Nazir  is  set  aside  with  no  findings  of  fact
preserved.

The appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  to  be  heard  by  a
different judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Stephen H Smith                  Date 5 October 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Stephen Smith


