
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07713/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 6 June 2019                    |On 10 June 2019                   |
|                                  |                                  |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge MANUELL


                                   Between

                              GANESH APPADURAI
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms C Taroni, Counsel
      (instructed by AA Immigration Lawyers)
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS





    Introduction

    1.     The Appellant appealed with permission granted by Upper Tribunal
         Judge Martin on 16 May 2019 against the determination of First-tier
         Tribunal Judge S L Farmer who  had  dismissed  the  appeal  of  the
         Appellant against  the  refusal  of  his  international  protection
         claim.  The decision and reasons  was  promulgated  on  28  January
         2019.

    2.     The Appellant is a national of Sri  Lanka  of  Tamil  ethnicity,
         born on 20 June 1947.  The Appellant held  successive  multi  visit
         visas for the United Kingdom.  He last entered the  United  Kingdom
         on 27 July 2017, with his wife.  He claimed asylum on  11  December
         2017, asserting a fear of the Sri Lankan government as a  suspected
         separatist.  His claim was refused by the Secretary of State on  11
         June 2018.

    3.     Judge Farmer provided a  detailed  summary  of  the  Appellant's
         claim at [17] of her decision.  According  to  the  Appellant,  his
         brother was suspected of terrorist activity and was  killed  on  14
         May 2009 during a police raid in Colombo at the Appellant's son  in
         law's home.  The Appellant's mother and sister were detained.  They
         were released in June and August 2012.  The Appellant's son in  law
         and daughter travelled  to  the  United  Kingdom  where  they  were
         granted asylum.  The son in law subsequently asked the Appellant to
         assist him recover his flat.  (The Appellant lived in a flat in the
         same block  in  Colombo.)   The  Appellant  consulted  lawyers  but
         progress was slow.  The Appellant came to  the  United  Kingdom  in
         July 2017, following earlier visits.  On 9 November 2017, while  in
         the United Kingdom, he received a letter  from  his  wife's  sister
         stating that the authorities had been to his flat looking  for  him
         and asking when he would return.  She warned  him  not  to  return.
         The Appellant was now afraid to do so.

    4.     The Appellant's identity was accepted by the Respondent, as  was
         the fact of the grant of asylum to the Appellant's son in law.  The
         remainder of the Appellant's account was challenged.   Judge Farmer
         found that the Appellant's credibility was  low.   The  Appellant's
         documents were dubious.  The Appellant had  travelled  freely  from
         Sri Lanka on his own passport.  There was  no  warrant  of  arrest.
         The judge found that the Appellant would not have agreed to attempt
         to assist in the recovery of the property if  there  had  been  any
         risk. The Appellant's expert's report contained errors and took the
         Appellant's case no further. The Appellant had never been connected
         with the LTTE.  There was no real risk on return.  The  appeal  was
         accordingly dismissed.

    5.     Permission to appeal was refused in the First-tier  Tribunal  by
         Judge I D Boyes on 8 March 2019 but was granted by  Upper  Tribunal
         Judge Martin.   Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Martin  considered  it  was
         arguable that the judge had failed to mention or make any  findings
         on the oral evidence of the Appellant's son in law.




    Submissions

    6.     Ms Taroni for the Appellant relied on the grounds and  grant  of
         permission to appeal by the Upper Tribunal.  Counsel submitted that
         the whole determination was unsafe, particularly because there  had
         been no findings as to the evidence given by the Appellant's son in
         law, who had been recognised as a refugee in  the  United  Kingdom.
         Counsel discussed the determination in dialogue with the  tribunal,
         submitting that the treatment of the expert's report  at  [24]  was
         unsatisfactory.  Counsel asked that the determination should be set
         aside and the appeal reheard by a  differently  constituted  First-
         tier Tribunal.

    7.     Mr Tufan for the Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department
         opposed the appeal.  The judge had dealt with the Appellant's claim
         fully in a comprehensive decision and reasons.   There were various
         references to the evidence of the Appellant's son in law.

    8.     Ms Taroni wished to add nothing by way of reply.




    No error of law finding

    9.     In the tribunal's view, the determination of First-tier Tribunal
         Judge  Farmer  was  unimpeachable  and,  as  Mr  Tufan   submitted,
         addressed all elements of the Appellant's claim.  The claim was  an
         elaborate one, with selective production of documents said to  have
         reached the Appellant after his last entry to the United Kingdom to
         visit his son in law.

    10.    The lengthy grounds of onwards appeal were largely generic, with
         the familiar litany of complaints about  a  perfectly  satisfactory
         decision, as so often seen in  this  jurisdiction.   Plainly  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Martin was unimpressed with the grounds.   The  only
         express basis on which permission to appeal had  been  granted  was
         that the judge had not dealt adequately with the  evidence  of  the
         Appellant's son in law.  By  necessary  implication,  none  of  the
         other grounds was considered to have any merit and  that  was  this
         tribunal's view.

    11.    The claim about the son in law's evidence has no  substance  and
         is based on a misreading of the determination, or perhaps a failure
         to read it all.  At [14] the judge stated that all of the  evidence
         has been considered by her, whether or not specifically  mentioned.
         At [15] the judge drew specific attention to the association of the
         Appellant with his  son  in  law  and  its  alleged  risk,  clearly
         indicating its centrality to the appeal.   Plainly  the  judge  was
         focussed on that issue in the summary  of  the  evidence  at  [17],
         where the son in law is mentioned by his full name and title and in
         the discussion which  follows.    The  son  in  law's  evidence  is
         specifically quoted and discussed  at  [21]  and  [23].  The  judge
         specifically considered the expert witness's opinion and gave  full
         and proper reasons for discounting it at [24].  In  the  Tribunal's
         view that was an entirely sufficient treatment of both the son  and
         law and the expert's evidence.  The assertion to  the  contrary  is
         simply wrong.

    12.    The judge  factored  in  those  findings  in  her  comprehensive
         explanation of why she found  that  the  Appellant's  evidence  was
         unreliable and not credible, having accepted  in  his  favour  that
         there had been no material delay in claiming asylum:  see  [26]  of
         the decision and reasons.

    13.    Thus the submissions advanced for the Appellant in  the  onwards
         grounds of appeal amounted to no more than  disagreement  with  the
         very experienced judge's decision.  The  tribunal  finds  that  the
         onwards appeal has no proper basis and that there was  no  material
         error of law in the decision challenged.




    DECISION

    The appeal is dismissed

    The making of the previous decision did not involve  the  making  of  a
    material error on a point of law.  The decision stands unchanged.




    Signed                             Dated 6 June 2019


    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Manuell
