








UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07770/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 15 November 2018                 |On: 11 December 2018                 |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between


                                    [H N]

                          anonymity direction made

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department

                                                                  Respondent

Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr C Mahfuz, counsel (instructed by Victory
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS
   1. The appellant is a national of Cameroon, born on  12  March  1997.  He
      appeals with permission against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
      Judge James, who in a decision promulgated on 23 August 2018 dismissed
      the appellant's asylum and human rights claims.

The respondent's case

   2. The appellant first came to the UK  on  25  June  2011  to  visit  his
      father. He returned to Cameroon on 28 August 2011.  He  again  visited
      his father in the UK between 29 June 2012 and 30 August 2012.

   3. He entered the UK on 14 July 2013 following a  successful  application
      for settlement. He was initially granted two  years'  leave  to  enter
      which was extended to indefinite leave to remain for ten years from  5
      November 2013. He returned to Cameroon on  7  May  2014  and  remained
      there for several years until he arrived in the UK on 3 December 2017.

   4. He claimed to have a well founded fear of persecution on the basis  of
      the Anglophone crisis in Cameroon.  The respondent contended that this
      was not a Convention reason. It was accepted that he  was  a  Cameroon
      national. From the documents produced the respondent  stated  that  he
      had not been targeted by the Cameroon authorities  and  had  not  been
      arrested, detained or  tortured  by  them  on  30  November  2016.  He
      therefore did not  have  a  genuine,  subjective  fear  on  return  to
      Cameroon.

   5. The appellant had his mother and sister present and settled in the  UK
      but as an adult he was not dependent on either of  them.  He  did  not
      meet the requirements under paragraph 276ADE(1) of the Rules. He would
      not face very  significant  obstacles  to  integration  on  return  to
      Cameroon. Nor were  there  any  exceptional  circumstances  warranting
      leave to remain under Article 8 outside the Rules.

The First-tier hearing

   6. Counsel who represented the appellant before the  First-tier  Tribunal
      informed First-tier Tribunal Judge James that the appellant  had  made
      an application to return to the UK for settlement in July  2017.  That
      application was refused on 30 August 2017 and he has lodged an appeal,
      although he could not provide the Judge with the date  it  was  filed.
      After he came to the UK on 3 December 2017 the decision to refuse that
      application had been withdrawn by the respondent.

   7. Counsel on behalf of the appellant applied to adjourn  the  appeal  on
      the basis that the Judge might make findings in the appeal relating to
      Article 8 that would be relevant and prejudicial  to  his  outstanding
      application [12].

   8. The presenting officer checked the Home Office records  electronically
      and informed the  Tribunal  that  they  indicated  that  there  is  no
      application outstanding [13].

   9. First-tier Tribunal Judge James noted that there may be  a  number  of
      issues common to the appeal and any outstanding  application,  but  he
      had before him an active asylum appeal and there was no clear evidence
      that there was an outstanding settlement application.  He  accordingly
      refused the adjournment sought [14].

  10. He noted that he had the benefit of a bundle of  documents  comprising
      134 pages. There was also a respondent's  bundle.  He  heard  evidence
      from the appellant and his mother. He stated that he had taken all the
      documents into consideration [17].

  11. Judge James accepted that the appellant had  previously  been  granted
      indefinite leave to remain and that this had only expired  because  he
      had spent more than [two] years outside the UK [21] [48]. He  recorded
      the submissions of both partied from [18-31].  The  appellant  claimed
      that  he  remains  a  person  of  ongoing  interest  to  the  Cameroon
      authorities on the basis that he has breached bail. He claimed he  was
      targeted and arrested as part of a group  of  about  30  other  people
      which is an act of persecution.

  12. The Judge noted that in his screening interview, the appellant made no
      reference to being  detained.  He  stated  that  he  provided  a  full
      narrative during his asylum interview [24].  He  claimed  in  evidence
      that he would be arrested and subjected to the same treatment as  when
      he was detained in Cameroon. He contended that Cameroon  is  not  like
      the UK in having a joined up judicial and immigration process and thus
      it is not unreasonable that he  was  allowed  to  leave  Cameroon.  He
      asserted however that he may get extra punishment on return because he
      breached bail [25].

  13. The respondent submitted that it is not plausible that the appellant's
      father would have taken all his documents. His mother had no idea that
      the appellant had asked for his documents to be sent to him.

  14. The appellant produced no evidence to show that the documents had been
      sent to his mother [19].

  15. In relation to the theft of his documents by his father, the appellant
      submitted that the respondent holds two envelopes showing the delivery
      of the documents. His mother has provided evidence why his father  had
      his documents stolen by the appellant's uncle in Cameroon. His  mother
      was unaware that his father had a new partner until she looked for his
      father on the internet. It was claimed that it is plausible  that  his
      father wanted to remove the appellant to avoid any  interference  with
      his new relationship. When confronted his father admitted that he held
      the documents and sent them to his mother.

  16. The appellant claimed to have evidence from his landlord  in  Cameroon
      that the police have been to the hostel to trace him. The authenticity
      of the letter from Lobe Cooperative Credit  Union  dated  29  December
      2015, which was  very  poorly  copied  in  the  bundle  of  documents,
      indicated that the police have been to the hostel several  times.  The
      appellant claimed that its authenticity had not been challenged.

  17. In his 'findings and conclusions', the Judge stated that he had looked
      at the evidence in the round and applied the lower standard of  proof.
      He  considered  the  appellant's  credibility  regarding  his  claimed
      arrest, detention and  torture  in  Cameroon.  He  claimed  he  became
      involved in a strike at Buea University concerning the  imposition  of
      penalties for late payment of fees. The Judge had regard to an  online
      article confirming the appellant's narrative  that  riot  police  were
      called and used force to break up the protests. There was no reference
      to arrests in the article or to events being linked to any  Anglophone
      crisis.

  18. The appellant claimed that after 20 days' detention he was released on
      reporting conditions. He was subsequently arraigned  before  the  High
      Court on 20 June 2017 and was told to expect a hearing on  9  February
      2018. He was unable to produce any documentary evidence on  this.  The
      appellant submitted that he received no paperwork because  his  arrest
      and detention was illegal. Judge James concluded that such arraignment
      before the High Court would have resulted in  documentation  from  the
      Court. In addition there would have been media reports of the  hearing
      [33]. Whatever the basis for his initial  arrest  and  detention,  the
      subsequent proceedings appear to  follow  due  process  and  he  would
      expect that to involve a paper trail [34].

  19. At [35] he noted that the appellant had been able  to  leave  Cameroon
      using his own passport without being  detained.  Whilst  the  passport
      control arrangements in Cameroon might be  different  to  the  UK,  he
      would not expect it to be so underdeveloped as to  "not  note  that  a
      person  subject  to  criminal  prosecution  would  go  unnoticed."  He
      referred to the letters from Lobe  Cooperative  Credit  Union  Ltd  at
      pages 115-116. The first letter, dated 29 December 2017, suggests that
      the police have been to the hostel room he  shared  with  his  brother
      "several times". The letters are addressed to his brother.

  20. He accepted that there were protests at the Buea University as claimed
      and that the appellant might have been  in  attendance  [36].  In  the
      absence of any documentation relating to  his  arrest  and  subsequent
      arraignment, he did not accept the appellant's narrative that  he  was
      arrested, detained and tortured as claimed. He did not accept that the
      authorities in Cameroon are so unsophisticated that they would not  be
      able to identify a possible fugitive from criminal proceedings. He was
      not persuaded that the letters addressed to his brother indicate  that
      he is wanted by the police.

  21.  He  stated  that  the  appellant  had  not  been  an   activist   for
      independence, nor was there evidence that he has been a  protester  in
      support of independence. There was no evidence that  he  would  become
      such an activist or protester on return. He accordingly found that the
      appellant would not be at risk of persecution or  serious  harm  as  a
      result of the Anglophone Crisis in Cameroon [37].

  22. Although the appellant claimed that the protest at Buea University was
      an Anglophone protest, the contemporaneous report does not describe it
      as such. Nor was there evidence  before  him  on  which  he  could  be
      satisfied that it was part of any movement for  independence  for  the
      Anglophone regions of Cameroon. The appellant did not therefore face a
      real risk of persecution or serious harm on return to Cameroon. He  is
      not entitled to either asylum or humanitarian protection [38].

  23. He considered 'the position' in relation to Article  8  of  the  Human
      Rights Convention. He noted that the appellant was granted  indefinite
      leave to remain in the UK on 5 November 2013 along with his  siblings.
      He returned to Cameroon on 7 May  2014.  He  claimed  that  after  his
      return there he thought he had lost his passport. He  reported  it  to
      the local police. The report produced provides the passport number and
      visa number. He claimed that his  father  was  angry  and  effectively
      abandoned him in Cameroon. This caused tension between his father  and
      mother, resulting in their separation in July 2014. His father found a
      new partner. The appellant was enrolled in a local school to  complete
      his A levels and  on  14  September  2016  he  was  admitted  to  Buea
      University.

  24. The appellant informed him that on 30 July 2017  his  mother  made  an
      application on his behalf for settlement in  the  UK  as  a  returning
      resident. That application was refused on 30 August 2017. He filed  an
      appeal which was withdrawn on 31 March 2018 [40].

  25. He had regard to the appellant's mother's "narrative". The appellant's
      parents did not separate until 10 July  2014,  two  months  after  the
      appellant's return to Cameroon. By the time she finally confronted the
      appellant's father in November 2017 he had another partner, with  whom
      he had a child. The appellant  claimed  that  his  father  planned  to
      abandon him in Cameroon to keep him out of the way while he started  a
      new relationship. It was unclear to the Judge why  he  would  want  to
      remove a 17 year old son and not any other member of the family [42].

  26. The appellant had not produced for examination  the  new  passport  he
      claimed was obtained by his father. He claimed that on arrival in  the
      UK in 2017 he was advised to claim asylum and that this would  proceed
      once he surrendered his passport and biometric residence card. Whether
      he did so or not, it is clear that he has been able to obtain  a  copy
      of the biometric residence permit. The failure to produce  a  copy  of
      his new passport prevents any consideration of when  and  how  it  was
      obtained in the absence of the  appellant  and  any  analysis  of  any
      biometric data such as the photograph used [43].

  27. He considered the narrative relating to  the  documents,  but  in  the
      light of the matters referred to at  [39-43]  the  narrative  was  not
      credible or persuasive. Some elements may be true. He did not find the
      substantive elements credible [44].

  28. With regard to his family and private  life  claim  under  Article  8,
      Judge accepted that he has a family life with his mother  and  sister.
      He also accepted that he acquired some measure of a  private  life  in
      the UK since returning here but in  the  absence  of  any  substantive
      evidence, he did not find it of such significance as to engage Article
      8. In any event, it was formed when  his  status  was  precarious  and
      carries little weight. He did not accept that he had  a  private  life
      continuing from his time in the UK between July 2013 and May 2014. His
      absence in Cameroon between May 2014  and  December  2017  would  have
      terminated any such private life [46].

  29. With regard to s117B of the 2002  Act,  Judge  James  found  that  the
      appellant did not meet the requirements of the Rules. There  had  been
      no  submission  to  the  contrary.  The   public   interest   remained
      undiminished in the appeal. The appellant speaks English, but had  not
      shown that he is financially independent [47].

  30. With regard to the proportionality exercise, he  stated  that  he  has
      given careful  consideration  to  the  fact  that  the  appellant  has
      previously been accepted for settlement in  the  UK  and  was  granted
      indefinite leave to remain. He lost that status as a result  of  being
      outside the UK for a continuous period of more than  two  years.  That
      two year rule is  in  place  as  part  of  the  regime  for  effective
      immigration controls [48].

  31. His narrative of being abandoned in Cameroon is not credible. He could
      have made arrangements to renew any lost  documents  and  avoided  the
      loss of his status. Judge James accordingly did not give the  previous
      grant of indefinite leave to remain any significant weight  in  favour
      of the appellant. The appellant could return to Cameroon and  continue
      with his studies with the support of his mother. He is  20  years  old
      and would be able to work there following his studies.  He  would  not
      face insurmountable obstacles.

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal

  32. In granting permission to appeal, First-tier Tribunal Judge Carruthers
      considered it arguable  that  the  Judge  may  not  have  sufficiently
      explained why he gave little or no weight to the letters which purport
      to support the appellant's case of being at  risk  of  persecution  in
      Cameroon. With regard to Article 8, he found it to  be  unlikely  that
      the appellant has a sustainable case to  make  by  reference  to  that
      article.

  33. Mr Mahfuz, who did not appear before the First-tier  Tribunal,  stated
      at the outset that he does not rely on  Ground  I  -  that  the  Judge
      failed to have regard to the  skeleton  argument  produced  -  but  on
      Grounds 2 and 3 as set out in his skeleton argument.

  34. A central issue in the appellant's case was whether he was of interest
      to the authorities in Cameroon on  his  return.  He  referred  to  the
      letters produced from the appellant's previous landlord at pages  115-
      116.

  35. The letter from the Lobe Cooperative Credit Union Ltd at page  115  is
      dated 1 January 2018. It is addressed to Mr [NNA] Jr. It  states  that
      following the first "mail" sent to him on 29 December 2017, they  have
      not had any reply and still the policemen  have  come  twice  and  are
      already losing patience and getting brutal with  people  who  are  not
      concerned with the matter at hand. They stated that they will have  to
      break down his door any day that the policemen show up again.  He  was
      also informed that they were officially terminating his  stay  at  the
      hostel. Keeping anything in association with [HN] is at the  detriment
      of the hostel. He was advised to get his brother as soon as he can for
      his safety and well being.

  36. The letter at 116 is dated 29 December 2017. It is stated that it  had
      come to their notice that "your brother, [HN]"  who  was  one  of  the
      unfortunate victims of the  student  strike  arrests  has  missed  his
      monthly report for December 20,  2017.  On  22  December,  five  armed
      policemen came to the hostel searching for [HN] who has not been  seen
      around the hostel since the beginning of the month.

  37. He submitted that the Judge failed to give proper reasons for  finding
      that he was not persuaded that the letters addressed  to  his  brother
      indicated that the appellant is wanted by the police  -  MK  (Duty  to
      give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641. In MK the Tribunal held that
      a bare statement that a document was afforded no weight is unlikely to
      satisfy the requirements to give reasons.

  38. Further, the Judge did not consider the documents in  the  context  of
      the evidence in the round. That  is  particularly  so  given  that  he
      accepted that there had been protests at the Buea University and  that
      the appellant may have been in attendance.

  39. With regard to Ground  3,  he  submitted  that  the  Judge  failed  to
      properly afford any, or any  proper  weight,  to  the  fact  that  the
      appellant had been granted ILR previously on 5 November 2013 as  noted
      at [48]. He failed to provide reasons why such a grant would not be  a
      weighty consideration within the  Article  8  assessment  outside  the
      Rules.

  40. Mr Mahfuz  submitted  that  the  appellant's  case  was  that  as  the
      respondent's refusal of his returning residence application  had  been
      withdrawn, the application of 31 July 2017 was still live. The finding
      at [14] that there was no clear evidence that there was an outstanding
      settlement application accordingly did not accord with  the  evidence,
      namely the letter of the First-tier Tribunal at page 67 of the  bundle
      dated 21 March 2018, where  it  was  noted  that  the  respondent  has
      withdrawn the original decision and the Tribunal  was  satisfied  that
      the appeal had been withdrawn.

  41. He further submitted that the previous grant to the appellant  of  ILR
      ought to have been afforded proper weight within  the  proportionality
      exercise as it was capable of demonstrating a  significant  degree  of
      family life with his family members  living  in  the  UK,  namely  his
      mother and sister, both of whom had ILR.

  42. He referred to paragraph 34BB of the Rules  which  provides  that  the
      applicant may only have one outstanding application at a time.  If  an
      application for leave to remain is submitted in circumstances where  a
      previous application for leave to remain has not been decided, it will
      be treated as a variation of the previous application.  He referred to
      paragraphs 18 and 19 of the Immigration Rules.

  43. In reply, Mr Lindsay submitted with regard to the failure to  consider
      the letters submitted in support that at [17] of the decision,  First-
      tier Tribunal Judge James stated that in addition to the  evidence  of
      the appellant and his mother, he had a bundle comprising 134 pages and
      has taken all the documents  into  consideration.  There  is  no  rule
      requiring the Judge to refer explicitly to every bit of evidence. This
      however has been done. The Judge stated that  he  has  looked  at  the
      evidence in the round [32].

  44. The letters were considered at [35-36]. The Judge  expressly  referred
      to pages 115 and 116 where the letters are produced. It is not a  fair
      reading of those paragraphs to conclude that the Judge  has  given  no
      reasons for giving no  weight  to  the  documents.  The  crux  of  the
      appellant's case is that he had been mistreated. The explicit  finding
      at [36] is that he did not accept the appellant's  narrative  that  he
      was arrested, detained and tortured as claimed. He  sets  out  reasons
      reinforcing that conclusion at [36].

  45. The Judge was entitled to find  that  documentation  relating  to  his
      arrest  and  arraignment  could  be  expected.  Accordingly,  adequate
      reasons have been given.

  46. With regard to Ground  2,  it  is  accepted  that  the  appellant  had
      previous leave to remain in the UK. He subsequently left  the  UK  and
      moved to Cameroon for over three years. He returned to Cameroon  on  7
      May 2014 and only returned to the UK on 3  December  2017.  There  was
      thus a period of absence of three years and seven months.

  47. As noted by the Judge, the appellant's ILR lapsed after two years. His
      absence in his case was nearly double the period. Accordingly, ILR  is
      no longer extant and is  not  a  relevant  proportionality  assessment
      consideration [48].

  48. The substance of the Article 8 claim must be considered. The appellant
      was not able to have two outstanding applications at the same time. He
      must advance any matter relied on at the appeal. The Judge  considered
      the evidence with regard to Article 8  as  a  global  assessment.  The
      appellant had been  out  of  the  country  for  over  two  years.  The
      application as a returning resident would fail. At best, the appellant
      could have a free standing Article 8 claim. He did have such  a  claim
      and he should have adduced all the relevant evidence.

  49. In reply, Mr Mahfuz contended that if proper regard  was  had  to  the
      extent of ties, his application as a  returning  resident  might  have
      been allowed. Both his mother and sister are in the UK.

     Assessment

  50. I have set out the competing  submissions  of  both  parties  in  some
      detail. With regard to Ground 2, Mr Mahfuz submitted  that  the  Judge
      failed to give proper reasons for finding that he  was  not  persuaded
      that the letters addressed to the appellant's brother  indicated  that
      he was wanted by the police.

  51. However, the Judge has given a detailed decision with  regard  to  the
      asylum appeal. He has expressly referred to the letters  contained  at
      pages 115 and 116, namely the letters at [35-36]. He had  also  stated
      at [17] that he had the benefit of the bundle of  documents  with  134
      pages and  he  stated  that  he  has  taken  all  the  documents  into
      consideration.

  52. As submitted by Mr Lindsay, the appellant's case was that he had  been
      mistreated. However, the Judge  found  that  he  did  not  accept  the
      appellant's narrative that he had been arrested, detained and tortured
      as claimed. He has given sustainable reasons for those conclusions  at
      [36].

  53. I accordingly find that Ground 2 has no merit.

  54. With regard to Ground 3, namely that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      failed to provide adequate reasons why a grant of ILR would not  be  a
      weighty consideration within the assessment of Article 8  outside  the
      Rules, I accept Mr Mahfuza's submission that the Judge does not appear
      to have been referred to and thus did  not  have  any  regard  to  the
      Rules, and in particular to paragraphs 18 and 19  of  the  Immigration
      Rules.  I find that he has not properly considered the extent  of  the
      appellant's ties as a returning resident.

  55. In accordance with those paragraphs, a person seeking leave  to  enter
      the UK as a returning resident may be admitted  for  settlement  where
      the  immigration  officer  is  satisfied,  inter  alia,  that  he  had
      indefinite leave to remain in the UK when he last left and that he has
      not been away from the UK for more than two years.

  56. Moreover, paragraph 19 provides that a person  who  does  not  benefit
      from the preceding paragraph by reason only of having been  away  from
      the UK too long, may nevertheless be admitted as a returning  resident
      if, for example, he has lived here for most of his life.

  57. Moreover, Home Office guidance sets out  how  applications  for  entry
      clearance as a returning resident should be considered where a  person
      has been absent from the UK for more than two years. Their  indefinite
      leave will not automatically lapse. In line with paragraph 19  of  the
      Rules, a person may nevertheless be admitted as a  returning  resident
      if they can demonstrate strong ties to the UK.

  58. Factors for consideration under paragraph 19 include their strength of
      ties to the UK including:

     a) the nature of those ties;

     b) the extent to which those ties  have  been  maintained  during  the
        applicant's absence;

     c) the length of their original residence in the UK;

     d) the length of time the applicant has been outside the UK;

     e) circumstances in which  they  left  the  UK  and  the  reasons  for
        remaining absent;

     f) their reasons for wishing to return;

     g) whether, if they were to be readmitted, they would continue to live
        in the UK;

     h) any other compelling or compassionate circumstances.

  59. The nature of the person's ties to the UK and the degree of those ties
      which have  been  maintained  during  his  absence  will  need  to  be
      considered when assessing  whether  he  should  be  re-admitted  as  a
      returning resident. Where he has close family ties  in  the  UK  which
      have been maintained during their absence, this will  likely  indicate
      strong ties to the UK. The more immediate the family members are,  for
      example, parents, spouse,  partner,  children  or  grandchildren,  the
      stronger those ties are likely to be.

  60. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of an error on a point of law  in  respect  ofnthe
      appellant'sm . It is evident that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  has  not
      considered or given proper consideration to the provisions set out  in
      paragraph 19 of the Rules.

  61. I am satisfied that the extent  of  judicial  fact  finding  which  is
      necessary in order for the decision to be re-made will  be  extensive.
      In the circumstances I find that this is a proper case to remit to the
      First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision to be made.


      Notice of Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error on a point of law and it is set aside.


      The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh decision
      to be made by another Judge on the appellant's Article 8 claim.


      No anonymity direction made.






      Signed                             Date 5 December 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


