

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07283/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Manchester                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On: 31st January 2018                        |On: 2nd February 2018         |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE

                                   Between

                                     KR
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:           Mr Pratt, WTB Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran born  in  1996.   He  appeals  with
    permission[1]  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  PJ
    Holmes), who on the 31st March 2017 dismissed his protection claim.






    Background


 2. When he claimed asylum the Appellant stated that he had  been  born  in
    Erbil, Iraqi Kurdistan (IKR), to parents who were refugees  from  Iran.
    His parents were cadres of the KDPI and had fled into Iraq sometime  in
    the 1980s. The family had lived in Iraq  but  had  never  been  granted
    Iraqi nationality or formal residence permits. They had also spent some
    time living in Turkey. The Appellant had worked as a television  repair
    technician with his father.  The Appellant left the IKR in  2015  after
    his relationship with a local girl  had  been  discovered;  her  family
    wanted her to marry within their tribe  and  now  the  Appellant  faced
    death or serious injury by them. The Appellant was unable  to  'return'
    to Iran because his family continue to receive threats from the Iranian
    security service. He therefore left and made his way to the UK where he
    made his claim.

 3. The Respondent did  not  accept  that  the  Appellant  was  an  Iranian
    national.  The Respondent believed the Appellant to be  an  Iraqi  Kurd
    and rejected the entire claim for want of credibility.

 4. The First-tier Tribunal found, on the  basis  of  documentary  evidence
    before it, that the Appellant is in fact Iranian  as  he  claims.  That
    evidence included a certificate issued by the UNHCR  in  Baghdad  which
    depicted the Appellant as a child, alongside  his  father,  mother  and
    siblings. The certificate stated the family  to  be  Iranian  refugees.
    There were also other UNHCR  documents  from  Turkey,  the  Appellant's
    parents' marriage certificate which was issued in Iran and "various old
    photographs  showing  the  Appellant's  father  in  the   presence   of
    identifiable persons connected with the KDPI".   The  Tribunal  further
    accepted  that  the  Appellant's  father  is  a  member  of  the  KDPI.
    Although it went on to reject the suggestion that the Appellant himself
    was a member (he actually denied being politically active at  all)  the
    Tribunal was satisfied that the Appellant would face  a  real  risk  of
    serious harm in Iran on account of his close association with the KDPI.



 5. Having made a positive finding that the Appellant is in fact an Iranian
    refugee, the Tribunal rejected the contention for the  Respondent  that
    he was Iraqi, or that alternatively  he  would  be  entitled  to  Iraqi
    nationality. No evidence was presented  to  the  Tribunal  which  would
    indicate that he would be so entitled.   The Tribunal  noted,  however,
    that the Respondent's refusal letter had clearly expressed a view  that
    the Appellant might be safely returned to Iraq.  In light of that view,
    the Tribunal considered it appropriate to apply the principles set  out
    in ST (Eritrea) [2012] UKSC 12 and RR (Syria) [2010]  UKUT  422  (IAC),
    wherein it was held that a finding of fact  that  an  individual  is  a
    refugee does not automatically  entitle  him  to  a  grant  of  refugee
    status. Article 33 of the Convention only prohibits refoulement if  the
    country of destination is one in which the individual's life or freedom
    would be threatened on account  of  his  race,  religion,  nationality,
    membership of a particular social group or political opinion.   Finding
    that the feared harm  of  'honour'  based  violence  in  Iraq  was  not
    credible, the Tribunal therefore dismissed his appeal  on  the  grounds
    that although he was a refugee from Iran, the Appellant could be safely
    returned to Iraq.




    Error of Law


 6. At a hearing on the  9th  November  2017  the  Applicant  made  several
    complaints about that decision, but before  me  his  representative  Ms
    Evans distilled her submissions to this: the decision of the First-tier
    Tribunal was procedurally unfair.  The  Appellant  submitted  that  the
    decision should be set aside for the following reasons:

              i) The appeal was dismissed on grounds  not  advanced  by  the
                 Respondent. Any proposed removal to Iraq  was  premised  on
                 the Respondent's belief that the  Appellant  was  an  Iraqi
                 national. The  Respondent  had  never  indicated  that  she
                 intended to remove  him  there  even  if  he  was  actually
                 Iranian.  The  Respondent's  view  on  the  matter  remains
                 unknown;


             ii) The applicable rule,  paragraph  339J  of  the  Immigration
                 Rules,  expressly limits 'safe third  countries'  to  those
                 where the claimant can assert citizenship.   That being the
                 case, the First-tier Tribunal had gone on a frolic  of  its
                 own;


            iii) The fact that the matter was only raised  by  the  Tribunal
                 deprived  both  parties  of  the  opportunity  of  adducing
                 relevant evidence  on  the  issue.  This  was  particularly
                 prejudicial to the  Appellant  who  was  not  permitted  an
                 opportunity to prepare his case  in  response  to  the  new
                 footing upon which the Tribunal had placed it;

             iv) The Tribunal erred in applying the guidance in AA  (Article
                 15(c)) Iraq CG  [2015]  UKUT  00544  (IAC)  in  respect  of
                 whether the Appellant would be able to  safely  access  and
                 remain in the KRG. Nowhere does that decision  address  the
                 position of Iranian refugees formerly resident in the area;

              v) There was no evidential basis upon which the Tribunal could
                 reasonably  have  concluded  that  an  Iranian  Kurd  being
                 returned to Iraq would be admitted to that country,  or  be
                 permitted to travel on to  the  KRG,  or  be  admitted  and
                 permitted to remain in that area.


             vi)  There  being  no  opportunity  for   the   Appellant   (or
                 Respondent) to investigate the Tribunal's proposed  course,
                 there was no evidence before the Tribunal (nor indeed clear
                 findings on the matter) as to the risk of refoulment.


 7. The Respondent was that day represented by Mr G. Harrison. He  reserved
    his position on whether this could in the end be an 'RR (Syria)'  case,
    but did not contest that the central complaint  of  the  Appellant  had
    been made out. The Respondent had  not  stated  that  she  proposed  to
    remove an Iranian to Iraq, nor had either party had an  opportunity  to
    make submissions or produce evidence on whether  the  Iraqis  would  in
    fact admit the  Appellant,  nor  on  whether  there  was  any  risk  of
    refoulement.   I accepted that for those reasons, and to  that  extent,
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal must be set aside.


 8. Having had regard to rule 5(3)(d)  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended) I made, by written decision dated the
    19th December 2017,  directions in the following terms:

         "The Respondent is directed to review the  case  and  consider  the
         effect of the Tribunal's unchallenged  finding  of  fact  that  the
         Appellant is an Iranian who has a well-founded fear of  persecution
         in that country.   In the event that the Respondent is  not  minded
         to grant the Appellant leave to remain as a  refugee,  and  if  the
         Respondent wishes  to  now  assert  that  the  Appellant  would  be
         admitted to Iraq, would be  permitted  to  reside  there  lawfully,
         would not face a real risk of persecution/serious harm, or  a  risk
         of refoulement to Iran, then she must issue a supplementary refusal
         letter to that effect, setting out the evidential  basis  for  such
         assertions.     I  direct  that  the  Respondent  is  to  make  her
         position known to the Appellant and Tribunal as soon as practicable
         and in any event no later than the  31st  January  2018  when  this
         matter will be set down for  a  'case  management  review'  hearing
         before me in Manchester.


         If the Respondent has not issued a further refusal letter  by  that
         time, or otherwise applied for further directions, the appeal  will
         be allowed on asylum grounds".


    The Re-Made Decision


 9. The hearing resumed, as  directed,  on  the  31st  January  2018.   The
    Respondent had not served a supplementary refusal letter, nor  had  she
    applied for further directions or time. Mr Diwnycz was able  to  inform
    me that he had spoken the previous day to the  Home  Office  caseworker
    who was not  minded  to  follow  the  route  taken  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. The caseworker was of the view that  it  would  be  extremely
    difficult to remove a person in the Appellant's position to Iraq or the
    IKR and that in view of the practical challenges the  Respondent  would
    not be pursuing the RR Syria/ST Eritrea argument.


10. The Respondent does not assert that it would be  reasonable  to  expect
    the  Appellant  to  avail  himself  of  the  protection  of  the  Iraqi
    authorities. In light of the findings of the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Mr
    Diwnycz accepted that the consequence of  that  position  is  that  the
    appeal must be allowed, on the grounds that the Appellant is a  refugee
    from Iran.



    Decisions


11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of
    law and it is set aside to the extent identified above.

12. The decision is remade as follows: "the appeal is allowed on protection
    grounds".

13. There is an order for anonymity.






                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           31st January 2018
                                                     -----------------------
[1] Permission was refused by First-tier Tribunal MJ Gillespie on the 4th
April 2017 but was granted upon renewed permission by Upper Tribunal Judge
Taylor on the 3rd May 2017

