
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/07337/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 8 January 2018                            |On 12 February 2018            |
|                                             |                               |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PITT
                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                   T H V B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Mr S Vokes, Counsel instructed by Steven & Richard
                    Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Ms Willocks-Briscoe, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision dated 11 August 2017  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE which refused  the  protection  and
    human rights claim of the appellant.

 2. The background to this matter is that the appellant claims that she was
    involved in opposition demonstrations on two occasions  in  Vietnam  in
    September 2011 and February 2012, coming to the  adverse  attention  of
    the authorities on both occasions and her  activities  leading  to  her
    father, a policeman, being demoted.  She also maintains that  in  April
    2012 she was arrested, detained and  seriously  mistreated  during  her
    detention.  After her release she was placed under surveillance by  the
    authorities.  She  found  the  situation   too   difficult   and   made
    arrangements to come to the UK. Fearing further mistreatment, she  came
    to the UK on 27 December 2013 with a valid student visa.

 3. On 26 April 2014 the appellant was encountered  during  an  enforcement
    visit to a nail bar and found to be working in breach  of  her  student
    leave conditions.  Removal directions were set for  6  May  2014.   The
    appellant then made an application for leave to remain under Article  8
    ECHR which was refused.  That refusal was the  subject  of  a  judicial
    review. She made further  submissions  on  4  May  2014.   The  removal
    directions set for 6 May 2014 did not proceed as the appellant was non-
    compliant.

 4. A further judicial review application was made on 6 May 2014  following
    which the  appellant  was  given  temporary  admission  and  placed  on
    reporting restrictions.  The second judicial review was refused  on  27
    January 2015.

 5. The appellant was detained again on 19 June 2015.  She made  a  further
    leave to remain application which was refused on 23 July 2015.  She was
    granted temporary admission on 8 October 2015 but failed to  report  as
    required on 9 October 2015 and 4 December 2015.

 6. On 10 May 2016 the appellant  was  again  encountered  working  without
    permission.  She was detained pending removal on 17 May 2016.  She made
    an asylum claim on 20 May 2016, leading to the respondent's refusal  of
    that claim on 4 July 2016.  The appeal against that decision led to the
    proceedings before First-tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp.

 7. The grounds of appeal against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
    can be summarised under three main headings.  Firstly,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge took an improper approach to the  expert  report  of  Dr
    Bluth dated 23 January 2017.   Secondly  the  judge  took  an  improper
    approach to the Rule 35 medical report  from  Dr  Ward.   Thirdly,  the
    judge failed to assess the appellant's claim that she would be at  risk
    on return merely as a failed asylum seeker.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal considered the report of Dr Bluth  at  [18]  of
    the decision:

         "18. Upon careful consideration of this evidence I  find  that  the
             appellant's account is undermined by her failure in  both  her
             asylum interview or in  her  witness  statement  to  name  the
             organisation  to  which  she   claimed   to   be   politically
             affiliated.  I do not find it plausible that if  she  were  as
             politically active as claimed that she would not have  offered
             this information prior to speaking to the  expert  in  January
             2017, or that she would have not  detailed  it  in  her  later
             witness statement.  In respect of the expert  report,  I  also
             find that little information is given as to the credentials of
             the expert, Professor C Bluth, and from the brief  information
             provided at paragraph 2 of his report (page  140)  it  appears
             that he is a university professor in international studies who
             has some experience  in  teaching  about  Vietnam  but  little
             further information  is  provided,  such  as  details  of  any
             relevant scholarly articles or reports that he has authored to
             demonstrate  his  alleged  expertise  with   this   particular
             country, or where his "first hand knowledge"  of  the  country
             came from.  Therefore, in the  absence  of  this  professional
             information I find that overall I can place little weight upon
             the contents of the expert report in assessing the appellant's
             claim."

 9. The appellant raises a number of  objections  to  the  conclusion  that
    little weight could be placed on Professor Bluth's report.  No  enquiry
    was made at the hearing as to Professor Bluth's credentials which could
    have answered the concerns set out by the judge.  It was  not  open  to
    the judge to conclude that his opinion  could  not  bear  weight  given
    that, at  the  very  least,  it  showed  that  he  is  a  Professor  of
    International Relations  and  Security  at  Bradford  University.   The
    reasons given in [18] for placing little  weight  on  the  report  were
    inadequate reasons and showed an irrational approach.

10. We did not find that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  took  an  incorrect
    approach to the report of Dr Bluth such that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal discloses a material error on a point of law.   Paragraph
    2 of the  report  states  under  the  heading  "My  Qualifications  and
    Relevant Experience":

         "I am Professor of  International  Studies  at  the  University  of
         Bradford.  My professional expertise is in international  relations
         and I have a PhD from Kings College, London.   I  am  not  a  legal
         expert, but I am giving evidence as a country expert and as  I  set
         out below  I  have  considerable  knowledge  of  the  situation  in
         Vietnam.  As a specialist  of  the  geopolitics  of  Asia,  I  have
         studied and taught about Vietnam for over twenty years and recently
         supervised a  Vietnamese  doctoral  candidate  who  was  engage  in
         primary research on his country.  As well as numerous  students  at
         Masters level.  I also have first hand knowledge of the country."

11. However, the report does not go on to "set  out  below"  how  Professor
    Bluth  comes  to  have  "considerable  knowledge"  of  Vietnam  or  the
    particular details of the appellant's claim and nothing in  the  report
    suggests how he comes to have "first hand knowledge" of Vietnam.  It is
    not correct, as argued in the grounds, that where  further  information
    about Professor Bluth's background  was  not  in  the  report,  it  was
    incumbent on  the  judge  to  enquire  at  the  hearing.   It  is  well
    understood that the burden of proof lies upon  the  appellant.   First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Boylan-Kemp therefore did not in  stating  in  [18]
    that  there  was   "little   information"   about   Professor   Bluth's
    appropriateness as a source of expert evidence.  We did not accept that
    the First-tier  Tribunal  erred  in  concluding  that  "little  weight"
    attracted to the expert report.

12. We also noted that Professor Bluth's report proceeds on the basis  that
    the appellant  was  informally  associated  with  the  Viet  Youth  for
    Democracy Party (VYDP). As  indicted  in  [18]  above,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal judge was concerned that the appellant had not  been  able  to
    name this organisation in her asylum interview.  At questions 83 to  86
    of the interview, the appellant stated only that she was accused by the
    Vietnamese   authorities   of   "working   for    an    anti-government
    organisation".  At  question  85  she  was  asked  if  she  knew  which
    organisation was being referred to by the authorities and her  response
    was "They did not know, but accusing me of working for them and  wanted
    us to speak about that". Her claim in her later  witness  statement  of
    February 2017 that in her detention in April 2012 she was  asked  about
    whether she was working for  the  YVDP,  her  first  reference  to  the
    organisation, is not  consistent  with  her  responses  in  her  asylum
    interview. This inconsistent aspect of her evidence was  something  the
    First-tier Tribunal was entitled to place adverse weight on  regardless
    of  the  comments  of  Professor  Bluth  on  possible  risks  to  those
    associated with the VYDP.

13. For all of these reasons, we did not find that the judge's approach  to
    the expert report of Dr Bluth showed a material error in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The second ground of challenge concerned the  medical  evidence  of  Dr
    Ward.  This was contained within a Rule 35 letter prepared  whilst  the
    appellant was in detention in July 2016.  The First-tier Tribunal  said
    this at [21] about the medical report:

         "The appellant has relied upon a number of scars to show  that  she
         was beaten whilst in police detention.  To support this  aspect  of
         her claim she has provided a copy of her medical report authored by
         Dr R Ward on 25 July 2016 whilst the appellant  was  in  detention.
         Dr Ward concluded that the appellant gave  a  detailed  account  of
         being detained and beaten and that her scars were  consistent  with
         the explanation given for them (page 29 of the appellant's bundle).
          Again, little information is provided as to the credentials of the
         assessing doctor, although I do accept that she  was  appointed  on
         behalf of the respondent.  Also, there is no  indication  that  the
         Istanbul  protocol  was  assessment  (sic)  was  adhered  to   when
         undertaking the review and reaching the conclusion set out  in  the
         report.  However, if I am wrong on this and Dr Ward did comply with
         the Istanbul protocol then her use of the word  "consistent"  could
         be taken to mean that the scar could have been caused by the trauma
         as described, but that there are  many  other  possible  causes  as
         well.  Overall, I find that the medical assessment does not advance
         the appellant's claim of being beaten or tortured and  that  little
         weight can be placed upon it due to the lack of detail  in  respect
         of the procedures used in making the assessment or  in  respect  of
         the conclusions reached."

15. The First-tier Tribunal was correct to indicate that the evidence  from
    the Rule 35 letter at its highest was that  the  appellant's  claim  to
    have injuries  from  her  mistreatment  in  Vietnam  amounted  only  to
    scarring that was "consistent" with her account.  As  indicated  above,
    this allowed for there to be other causes of the scarring noted  by  Dr
    Ward.  Where that was so, having assessed the medical evidence  against
    the evidence as a whole, it was open to the  judge  to  find  that  the
    medical report was not sufficient to show that the appellant's  account
    was credible.  The judge's comment at the end of [21] that  she  agreed
    with the respondent's submission that "[t]he appellant's injuries could
    have been sustained in other ways besides her account of  being  beaten
    by the Vietnamese authorities" is  in  line  with  the  medical  report
    identifying the scarring only as  "consistent"  and  not  an  error  as
    suggested in the grounds.

16. The final challenge maintains that the judge erred in failing to assess
    whether the appellant would face a risk on return as  a  failed  asylum
    seeker.  Firstly, this ground relies on the comments of Professor Bluth
    on failed asylum seekers at section 5.4  of  his  report.  As  set  out
    above, the First-tier Tribunal was entitled to place little  weight  on
    his report given the lack of information about his expertise. Secondly,
    the paragraphs in the report  addressing  risks  on  return  to  failed
    asylum seekers do not show that someone with this appellant's  profile,
    a  failed  asylum  seeker  simpliciter,  would  face  a  real  risk  of
    mistreatment on return. The report refers to mistreatment on return  of
    individuals  with  a  particular  or  heightened  profile  which   this
    appellant does not have. At its highest, the report indicates only that
    the appellant could be questioned for an extended period at the airport
    on return but nothing about her profile  indicates  that  more  serious
    mistreatment would follow. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal
    did not make out a risk on return for this appellant as a failed asylum
    seeker, therefore, and the outcome of the appeal could  not  have  been
    different even had overt consideration been given to this issue in  the
    decision.

17. For all of these reasons we found that the decision of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did not disclose an error on a point of law and should stand.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal does not  disclose  an  error  on  a
point of law and shall stand.


Signed: [pic]                                    Date: 25 January 2018
Upper Tribunal Judge Pitt
