
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07597/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 September 2020                          |On 29 September 2020          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    S a m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Bradshaw, Counsel instructed by Braitch RB
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any
matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the Appellant.
Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt of court. I make this
order because the Appellant is an asylum seeker.

2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Iraq against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against a decision of the Secretary of
State refusing him asylum.

3. The core ground of complaint is that the First-tier Tribunal Judge built
an adverse credibility finding on his concerns that the appellant was able
to produce an identification document when, as the First-tier Tribunal
Judge understood the evidence, that identification document would have been
taken from him when he was arrested.  It is a perfectly fair observation
that people who are arrested generally have their possessions taken from
them and it is a perfectly reasonable inference that a person is in
possession of an identification document because that is what they are
issued.  However, it is not the case that people always have their
documents with them or indeed that they are necessarily taken from them
when they are arrested.  This was a great deal of conjecture on the judge's
part on which he built much in his adverse findings.

4. There is before me a statement I admitted under Rule 15(2A) of the
Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 because it deals with
something that the appellant could be expected to deal with before the
hearing. Here the appellant says that if he had been asked he would have
explained that he did not have it with him when he was arrested and that is
why it was available to be sent to him later by a member of his family.
The difficulty with things not being put at the appropriate time is made
clear in this case.  Had the witness been asked how he has retained his
identity card after he was arrested he might have given an unbelievable
vague answer because he is not telling the truth or he might have given a
very persuasive answer instantly and unhesitatingly because he was telling
the truth. He has been deprived of the opportunity of spontaneously
answering the question impressively but that cannot be remedied now.

5. Mr Clarke accepted, and with respect, he was doing no more than
accepting what is clearly right, that this adverse credibility finding is
really built on one foot and it goes to the very core of the matter (if I
might be excused the mixed metaphor).  The decision is unsatisfactory and
it has to be set aside for error of law.  The parties say, and on this
occasion I agree, that this is a case that should go back to the First-tier
Tribunal for fundamental findings of fact to be made properly.
Regrettably, on this occasion they were not.

Notice of Decision

6. My decision is that the First-tier Tribunal erred in law, I set aside
its decision and direct that the appeal be heard again in the First-tier
Tribunal, no findings preserved.







                              Jonathan Perkins
|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 24 September 2020              |


