
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA072382016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Decision promulgated and sent         |
|On 25 April 2017                    |On 26 May 2017                        |
|                                    |                                      |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge FREEMAN


                                   Between

                                     s a
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the appellant:     Catherine Bexson (counsel instructed by Abbey Law,
St Albans)
For the respondent:    Mr Tom Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


   1.     This is an appeal by a citizen of Bangladesh, born in 1988, from a
      decision by Judge Nalla  Lawrence,  sitting  at  Hatton  Cross  on  12
      January 2017.

   2. On 5 January 2016 this appellant, who had been here for several  years
      as a student,  applied  for  asylum,  on  the  basis  that  he  was  a
      homosexual who had a well-founded fear of  persecution  on  return  to
      Bangladesh, and an important part of his  case  was  his  relationship
      with a man called L R, who he said was his partner.  On  30  June  his
      application was refused on asylum and private and family life grounds.
       The judge did not believe that the appellant was a homosexual at all;
      but permission to appeal was granted on the basis that he had given no
      reasons for rejecting the evidence of the appellant's  partner,  which
      was given  in  person,  and  had  not  dealt  with  a  letter  from  a
      psychologist, giving his opinion that the appellant was a  homosexual.



   3. Whatever the outcome should have been, the partner's evidence at least
      was crucial to the outcome of this case, and the  parties  are  agreed
      that this appeal must be allowed, with a direction for a fresh hearing
      before another first-tier judge.  Pending any decision at or  on  that
      hearing, the appellant is  granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these
      proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or any member of
      his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and  to  the
      respondent.  Failure to comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
      contempt of court proceedings.


Appeal : first-tier decision set aside
Fresh hearing before first-tier judge (not Judge Lawrence)
                               [pic]                       (Judge of the
                                   Upper Tribunal)

                              Date 26th May 2017




