
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07808/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 June 2017                              |On 11 July 2017               |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     AK
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms K. Reid, Counsel, instructed by Sentinel
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. P. Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Malcolm, promulgated on  13  April  2017,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.
  2. As this is an asylum appeal I make an anonymity direction.


  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "Between paragraphs 131 and 149 the judge makes adverse credibility
         findings.  Having done that, at paragraph 150 the judge then  makes
         a passing reference to the medical evidence.  From the decision  as
         a whole it  does  seem  that  the  judge  has  first  made  adverse
         credibility findings and then made a simple  passing  reference  to
         the  medical  evidence.   There   appears   to   be   no   detailed
         consideration of the said evidence.  Indeed,  the  judge  notes  at
         paragraph  150  that  it  is  quite  likely  that  there  would  be
         inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence.  In  respect  of  that
         point the judge goes no further.  It may be open to  argument  that
         the judge adopted the wrong  approach.   Accordingly  there  is  an
         arguable error of law."


  4. The Appellant attended the hearing.  I heard brief submissions from  Ms
     Reid and Mr. Deller.  Mr. Deller accepted that  the  judge  had  fallen
     into error and had  not  looked  fully  enough  at  the  evidence.   He
     acknowledged that the decision involved the making of a material  error
     of law.  I set the decision aside and remitted the appeal to the First-
     tier Tribunal to be reheard.  My full reasons are set out below.


Error of Law Decision


  5. At paragraph 18 of the decision the judge set out the  documents  which
     were before him.  Under the  heading  "Respondent's  bundle"  he  lists
     "Medical report from Dr Susannah  Fairweather  dated  14th  June  2016"
     (vii).  In the list of documents under the heading "Appellant's bundle"
     he lists "Psychiatric report  prepared  by  Dr  J  Hajioff  dated  14th
     February 2017" (x).


  6. The findings are set out from paragraph 131 onwards.  At paragraph  132
     the judge states that he  accepts  that  the  Appellant  is  young  and
     vulnerable and that he has taken into account the Presidential guidance
     on vulnerable witnesses.


  7. In paragraph 135 the judge states:


         "I accept that there is a core of the appellant's  claim  which  is
         consistent however there are a number  of  inconsistencies  in  his
         evidence and even accepting that it  is  quite  likely  that  there
         would  be  inconsistencies  in   the   appellant's   evidence   (as
         highlighted in the report from Dr Fairweather)  I  considered  that
         there were discrepancies  which  were  difficult  to  reconcile  in
         relation to matters which I considered to be core elements  of  the
         appellant's account."


  8. The judge makes findings of areas regarding  these  discrepancies  from
     paragraphs 136 to 149.  At paragraph 150  he  summarises  the  evidence
     before him.  He states:


         "In making this finding I have taken into account the  age  of  the
         appellant and the medical findings and in particular the opinion of
         Dr Fairweather  that  it  is  quite  likely  that  there  would  be
         inconsistencies in the appellant's evidence."


  9. I  have  considered  the  report  of  Dr.  Fairweather,  found  in  the
     Respondent's bundle at Annex G.  In  addition  to  stating  that  there
     would be discrepancies in sequential accounts given by PTSD  sufferers,
     Dr. Fairweather also states in the final paragraph:


         "Therefore a number of factors are likely to produce ongoing memory
         difficulties and deficiencies in [AK's] narrative.  In this context
         it is highly likely that narrative omissions  and  possibly  errors
         will characterise any statements  that  he  provides:  by  contrast
         provision of highly detailed and internally consistent accounts  of
         what occurred might be actually at variance with his condition."


 10. I find that the judge does not appear to have taken  into  account  the
     second part of Dr. Fairweather's opinion in his  consideration  of  the
     alleged discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence.   In  particular,  I
     find that the inconsistencies referred to at  paragraphs  141  and  143
     where the judge found that there were certain  elements  on  which  the
     Appellant was unable to give evidence, are  characteristic  of  someone
     going through a traumatic experience as indicated by  Dr.  Fairweather.
     However, there is no  reference  to  this  because  there  is  no  full
     analysis and consideration of Dr. Fairweather's report.  There  are  no
     separate findings in relation to this report.  Reference to the medical
     evidence is very brief and refers only to one part of her opinion.


 11. However, in addition to there being problems with the way in which  the
     judge has considered the evidence of  Dr.  Fairweather,  what  is  more
     startling is that the judge has not given any consideration at  all  in
     the findings to the psychiatric report of Dr.  Hajioff.   It  is  clear
     that this report was before him, but there is not a single reference to
     Dr. Hajioff's report in the findings.  This is important on two levels,
     first because Dr. Hajioff gave evidence in relation to the  psychiatric
     condition of the Appellant,  but  also  because  Dr.  Hajioff  gave  an
     opinion on the Appellant's scarring.  There is no reference at  all  to
     this report in relation to the scarring and  I  find  that  this  is  a
     significant element which has not been taken into account by the judge.


 12. Dr. Hajioff's report states that the scarring was corroborative of  the
     Appellant's account.  The judge's failure  to  take  this  report  into
     account therefore renders the credibility  findings  materially  unsafe
     given that there was corroborative evidence to support the  Appellant's
     account of what had occurred.  I find  that  the  judge  has  erred  by
     failing to take into account evidence which was before him.


 13. I further find, as accepted by Mr.  Deller,  that  although  the  judge
     states that he has had regard to the Presidential guidance and the fact
     that the Appellant was a vulnerable witness, the fact that insufficient
     consideration has been given to one expert  report,  and  that  another
     expert report has been completely ignored, indicates  that  not  enough
     care has been given in the round to the Appellant's case given that the
     events took place when the Appellant was a minor.  What the  scars  are
     and what they show is a key consideration, but the judge  has  paid  no
     attention to this.  Not only did Dr. Hajioff give  an  opinion  on  the
     Appellant's state of mind but he  also  gave  an  opinion  on  physical
     features of the Appellant which are corroborative of his account.


 14. I find that the judge has made material errors of law  in  his  failure
     properly to take into account the evidence which was  before  him,  and
     his failure to give due regard to the fact that  the  Appellant  was  a
     minor when the events occurred.


 15. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
     necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
     overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
     to the First-tier Tribunal.


Decision


 16. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  No findings  are
     preserved.


 17. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be reheard.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Directions

An Albanian interpreter is requested for the rehearing  of  the  Appellant's
appeal.

It should be noted that the address of the Appellant  has  changed  and  has
been amended on the file.


Signed                                  Date 9 July 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

