
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07712/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3rd June 2019                     |On 19th June 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS


                                   Between

                                   Mr C.G.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Jasiri, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Sri Lanka (born  [~]  1989),  appeals  with
    permission against the decision of Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Courtney dismissing his appeal against the Respondent's decision of 6th
    June 2018 refusing his protection claim.

 2. The Appellant entered the UK clandestinely on 20th  November  2017  and
    claimed asylum on 8th December 2017.  In summary, his claim  to  asylum
    is as follows.  The Appellant was born in Atchuvely in Sri Lanka and is
    of Tamil ethnicity.  His father and brother were both involved in  LTTE
    activities.  His father undertook carpentry work for the Sea Tigers and
    although the Appellant was not part of any LTTE cadre, he did accompany
    his father to work at a  time  when  his  father  was  undertaking  the
    carpentry tasks.  It is accepted by the Respondent that the Appellant's
    brother was involved with the LTTE.  The whereabouts of his brother are
    unknown.

 3. In May 2016 the Appellant's father disappeared.  A co-worker phoned the
    family and said that his father had  been  arrested  by  the  CID.  The
    Appellant and his mother sought help from an uncle and started pursuing
    enquiries with the authorities as to where they had taken  his  father.
    To date nothing is known.

 4. In July 2016 the Appellant was arrested and detained  for  three  days.
    He was released  after  being  warned  that  the  family  should  cease
    pursuing enquiries as to the whereabouts of his father.  He encountered
    no further difficulties until November 2016 when he was arrested for  a
    second time.  It would seem that the reason for his arrest was in order
    to extract information concerning the whereabouts of his brother and in
    addition, it was said to the Appellant  that  he  too  must  have  been
    involved in LTTE activities because other  family  members  were.   The
    Appellant denied being an LTTE member.  However, on  this  occasion  he
    was detained for three months, beaten and tortured.  He  was  asked  to
    confirm that he was an active supporter of LTTE but refused to do so.

 5. He was released after three months upon payment of  a  bribe  which  he
    said had been arranged by his uncle.  Once released he  sought  medical
    help from a local healer for the injuries  he  said  he  sustained  and
    subsequently his uncle arranged for his passage to the UK.  He left Sri
    Lanka in February 2017, arriving in the UK in November 2017.

 6. Post-arrival in the UK the Appellant engaged in diaspora activities  by
    becoming a member of the TGTE.  He has been diagnosed as suffering from
    PTSD and depression, and has suicide ideation.  He claims he  would  be
    at risk on return on account of being known to the authorities,  having
    engaged in diaspora activities, and on account of his Article 3 suicide
    risk.

The FtT Hearing

 7. When the Appellant's appeal came before the FtT, the judge  had  before
    her a bundle of documents which included a medico-legal report from  Dr
    Dhumad a consultant psychiatrist, the Respondent's  CPIN  June  2017  -
    Tamil separatism Version 5.0, and supporting documents relating to TGTE
    membership.  After consideration of the evidence the FtTJ made  several
    findings.  She was satisfied that the Appellant had demonstrated to the
    lower standard that he had been detained by the authorities and that on
    the second occasion had been beaten and tortured.   She  accepted  that
    the Appellant had engaged in diaspora activities but they were of  such
    a low level as to present no risk on return.  So far as the Appellant's
    mental health issues and suicide risk is concerned, she concluded  that
    they were not of such severity as to reach Article  3  threshold.   She
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

Onward Appeal

 8. The Appellant appealed the decision on three grounds and permission was
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal in the following terms:

         "2.  The grounds assert that the Judge erred  by:  (a)  failing  to
             consider material evidence - the objectives of the TGTE - when
             considering likelihood of  adverse  attention  of  authorities
             upon return; (b) failing to consider objective evidence  since
             GJ when determining risk to failed  asylum  seekers;  and  (c)
             failing to consider risk of  suicide  upon  return  compatibly
             with Y and Z (Sri Lanka) -v- SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 362 ("Y  and
             Z").

         3.    It  is  arguable  that  if  the  Judge  had  considered   the
             Respondent's Country Policy and Information  Note  Sri  Lanka:
             Tamil separatism Version 5.0 June 2017 he might  have  reached
             different conclusions about  the  risk  to  the  Appellant  on
             return.  It is also arguable that the Judge fell into error by
             predicating key findings in relation to the risk of suicide on
             bases that are contrary to Y and Z.  The decision and  reasons
             do contain arguable material errors  of  law.   Permission  to
             appeal is granted for that reason.  Permission is  granted  on
             all grounds asserted in the application dated 26 March 2019."

    There was no Rule 24 Response served on behalf of the Respondent.

 9. Thus, the matter comes before me to determine whether the  decision  of
    the FtTJ discloses such error of law that it must be set aside and  re-
    made.

Error of Law Hearing

10. Before me Mr Jasiri appeared for the Appellant, and Mr Tarlow  for  the
    Respondent.  Mr Jasiri's submissions followed the line of  the  grounds
    set out in the grant. He emphasised that the judge's findings  on  risk
    on return were unsustainable in that the Appellant's  profile  had  not
    been properly considered. There was cogent evidence from Dr Dhumad that
    the Appellant was at risk of  suicide.  He  would  be  returning  as  a
    vulnerable person. The background documents set  out  that  all  failed
    asylum seekers were interviewed  on  return  at  Colombo  International
    airport.  The likelihood is that because  of  his  depressed  state  he
    would not behave in a rational manner when  questioned  and  would  act
    erratically.  That  would  immediately   raise   suspicion   with   the
    authorities that the Appellant was more than merely a returned economic
    migrant.

11. Additionally developing this point, the judge had failed to have regard
    to Y and Z and had not turned her mind at all as to whether or not  the
    Appellant would be able, in his state  of  mind,  to  access  and  seek
    medical help from the very authorities whom it had been found had  been
    responsible for causing his difficulties in the first place.

12. So far as the remaining grounds are  concerned,  Mr  Jasiri  emphasised
    that the Appellant could not be expected  to  lie  about  his  diaspora
    activities and  once  again  he  would  find  himself  in  difficulties
    explaining the extent of his involvement in the TGTE  which  is  now  a
    proscribed organisation in Sri Lanka. The decision  needed  to  be  set
    aside in order that a rehearing could fully consider the evidence which
    was submitted on the Appellant's behalf.

13. Mr Tarlow in response simply relied on saying that the judge  had  made
    two findings which he drew to my attention.   At  [71]  the  judge  had
    found there is no evidence to show that the Appellant has a significant
    role in the TGTE.  At [82] the FtTJ considered that the risk of suicide
    in the UK will be adequately managed by the  UK  authorities  and  that
    they can bring the risk to below  the  Article  3  threshold  when  the
    decision  to  remove  is  taken.  She  took  judicial  notice  of   the
    arrangements the Secretary of  State  has  made  to  escort  vulnerable
    persons on return. Furthermore no evidence had been presented  to  show
    that appropriate medication  and  counselling  services  would  not  be
    available to the Appellant in Sri Lanka.

Consideration

14. I am persuaded after hearing from both parties, that there is merit  in
    the grounds and that the FtTJ did err for the following reasons.

15. First, the judge had accepted that the  Appellant  had  been  arrested,
    detained and physically abused in late 2016/early 2017.  The reason why
    the  authorities  detained  the  Appellant  was  on  account  of  their
    perception that he  was  an  LTTE  supporter.   On  a  reading  of  the
    decision, the FtTJ  does  not  appear  to  have  fully  considered  the
    Respondent's CPIN  June  2017  -  Tamil  separatism  Version  5.0  when
    assessing risk on return.  I accept that she makes  reference  to  this
    document at [64].  However there is no  clear  finding  to  demonstrate
    that she has given consideration to the contents, which show that there
    may now be an increased risk profile for  those  who  have  engaged  in
    diaspora activities in a proscribed organisation, as is the  case  with
    this Appellant.  Moreover the background documents  set  out  that  all
    failed  asylum  seekers  are   interviewed   on   return   at   Colombo
    International airport. Therefore it is not sufficient for the judge  to
    find as she did that the Appellant could simply tell the truth  at  the
    airport which is that he is a low level supporter of the TGTE.  I  find
    that the failure to engage  fully  with  this  evidence  amounts  to  a
    material error.

16. Following on from that Mr Jasiri's submissions concentrated largely  on
    what he said was the judge's  failure  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    discounting Dr Dhumad's expert medicolegal report.  He emphasised  that
    Dr Dhumad's report was to the  effect  that  the  Appellant's  risk  of
    suicide is currently moderate but it is very likely to increase in  the
    context of removal to Sri Lanka.  The FtTJ's findings at [80] and [81],
    I am satisfied, are predicated on bases which are contrary to Y and  Z.
    Nowhere do I see in the decision that the judge has turned her mind  to
    a proper consideration of the reasonableness of whether this Appellant,
    an asylum seeker whom she  accepted  had  been  detained  and  suffered
    torture at  the  hands  of  the  authorities,  could  realistically  be
    expected to seek assistance from those same authorities.  I  find  that
    this is a material error.

17. I am reinforced  in  this  view  by  apparently  inconsistent  findings
    recorded at [79].  At [78] the FtTJ quotes directly  from  Dr  Dhumad's
    report that, "The risk (of suicide) will be greater when he feels  that
    the deportation is close.  Threat of removal in my opinion will trigger
    a significant deterioration in his mental  suffering  and  subsequently
    increases the risk of suicide."  At [79] she records that  Dr  Dhumad's
    report expresses the view that the Appellant is not fit  to  fly  given
    his current unstable mental health with suicide risk, PTSD symptoms and
    depression.   The  FtTJ  then  concludes  that,  "Dr  Dhumad  does  not
    expressly suggest that the Appellant might suffer damage to his  mental
    health as a result of the removal process." This does not appear to  be
    a logical conclusion to draw in the wake of the passages of  text  that
    she has quoted, nor in light of other opinions expressed by Dr  Dhumad.
    For example at paragraph 16.4 if his report he states,  "Therefore,  in
    my view, he is very likely to suffer a  serious  deterioration  in  his
    mental health if he were to be returned to Sri Lanka and this is not  a
    course that I would recommend."

18. Having found material errors in the decision, I find that  it  must  be
    set aside and the appeal must be reheard.  I set aside the decision  in
    its entirety. I gave consideration as to whether any  of  the  findings
    made could be preserved but Mr Jasiri's  submissions  as  I  understood
    them inclined to the view that, in  light  of  the  above  errors,  the
    findings were tainted and there should be a fresh rehearing.  I  agree.
    I find in view of the amount of judicial fact finding  required  it  is
    appropriate that  the  fresh  hearing  take  place  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal. No findings are preserved.  The  hearing  should  take  place
    before a judge other than Judge Courtney.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 13th  March  2019  is
set aside for material error.  The appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal (not Judge  Courtney)  for  that  Tribunal  to  rehear  the  matter
afresh.


Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     16 June 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
