
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07431/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                |Determination & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd November 2018               |On 02 January 2019                      |
|                                       |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                     SW
                         (ANONYMITY direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O Noor of Counsel, Lexmark Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior HOPO


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge C A S O'Garro, promulgated  on  23rd  August  2018,  following  a
    hearing at Hatton Cross on 12 July 2018.   In  the  determination,  the
    judge dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  whereupon  the  Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Pakistan, and was  born  on  10th
    October 1991.  He appealed against the decision of the Respondent dated
    25th May 2018, refusing his  claim  for  asylum  and  for  humanitarian
    protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C of HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant's claim is that he is a Christian from Pakistan, who  had
    lived in Lahore, where his father was a pastor of the local church.  He
    had a friend by the name of "Tayab" who was of the  Muslim  faith.   He
    and his family were of strict beliefs.  The Appellant claimed that  his
    problems started on 7th June 2011.  This is when Tayab wanted to  learn
    from the Appellant about Christianity, which  the  Appellant  began  to
    teach him.  The Appellant gave him a Bible to look at for about two  or
    three weeks.  Tayab took the Bible home.  The  Appellant  claimed  that
    Tayab's mother found the Bible and Tayab was beaten and asked where  he
    got it from.  Tayab's mother informed Tayab's brother, Sajid, who was a
    police officer, and who  brought  some  other  officers  along  to  the
    Appellant's place, picked him up, took him to the police  station,  and
    beat him up, and tortured him.

 4. The  Appellant  during  the  process  had  been  rendered  unconscious,
    blindfolded, and put in the back of a car and then driven to an unknown
    location.  He was kept for four days.  He was  stripped  and  tortured.
    He pleaded for mercy and apologised for  what  he  had  done.   He  was
    eventually released.  He was thrown outside his home.  He was taken  to
    hospital by his father where he remained for two  or  three  days.   He
    received treatment.  He then "returned to normal living with no problem
    until the middle of October 2011" (paragraph 6).

 5. At that stage, the Appellant and his father encountered Tayab who  told
    them that he had run away from home.  Tayab apologised to them for what
    had happened to the  Appellant.   He  said  he  wanted  to  convert  to
    Christianity.  The Appellant said that the following day Tayab came  to
    his family home and the Appellant's father  took  Tayab  to  the  local
    church and baptised him there in the church courtyard.

 6. The Appellant claimed that whilst he was being baptised someone saw the
    baptism taking place through the  church  gates  and  informed  Tayab's
    brother, Sajid.  The Appellant claimed that  the  following  day  Sajid
    made a threat against all  of  their  lives.   The  Appellant's  father
    locked up the home and went to stay with  the  uncle  who  was  also  a
    pastor.  The  Appellant  claimed  that  his  father  began  to  receive
    threatening phone calls from Sajid and his associates.

 7. The family decided that the Appellant should travel  to  the  UK.   The
    father remained in Pakistan in hiding.  The Appellant also stated  that
    sometime in 2014 his younger  brother,  who  was  starting  college  in
    Pakistan, and had travelled to Lahore in order to obtain certificate he
    required, was shot and killed by Sajid due to a  false  blasphemy  case
    against the Appellant.  The Appellant maintains that there is an arrest
    warrant issued against him and  his  father  for  blasphemy  where  the
    penalty prescribed is death.

The Judge's Findings

 8. The judge, in a comprehensive and detailed determination,  set  up  the
    facts in question, together with the background objective  evidence  in
    relation  to  Christians  in  Pakistan  (see  paragraph   38),   before
    concluding that the  Appellant  could  not  succeed.  The  reason  was,
    whereas the  judge  accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been  attacked
    following the loan of the Bible to Tayab, the fact was that, after this
    "the appellant said life returned to normal" (paragraph 45).

 9. The judge did not accept the remaining part of the  Appellant's  claim,
    namely, that his father then went on  to  baptise  Tayab,  particularly
    given that this part of the claim was based  upon  the  baptism  taking
    place in the church courtyard, where the Appellant's  father  could  be
    seen by others.   The judge did also not accept that a blasphemy charge
    was levied against the Appellant's father and the  Appellant,  or  that
    his brother was killed as a result  of  those  blasphemy  charges  (see
    paragraph 45).

Grounds of Application

10. The grounds of application state that  the  judge  failed  to  properly
    assess the documentary evidence provided in favour  of  the  Appellant.
    There were six pieces of documentary  evidence,  which  the  judge  had
    disregarded  upon  concluding  that  the  Appellant's  claim  was   not
    credible.  This was an  error  of  law,  given  that  the  variety  and
    provenance of these documents had not been considered.  The judge  also
    failed to engage properly with the Appellant's  medical  circumstances.
    There had been unnecessary criticism of the Appellant in not  making  a
    claim at the earliest opportunity, which had  been  taken  against  the
    Appellant, and could not be a proper basis for  the  rejection  of  the
    claim.

11. On 27th September 2018,  permission  to  appeal  was  granted,  on  the
    additional basis that the judge had noted that the Appellant  had  been
    tortured by non-state agents for reasons  connected  to  his  Christian
    beliefs and, although this had  been  argued,  paragraph  339K  of  the
    Immigration Rules, makes it  clear  that  if  there  has  been  a  past
    persecution, then unless proper reasons can be shown to  the  contrary,
    it must be assumed that such persecution will continue in  the  future.
    The judge had also failed to take into account the clinical findings of
    Dr Goldwyn.

Submissions

12. At the hearing before me on 22nd November 2018, Mr Noor relied upon the
    grounds of application.  He submitted that  both  the  Respondent  Home
    Office and the judge had accepted that the Appellant  was  a  Christian
    from Pakistan.  The judge had also accepted that the Appellant had been
    tortured by the police (see paragraph 12 of the  grounds).   The  issue
    that this raised, however, was the outright rejection of the six pieces
    of documentary evidence (see paragraph 46 of the determination) by  the
    judge, on the basis that the Appellant's account was not credible,  and
    so the documentation could not be relied upon (see paragraph 6  of  the
    grounds).  Such documentation was important, consisting of two FIRs, an
    arrest warrant, and a superintendent's letter from the  Lahore  Police,
    confirming how the Appellant's brother had been shot and killed, in  an
    encounter with the police.  There had been no attempt  to  engage  with
    the documentation, with a view to their provenance, and  their  import.
    The judge had also wrongly come to  the  conclusion  that  this  was  a
    Section  8  case  of  dismissal,  where  the  Appellant's   claim   was
    intrinsically lacking credibility, on account of his having delayed  in
    applying earlier (paragraph 49).

13. For his part, Mr Whitwell submitted that the  determination  was  clear
    and comprehensive and there was no error of  law.   This  was  for  the
    following four reasons.  First, the documents  had  to  be  taken  into
    account in the round, and in the context of  the  other  evidence  (see
    Tanveer Ahmed).  In this regard paragraph  15.11  of  the  Home  Office
    country  guidance  report  makes  it  clear  that  the  prevalence   of
    fraudulent documents in Pakistan is so widespread as to render most  of
    these to be unreliable.  Second, the judge has  taken  account  of  the
    background evidence, and then concluded that the Appellant account  was
    lacking in  credibility.   Third,  whilst  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant had been tortured by the police, the judge laid  considerable
    stress on the fact that the Appellant's life  returned  to  normal,  so
    that he remained in  Pakistan  for  six  months,  without  any  further
    incidents.   Finally,  the  judge  was  correct  to  raise  credibility
    concerns in the context of Section 8 given the delay in  the  Appellant
    applying for asylum.

14. In his reply, Mr Noor submitted that it  was  simply  not  possible  to
    separate the recognition  of  torture  having  taken  place,  from  the
    documentation in support of such ill-treatment, because,  once  it  had
    been accepted that there had been  torture,  then  it  had  to  be  the
    position that, unless there was probative  evidence  to  the  contrary,
    that would be the starting point for the risk in  the  future,  and  to
    that end the documentation had to be engaged with and their  provenance
    assessed.

15. He asked me to allow the appeal.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007 such that I should set aside  the  decision  and  remake  the
    decision).  I come to this conclusion notwithstanding Mr Noor's valiant
    and commendable efforts to persuade me otherwise in an appeal that  was
    well-resented before me.  My reasons are as follows.  This  is  a  case
    where the Appellant came to the UK as a Tier 4 Student on 31st December
    2011.  He did not claim asylum until 11th  November  2014.   The  basic
    nature of the claim was accepted, insofar as it was recognised that  he
    had given a copy of the Bible to a friend, and as a consequence of that
    had been beaten up and mistreated by state authorities, in the form  of
    the police, but after that, the judge was  clear  that  "the  Appellant
    said life returned to normal" (paragraph 45).  The judge rejected other
    aspects of the claim.  He was entitled to do so.  He  was  entitled  to
    come to the view that the Appellant's father would not  have  converted
    Tayab, a person from a strict Muslim family, and especially in the open
    courtyard of the church, where other people would be able to  see  what
    had happened, and to thereby attract adverse publicity to an  act  that
    was prescribed by law  in  Pakistan,  under  the  country's  well-known
    blasphemy laws.

17. That left two issues.  The first was the issue of  documentation.   The
    judge does not ignore the documentation.  He expressly engages with it.
      He makes it quite clear that,

         "I find that the objective evidence indicates that the  appellant's
         uncle would not have been able to get the documents the appellant's
         claimed he obtained and sent to him because the  likelihood  is  he
         would  have  been  subject  to  intimidation  and  attacks  and  in
         addition, ran the risk  of  being  accused  of  blasphemy  himself,
         particularly as he is a Christian preacher  himself,  according  to
         the appellant's evidence" (paragraph 44).

18. This finding is made before it is then concluded that  the  claim  that
    the  Appellant's  father  baptised  Tayab  was  not  a  credible  claim
    (paragraph 45).  The judge considers the documents "with  the  guidance
    given in Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439" and then goes on to say that
    "in view of my findings about the Appellant's credibility, I will place
    no evidential weight on these documents.  I also bear in mind what  the
    objective evidence is about the ease by which false  documents  can  be
    obtained in Pakistan" (paragraph 46).  It is clear from this  that  the
    documentation is considered in the context of the overall evidence, and
    particularly,  on  the  basis  of  the  judge's  conclusions  that  the
    provenance of these documents could not be relied upon given  the  risk
    that the Appellant's uncle would run in terms of himself being "subject
    to intimidation and attacks" (paragraph 44), which was not  a  credible
    prospect that the uncle would have entertained willingly.

19. Second, insofar as there was the issue of  the  medical  report  by  Dr
    Goldwyn, this does go on to refer to the Appellant's mental state,  and
    the PTSD, but it is very much based upon  what  the  Appellant  himself
    said to Dr Goldwyn,  and  the  judge  was  clear  that  the  report  is
    "conspicuous by its absence of  the  Respondent's  refusal  letter  and
    there was no reference to the Appellant's medical records  which  means
    an assessment of the Appellant's mental state was based largely on what
    the Appellant told her" (paragraph 47).

20. This was not to say that the judge rejected the findings by Dr  Goldwyn
    of the Appellant suffering from PTSD and severe depression, but made it
    quite clear that the expert "has not stated the cause of the  symptoms"
    and it was just as likely that the cause of these symptoms  was  to  do
    with "the uncertainty surrounding his  immigration  status"  (paragraph
    48).  That was a finding that the judge was entitled to make.

21. In the same way, the judge was entitled to come to the conclusion  that
    Section 8 applied in that the Appellant had delayed considerably before
    raising an asylum claim on facts that were most obvious to raise at the
    earliest opportunity, had the Appellant been a  genuine  asylum  seeker
    raising a genuine asylum claim for the reasons which he eventually laid
    before the Secretary of State, and were determined by Judge O'Garro.

Notice of Decision

22. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not  involve  an  error  of
    law.  The decision shall stand.

23. An anonymity order is made.

24. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 18th December 2018


