
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07153/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 June 2019                      |On 23rd July 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     V L
                      (ANONYMITY DIRECTION maintained)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms J Sachdev, Counsel, instructed by Bury Law Centre
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant is a national of  Russia.   In  a  decision  sent  on  13
    February 2019 Judge McClure of the First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  his
    appeal against the decision made by the respondent  on  26  March  2018
    refusing his protection claim.  The basis of the appellant's claim  was
    that as a result of his lengthy history of acting as an Advocate in the
    Russian courts and then finding himself the subject of prosecution  for
    making threats to judges, he had come to the adverse  attention  of  an
    Investigation Committee in 2017 and would be at real risk on return  of
    serious harm from the Russian authorities.

2.   The appellant's  grounds  refer  to  two  grounds.   Unhelpfully,  they
    overlap and each raise points  amounting  to  additional  grounds.   As
    stated, ground (1) alleges that the judge failed to take  into  account
    relevant evidence and failed to make proper findings, errors said to be
    magnified by the fact that the appellant had known medical  issues  and
    had been assessed  by  a  medical  expert,  Dr  Rojo,  as  at  risk  of
    committing suicide; ground (2) takes issue with the  judge's  delay  in
    promulgating the decision, his failure to make mention of or  make  use
    of the appellant's  Litigation  friend;  and  failure  to  address  key
    matters of evidence.

3.   I heard extremely thorough submissions from both representatives.

4.   Given the overlapping and  multi-layered  nature  of  the  two  grounds
    pleaded, I shall deal with the most important points in my  own  order,
    commencing with the particular points that I found unpersuasive.

5.   First of all, I  reject  the  appellant's  submission  that  the  judge
    failed to recognise that when dealing with  an  appellant  with  mental
    health problems, he should have given more prominence and weight to the
    background evidence.  I consider that at paragraph  64  the  judge  was
    well aware of this need.  In this paragraph he stated:

         "In circumstances where  the  medical  reports  indicate  that  the
         appellant's perception of reality  may  be  a  problem,  where  the
         appellant may be boastful and overstate matters where the appellant
         may give explanations which are not fully based on  reality,  there
         may be some difficulty in ascertaining the truth of  the  situation
         with regard solely from the appellants evidence."

    Whilst he does not thereafter refer systematically to other sources  of
    evidence, it is clear he was at all  times  looking  to  consider  what
    evidence there was  apart  from  the  appellant's  own  statements  and
    testimonies.

6.   Second, I  see  absolutely  no  merit  in  the  judge's  assessment  at
    paragraph 80 that:

         "With regard to the claims  that  the  appellant  is  suicidal  the
         reports  refer  to  the  possibility  of  such  but  I  find   that
         appropriate  arrangements  can  be  put  in  place  to  return  the
         appellant to Russia to minimise any risk.  I do not find  that  the
         appellant would be at risk of taking his own life and that  in  any
         event appropriate steps can be taken to minimise such risk."

    That was a fair description of the medical report by  Dr  Rojo  and  it
    must also be borne in mind that Dr Rojo did not identify the  need  for
    any specific steps to be taken by medical authorities  to  protect  the
    appellant against the risk of suicide. Further, on the appellant's  own
    account, uncontradicted by  the  doctor,  he  was  not  undergoing  any
    treatment in the UK for his mental health problems.  (I should add that
    although the judge did state incorrectly, e.g. in  paragraph  13,  that
    the appellant was in receipt of treatment in the UK, that  mistake  had
    no material impact on the judge's assessment of risk on return  or  his
    level of suicide risk).

7.   However, I am persuaded that grounds  (1)  and  (2)  do  disclose  some
    material errors of law, when considered cumulatively.

8.   First of all, despite  being  acutely  aware  that  the  appellant  had
    mental health problems, and that he "lacked capacity to give  evidence"
    (paragraph 51) the  judge  nowhere  indicates  that  he  was  therefore
    treating him as a vulnerable witness, in respect of whom allowances may
    need to be made for discrepancies, vagueness  and  the  like.   Perhaps
    because the appellant did not give oral evidence the  judge  overlooked
    that  he  still  needed  to  consider  the  application  of  the  Joint
    Presidential Guidance Note 2010 on vulnerable witnesses  and  Court  of
    Appeal guidance pertaining to this: see AM  (Afghanistan)  [2017]  EWCA
    Civ 1123.

9.   Second, despite it having clearly been made known to him at the  outset
    that the appellant was assisted by a litigation friend (Ms  Van  Wick),
    who had sent a statement of suitability on 12 October 2018,  the  judge
    does not appear to have engaged her at all in the  proceedings.   Given
    that in a number of places the judge relied  on  discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's evidence and the lack of adequate explanation for them,  he
    should at least have stated why he chose not to engage with Ms Van Wick
    to help ascertain whether, indirectly, the appellant wished to  address
    any concerns the judge had with the appellant's evidence.

10.  Third, between hearing the appeal on 15 October 2018  and  promulgating
    his decision on 13 February 2019 there was nearly four months delay, or
    at least three months if one takes the date he has given along with his
    signature.   By  itself  this  feature  would  not  necessarily   cause
    sufficient concern to interfere, but in this case the judge's  response
    to the highly discursive account given by the appellant in his  various
    written statements seems also to possess a discursive flavour,  raising
    a question as to whether the delay in writing  up  the  case  may  have
    caused this judge (who is characteristically lucid)  to  be  no  longer
    being on top of the materials before him.

11.  Fourth, even though the judge  clearly  did  set  out  to  attach  more
    weight  than  usual  to  the  documentary  evidence  (in  view  of  the
    appellant's mental health problems), he failed to refer to key items of
    documentary  evidence.   The  judge  rightly  saw  as  crucial  to  the
    appellant's case his claim to face a risk of persecution as a result of
    alleged visits paid to him by an Investigation Committee in  2017.   At
    paragraph 75 he concluded:

         "Thereafter I do not see that the authorities within  Russia  would
         have any interest in the appellant.  The appellant has referred  to
         the fact that he  had  commenced  to  work  with  a  friend  making
         furniture.   I  do  not  see  in  such   circumstances   that   any
         Investigation Committee would have any interest in the appellant or
         would seek  to  threaten  the  appellant.   I  do  not  accept  the
         appellant's assertions  or  the  assertions  within  the  documents
         produced that officials  would  seek  to  monitor  the  appellant's
         conduct.  I do not accept that the appellant was under surveillance
         of  that  the  appellant  was  threatened   by   members   of   the
         investigation committee."

12.  Taken on its own,  such  a  conclusion  would  appear  unexceptionable.
    However, it was premised in part on the judge's earlier conclusion that
    the authorities would not perceive the appellant as an  anti-government
    troublemaker because he had failed to show that he had ever  worked  in
    the courts helping citizens fight  cases  or  that  he  had  ever  been
    involved with the Democratic Union or an organisation  called  Memorial
    which sought to promote human rights.  Yet in reaching  those  findings
    the judge nowhere makes reference to or explains what weight if any  he
    attached to the article from Mr Rudnitsky stating  that  the  appellant
    did human rights work  or  the  letter  from  Memorial  confirming  the
    appellant's association with  them  or  to  the  medical  reports  from
    Russian doctors which in the course of  their  psychiatric  evaluations
    refer (without any query) to his role in litigating cases.   The  judge
    appeared to reject the appellant's claim to have been  involved  as  an
    advocate in cases before the Russian courts for  the  reason  that  the
    appellant had no legal qualifications, but his  own  account  was  that
    parties authorised him by power of attorney to speak for them in  court
    and I have not seen anything from the respondent indicating  that  such
    party-authorised advocacy is not permitted in the Russian courts.  This
    again is precisely the type  of  disputed  issue  of  fact  that  could
    usefully have been pursued by the judge  by  involving  the  litigation
    friend, to try  and  gain  more  clarity  as  to  how  it  was  on  the
    appellant's account he was able to play such a role.

13.  I concur with Mr Bates that there were many aspects of the  appellant's
    evidence  that  the   judge   was   understandably   sceptical   about,
    particularly in relation to his own court case (which had  resulted  in
    an order to undertake correctional work for six months) given  that  on
    his own account he had made serious threats against the  judge  hearing
    the case.  At the same time, given that he was a vulnerable witness and
    someone who, on the basis of the medical report, had at times a tenuous
    grasp on reality, the judge failed to  show  that  he  had  taken  into
    account all the documentary evidence in the case.

14.  The errors identified above  clearly  had  a  material  impact  on  the
    judge's assessment of credibility.  Accordingly, I see  no  alternative
    to the  decision  being  set  aside  and  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Assuming that it will continue  to  be  the  case  that  the
    appellant will not be called as a witness,  but  will  again  have  the
    assistance of a litigation friend  the next judge should state  at  the
    outset what he or she expects the role of  such  a  person  to  be  and
    should seek to engage this person in consideration of discrepancies  in
    the appellant's evidence. It may be a useful starting point will be the
    gov.uk website entry on Litigation friends, read together with reported
    decisions of the Upper Tribunal dealing with litigation friends.

15.  To conclude:

     The decision of the FtT Judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT Judge, not before Judge McClure.

         I would observe, that as was necessary last time,  the  case  would
    best be dealt with by an experienced judge.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 9 July 2019

               [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal




