
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07372/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2019                         |On 15th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                mrs Maria [F]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Abbas, Solicitor, instructed by Imperium Group
                    Immigration Specialists
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan whose appeal  was  dismissed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Howard in  a  decision  promulgated  on  19th
    December 2018.  Grounds of application were lodged.   The  grounds  say
    that no mention or regard was made by the judge to the  fact  that  she
    was a single mother when considering the Appellant's Article  8  claim.
    The Appellant  had  highlighted  the  position  of  single  mothers  in
    Pakistan and it was not a favourable one in the slightest.   The  judge
    ignored the Appellant's evidence that her ex-partner wanted custody  of
    the child.  The judge had  also  failed  to  consider  the  Appellant's
    mental health and history of abuse she has suffered as detailed in  the
    medical evidence.  The judge had failed  to  consider  the  submissions
    made in respect of those matters and had totally  ignored  the  finding
    from medical professionals regarding the sexual abuse she had  suffered
    as a child.  Reference was made to the PTSD symptoms from past  events.
    Arguably given that the Appellant was a single mother and  the  country
    information Article 8 was engaged and deserved more than just a cursory
    consideration.  Secondly the judge's consideration of the facts is also
    questioned.  The Appellant did not state that her family had  a  pistol
    in the home.  It was stated  in  evidence  to  the  Respondent  in  her
    witness statement that her family came to her friend's house armed with
    a pistol.  The judge had failed to take into account why  and  how  her
    friend came to visit her and eventually managed to take  her  from  the
    home.  The judge did not have regard to all the evidence.

 2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Gumsley
    in a note dated 17th January 2019.

 3. A Rule 24 notice was lodged by the Secretary of  State.   It  was  said
    that the issues as to whether or not the gun was in  the  home  of  the
    family was not the central reason why the Appellant's account had  been
    rejected.  This had formed one of the minor findings made by the  judge
    and without it there  were  sufficient  findings  which  in  any  event
    undermined the Appellant's claim; see paragraphs 23, 24 and 26  of  the
    decision.  As such if it was found to be an error it was not  material.
    The judge was entitled to  consider  the  fact  that  the  family  were
    willing to use violence towards the Appellant's friend  as  undermining
    the account that she was able to enter the Appellant's family home  and
    liberate her from being held captive.

 4. The grounds of the Appellant returning as a single lady were predicated
    on the basis that the judge had accepted the Appellant's account in its
    entirety.  This was misconceived  as  the  judge  had  found  that  the
    Appellant's family was not seeking to harm her  as  claimed  given  the
    inconsistency in her account of returning to them among other  reasons.
    The grounds did not  establish  how  the  Appellant  in  light  of  the
    findings of fact would have an arguable private life claim.

 5. Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. Before me Mr Abbas relied on his grounds and said that  the  judge  had
    not properly considered the Article  8  claim.   The  Appellant  was  a
    single mother and separated.  The judgment was not safe and  it  should
    be set aside and remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  fresh
    hearing.  I was referred to the medical evidence at pages 45 to  46  of
    the medical bundle and the fact that the registered psychotherapist had
    formed a view that the Appellant was sexually assaulted on two separate
    occasions in Pakistan.  He had concluded that  if  returned  there  she
    would be an outcast and at risk of further attack by her  family.   The
    judge had misinterpreted the Appellant's evidence and the judgment,  as
    stated, was not safe.

 7. For the Home Office Mr Clarke said the grounds  were  very  narrow  and
    none of the reasoning of the judge or very little of it was  challenged
    in the grounds.  The point was that the  Appellant  was  not  estranged
    from her family and that was not challenged.  She would not be returned
    as  a  single  mother.   It  was  unclear   what   qualifications   the
    psychotherapist had and in any event, nothing turned on  his  findings.
    In terms of Article 8 the Appellant would need to  set  out  what  care
    facilities were needed in  Pakistan  for  the  Appellant  to  have  any
    benefit from arguing that her mental health was a serious issue in this
    appeal.  There was no error in law by the judge and the decision should
    stand.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. I have to agree with what is said  in  the  Rule  24  notice  that  the
    Appellant's grounds in this case are based  on  a  misconception.   The
    judge gave a number of reasons for finding that she was  not  estranged
    from her family (paragraph 28).  He went further than that noting  that
    given his findings there was no factual basis on which to find that she
    was at risk of persecution in her home area as  a  single  woman.   The
    judge said, "she has the support of her  family"  (paragraph  30).   As
    such he found that Article 8 was not engaged.

10. It is unclear from the  grant  of  permission  to  appeal  exactly  why
    permission has been  granted  in  this  case.   The  judge  made  clear
    findings, not challenged in the grounds, that it  "is  not  credible  a
    friend would be able to secure her escape from a  locked  room  in  the
    family home." (paragraph 24). There is no challenge to that finding and
    the judge gives reasons for it.  The fact is she would not be returning
    as a single mother because she would have the support of her family. As
    the Rule 24 notice says the grounds of application  are  predicated  on
    the facts as claimed by the Appellant but those facts were rejected  by
    the Judge for clear reasons.

11. As such the grounds are misconceived.

12. On the findings of the judge he was entitled to find that Article 8 was
    not engaged. Absent any evidence  about  care  facilities  in  Pakistan
    there is no medical health issue arising in this appeal. The  Appellant
    was not estranged from her family; on the contrary she would have their
    support.  Even if Article 8 had been engaged it  is  clear  that  there
    were no exceptional or compelling circumstances in  this  case  and  in
    terms of  carrying  out  the  balancing  exercise,  if  that  had  been
    necessary, the appeal  would  have  been  bound  to  fail  because  the
    interference with her private life and  family  life  would  have  been
    proportionate to the legitimate public end sought to be achieved namely
    the economic wellbeing of the country through immigration control.

13. In short, the judge gave cogent reasons why  he  did  not  believe  the
    Appellant.  He considered the presence of the pistol in the  house  and
    made findings on that.   Those  findings  were  findings  that  he  was
    entitled to make  based  on  the  evidence  before  him.   The  crucial
    finding, however, is that it was not plausible that a friend  would  be
    able to secure her escape from a locked room and absent  any  challenge
    to that finding this appeal had no realistic prospect of success.

14. As such there is no error of law in the  judge's  decision  which  must
    stand. I see no need for an anonymity order.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

No anonymity order is made.


Signed   JG Macdonald                            Dated   13th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

