

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07767/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                           |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 26 August 2020                              |                              |
|                                               |On 2 September 2020           |
|                                               |                              |
|                                               |                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON



                                   Between

                              G S A (Ethiopia)
                           [ANONYMITY ORDER MADE]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

                            DECISION AND REASONS
Anonymity order

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of G S A who is the  subject  of  these  proceedings  or
publish or reveal any information which would  be  likely  to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.

Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.

Decision and reasons

1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the  First-
   tier Tribunal to refuse him refugee status  under  the  1951  Convention,
   humanitarian protection, or leave to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  on
   human rights grounds.  The appellant is a citizen of Ethiopia.

2. The appellant does  not  speak  English:  he  gave  evidence  in  Amharic
   through an interpreter.

Background

3. The appellant came to the United Kingdom  clandestinely  on  in  November
   2017.  He says that  four  years  earlier,  he  helped  his  father  with
   leafleting for the oppositionist Patriotic Ginbot  Party  (PG7)  and  was
   detained and abused during interrogation.

4. The appellant did not leave Ethiopia immediately but  he  now  claims  to
   fear being imprisoned or killed by the Ethiopian  authorities  if  he  is
   returned.  In the United Kingdom, he has become a member of  PG7  and  he
   produced a rather sparse email from that organisation, which does no more
   than confirm his membership.

5. The claimant also relies  on  family  life  with  his  Ethiopian  citizen
   partner, whom he met and perhaps married in Ethiopia, before coming here.
    She has no status in the United Kingdom, but they have twin sons born in
   April 2019 while the parents were unlawfully resident.   The  appellant's
   partner did not attend the hearing but photographs of a woman he said was
   his partner were produced.

6. Neither the partner nor the  children  are  'qualifying'  as  defined  in
   section 117D of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as
   amended): all members of the family have only Ethiopian citizenship.

First-tier Tribunal decision

7.  The  First-tier  Judge  found  the  political  opinion  claim  to   lack
   credibility and that the appellant did not qualify for  leave  to  remain
   under paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended)  or
   outside the Rules.  He dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

8. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal.

Permission to appeal

9.  Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Bruce,
   principally because she  considered  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had
   arguably failed to consider the appellant's accepted  membership  of  the
   PG7 group in the United Kingdom as a risk factor on return  to  Ethiopia.
   Given the positive credibility finding the First-tier Judge had  made  on
   that single issue, the  credibility  of  any  past  persecution  was  not
   relevant to assessment of that particular risk.

10. The grant of permission was not limited and permission  was  granted  on
   all grounds.

Further directions

11. On 1 June 2020, the Tribunal sent out triage directions  made  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Bruce  in  the  light  of  the  COVID-19  pandemic.    The
   appellant was invited to make further submissions on  the  error  of  law
   issue, if so advised, with a right for the respondent to reply, if triage
   submissions were made, and a further right of  reply  for  the  appellant
   thereafter.

12. Both parties were  directed  to  say  whether  they  considered  that  a
   further hearing, oral or remote, was required.  In  default,  the  appeal
   would be considered on the papers and triage submissions, if any.

Appellant's triage submissions

13. Triage submissions were received from the appellant. He submitted  that,
   his membership of the United Kingdom branch of PG7 having been  accepted,
   that meant that  his  oppositionist  political  beliefs  should  also  be
   accepted.  He relied on the Upper Tribunal's country guidance in MB  (OLF
   and MTA  -  risk)  Ethiopia  CG  [2007]  UKAIT  00030  for  the  risk  to
   oppositionist groups in Ethiopia.   The appellant  acknowledged  that  MB
   (Ethiopia) was not a decision on PG7  specifically  but  argued  that  it
   applied to all oppositionist groups in Ethiopia and thus that there was a
   continuing risk to him as a United Kingdom member of PG7.

14. The appellant relied on pages [11]-[13] of  his  skeleton  argument  for
   the First-tier Tribunal to support  his  contention  that  there  was  no
   cogent evidence of durable change in Ethiopia in  the  last  4  years  to
   rebut the risk which the AIT found to exist in 2007.  The appellant could
   not be  expected  to  dissemble  about  his  political  opinion:  see  RT
   (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2012]  UKSC  38
   and HJ and HT (Iran) v Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2010]
   UKSC 31.

15. In relation to  Article  8  ECHR,  the  appellant  relied  on  the  same
   passages in his First-tier Tribunal skeleton argument and argued that his
   PG7 political opinion was a very significant obstacle to reintegration in
   Ethiopia.

16. Finally, the appellant asserted that  the  First-tier  Judge's  decision
   was inadequately reasoned and/or irrational, in its failure to assess the
   risk arising from his sur place activities for  the  PG7  in  the  United
   Kingdom.  The evidence produced included not just  the  email  confirming
   membership but also a copy of what was said to be his rail  ticket  to  a
   PG7 meeting held in the United Kingdom on 16  December  2017,  which  the
   First-tier Judge appeared to have overlooked in his decision.

17. The  appellant  did  not  ask  for  a  hearing  for  the  error  of  law
   consideration but if a material error of law were  found,  he  considered
   that a remaking decision would require a hearing and  that  the  positive
   finding about his membership of PG7  in  the  United  Kingdom  should  be
   preserved.

Respondent's triage submissions

18. The respondent on 23 June 2020 served  submissions  in  response,  which
   were erroneously described as an (out of time) Rule 24 reply to the grant
   of permission.  I have treated that document as her triage submissions.

19. The submission identifies  the  circularity  of  the  appellant's  three
   points, which really all turn on the acceptance of his membership of  PG7
   in the United Kingdom.   The First-tier Judge had  roundly  rejected  the
   assertion of previous activity in Ethiopia before he came to  the  United
   Kingdom.  The country guidance in MB (Ethiopia) was specific to  the  OLF
   and the MTA in 2007 and not cross-applicable to PG7 in 2020.

20. The respondent  relied  on  her  August  2019  CPIN  entitled  Ethiopia;
   Opposition to the Government and in  particular,  paragraph  8.1.7  which
   noted that in  June  2018  PG7  had  announced  a  unilateral  ceasefire,
   suspended all  armed  operations,  and  returned  to  Ethiopia  from  its
   expatriate  base  in  Eritrea,  to  continue  the  struggle  by  peaceful
   political means.

21. The OLF and PG7, also known as  Ginbot  7,  were  no  longer  proscribed
   organisations in Ethiopia and PG7 had  ceased  to  have  any  independent
   existence.  In 2018/2019, seven opposition parties,  including  PG7,  had
   dissolved and merged into a new political party, Ethiopian  Citizens  for
   Social Justice.  PG7  members  abroad  had  voted  with  their  feet  and
   returned to Ethiopia to pursue their aims through the democratic process.
    It had been open to the judge to find that there was no present risk  to
   members of the United Kingdom PG7 if they were returned to Ethiopia now.

22. The respondent's  triage  submissions  did  not  address  the  issue  of
   whether any hearing was required at the error of law stage.  She is taken
   therefore to concur with the indication in the triage direction that  the
   question of a material error of law would be resolved  on  the  documents
   and submissions before the Tribunal.

23. That is the basis on which this appeal came before the Upper Tribunal.

Analysis

24. I am satisfied that it is appropriate to decide whether  the  First-tier
   Tribunal decision contains a material error of law on the  basis  of  the
   decisions and submissions before me.

25. I remind myself that it is not necessary for a judge to set out  all  of
   the evidence before him and I note that the First-tier Judge set out  the
   correct standard and burden of proof at [6], and that at [7] he said that
   he  had  taken  account  of  all  relevant  evidence,  including  written
   statements, screening interview, the asylum  interview  record  and  oral
   evidence.

26. The appellant  relied  on  the  email  already  mentioned,  and  various
   untranslated documents from Ethiopia which the judge could not assess  as
   they were written in Amharic.  The judge was entitled  to  find  that  he
   could place no weight on the asserted contents of those documents.

27. The up to date country evidence before the First-tier Judge, as set  out
   above, was more than sufficient to be cogent evidence of a durable change
   of  circumstances  in  relation  to  oppositionists  in   Ethiopia,   and
   PG7/Ginbot 7 in particular.  The evidence now is that the party no longer
   exists, is not proscribed, and has ceased armed oppositionist activities,
   preferring to join with other parties to seek democratic  change  through
   the political process.  Even if the appellant is an active member of  PG7
   in the United Kingdom, which the judge did not find to be credible,  that
   was not sufficient  to  establish  a  risk  on  return,  on  the  present
   evidence.

28. There is no material error of law in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
   Judge, which is upheld.

DECISION

29. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:


   The making of the previous decision involved the making of no error on  a
   point of law
   I do not set aside the decision but order that it shall stand.




Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                           Date:      26 August
2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson



