
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07405/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|Oral determination given following hearing    |                              |
|On 16 January 2018                            |On 28 February 2018           |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

                                mohammed [a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr J Gajjar, Counsel instructed by A2 Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant claims to be a stateless Bidoon, whose date of  birth  in
    uncertain.  The man whom he claims to be his father was granted refugee
    status on the basis  that  he  was  an  undocumented  Bidoon  and  this
    appellant originally claimed that he was  entitled  to  family  reunion
    with his father.  That application was refused on 9 December 2012.   He
    applied again and his appeal against a subsequent refusal was dismissed
    in September 2014.  The First-tier Tribunal made a  number  of  adverse
    credibility findings in the course of that decision in particular  that
    the witnesses had attempted  to  mislead  the  Tribunal  regarding  the
    appellant's true age.  A finding of fact was made which was  maintained
    by the Upper Tribunal that the appellant was in fact an adult (that  is
    at least four years older than he claimed to be) and had been an  adult
    at all material times.  Subsequently the appellant (or  so  he  claims)
    left Jordan in July 2016,  eventually  arriving  in  the  UK  where  he
    claimed asylum as an undocumented stateless Bidoon.


 2. His current appeal was  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Fox
    sitting at Hatton Cross on 4 September  2017  but  in  a  decision  and
    reasons promulgated on 18 October 2017 Judge Fox dismissed the  appeal.




 3. It is not in dispute that if the appellant is  indeed  an  undocumented
    Bidoon as he claims he would be entitled to protection and  his  appeal
    in those circumstances should have been  allowed.   However  Judge  Fox
    decided for the reasons that he gave that  the  appellant  was  not  an
    undocumented stateless Bidoon.  Challenge  has  been  brought  to  that
    decision on a number of grounds of which two in particular  stand  out.
    The first is that the judge found at paragraph 65 that the DNA evidence
    presented in support of his appeal (which purported to show that he was
    the son of a man who had been given refugee status on the basis that he
    was an undocumented Bidoon) could not be relied upon.  It  is  accepted
    on behalf of the respondent that that finding is not  sustainable,  but
    Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted nonetheless  that  this  error  was  not
    material because the judge went on to state  that  "I  proceed  on  the
    basis of the evidence at its highest".


 4. On behalf of the appellant, Mr  Gajjar  refers  to  what  was  said  at
    paragraph 76 of the decision which he says shows  that  the  judge  did
    have this factor among others  in  mind  when  dismissing  the  appeal,
    because he states as follows:-


         "76. For  the  reasons  stated  above  the  appellant  relied  upon
             documents to support  an  entry  clearance  application.   The
             evidence relating to their existence  is  vague,  evasive  and
             inconsistent."


 5. The judge then went on to say that:-


         "The appellant cannot be relied upon to provide a reliable  account
         of his circumstances and his subjective claim  to  be  undocumented
         for the purpose of an asylum claim is self-serving and  of  limited
         probative value" (relying on the country guidance  decision  of  NM
         (documented/undocumented  Bidoon:  risk)  Kuwait  CG  [2013]   UKUT
         00356).


 6. The other ground which stands out is contained at paragraph  7  of  the
    grounds and relates to the judge's finding made at paragraph 61 of  his
    decision.  It is stated in the grounds as follows:-


         "7.  The judge misdirected himself at paragraph 61 when  he  stated
             that  the  Applicant  has  provided  new  evidence  about  his
             education and made adverse credibility [findings] as a result.
              It is contended as follows


             1)   During the Applicant's asylum interview,  the  Respondent
                  asked


                  Question - AIR question 13 - 'What school did you go'


                  Answer: 'I haven't, not been to school'.


             2)   During cross examination, the Applicant was asked


                  Question - 'Did you ever go to a Madrassa'


                  Answer: 'Yes, they teach us Quran just by hearing'


             3)   We state accordingly that there is  no  inconsistency  at
                  all in the Applicant's answers as he was  never  asked  at
                  his asylum interview if  he  ever  received  any  form  of
                  education in a school or Mosque.  He was asked the name of
                  the school he went to and he answered  correctly  that  he
                  never went to school.


             4)   It is contended  that  the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
                  finding on the alleged new evidence  is  wholly  misplaced
                  and unsustainable."


 7. On behalf of the respondent before me,  Ms  Brocklesby-Weller  did  not
    seek to justify this part  of  the  judge's  reasoning,  which  was  as
    follows:-


         "61. However this new evidence of limited education is inconsistent
             with the appellant's earlier claims that he had no  education;
             second statement paragraph 25.  When the available evidence is
             considered in the round it is reasonable that the appellant is
             selective in the information he is willing to disclose.   This
             does not assist his credibility."


 8. Having considered the evidence which had  been  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, Ms Brocklesby-Weller accepted that on this point at any  rate
    the matters set out by the judge did not in fact support his finding of
    inconsistency in the appellant's evidence.


 9. Although this decision might be finely balanced, it is  very  important
    when making adverse credibility findings to ensure that bad points  are
    not taken.  The judge clearly took account of factors which did not  in
    fact support the findings which he made, and I  cannot  find  that  the
    error that he made at paragraph 61 is not material.   It  follows  that
    the overall adverse credibility finding cannot stand.   I  do  have  in
    mind when reaching this decision also that the  judge  does  appear  to
    rely at least in part upon his finding with regard to the DNA  evidence
    which Ms Brocklesby-Weller also accepts is a  finding  that  cannot  be
    maintained on proper consideration of the evidence.


10. It follows that this decision will have to be set aside and re-made and
    in these circumstances it is appropriate to remit this appeal  back  to
    the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing in front of any judge other than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox and I will so order.


Decision

I set aside the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Fox  as  containing  a
material error of law and remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
sitting at Hatton Cross, to be heard by  any  judge  other  than  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Fox.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed:
                 [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Craig Dated: 25 February 2018

