
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07032/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 5th January 2021                       |On 18th January 2021            |
|                                          |                                |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY

                                   Between

                                     AG
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)


                                                                   Appellant
                                     and


               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bayati, of Counsel, instructed by Appleby Shaw
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan,  Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of Albania  born  in  February  1992.  He
       arrived in the UK illegally in May 2015. On 30th March 2017  he  was
       convicted of possession with intent to supply class A drugs and  was
       given a three year'  and  six  month  sentence  of  imprisonment.  A
       deportation order was  signed  against  him  as  a  result  of  this
       conviction, and in response he made an asylum and human rights claim
       to remain in the UK, which in turn was refused in  the  respondent's
       decision of 21st May 2018. His  appeal  against  that  decision  was
       dismissed on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Pooler  in  a
       determination promulgated on the 5th December 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted and I  found  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law, in a decision taken  on  the  papers,  in
       relation to the determination of the protection appeal, but not  the
       Article 8 ECHR appeal based on the appellant's relationship with his
       wife and British citizen son, for the reasons set out in my decision
       on error of law which is attached to this decision  as  Annex  A.  I
       confirmed with the parties that neither of them  had  objections  to
       the decision I took under Rule 34 finding an error of law  in  light
       of the decision in R (JCWI) v President of UTIAC  [2020]  EWHC  3103
       (Admin).  The matter comes before me now to remake the appeal.

    3. I specifically preserved the following  from  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal:

       . the concession from the appellant that an appeal was not pursued on
         asylum grounds at paragraph 4 of the decision

       . the assessment that the appellant's partner is a  credible  witness
         at paragraph 10 of the decision

       . the common ground summary of  the  appellant's  criminal  offending
         history at paragraph 12 of the decision

       . the findings with respect to the medical evidence at paragraphs  33
         to 38 of the decision, and the finding at  paragraph  49  that  the
         appellant's injuries make it likely  that  he  was  injured  in  an
         explosion in Tirana and possible that he received a gunshot injury.

       . the  findings  with  respect  to  the  Panorama  online  report  at
         paragraphs 40 to 42 of the decision

       . the findings with respect to  the  appellant's  partner's  evidence
         about the explosion which damaged the appellant's  car  in  October
         2016 and the attempted burglary at paragraphs  43  and  44  of  the
         decision

       . the s.8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
         etc.) Act 2004 findings at paragraph 48 of the decision

       . the finding that no weight could be placed on the letters from  the
         appellant's uncles at paragraph 50 of the decision.

    4. The rest of the findings in the credibility section were set  aside,
       particularly those at paragraphs 39, 46-47, 51, and those after  the
       third sentence at paragraph 49 of the decision.

    5. Ms Bayati confirmed to me that the protection appeal is argued  only
       on the basis that the  appellant's  removal  would  be  contrary  to
       Article 3 ECHR. It was accepted before me, for the  appellant,  that
       his appeal could not succeed on humanitarian protection grounds  for
       the same reason,  namely  the  criminal  conviction,  it  could  not
       succeed under the 1951 Geneva Convention. It was agreed that  whilst
       I had upheld the Article 8 ECHR findings of the First-tier  Tribunal
       different findings on the problems  the  appellant  had  in  Albania
       might potentially affect his ability to reintegrate in that  country
       and thus potentially amount to it being unduly harsh  for  his  wife
       and child to have family life  in  that  country,  and  that  recent
       developments in the UK with  respect  to  criminal  attacks  on  his
       wife's family might potentially mean it was unduly harsh for them to
       remain in the UK. These points potentially affecting the  Article  8
       ECHR appeal could therefore also be argued before me.

    6. The hearing was held at a remote Skype for Business hearing in light
       of the need to reduce the transmission of the Covid-19 virus, and in
       light of this being found to be  acceptable  by  both  parties,  and
       being a means by  which  the  appeal  could  be  fairly  and  justly
       determined. There were no significant problems  with  audibility  or
       connectivity, although it  was  necessary  for  us  to  wait  for  a
       participant or participants to reconnect to the hearing from time to
       time. I took care to recap where the hearing had got to prior to the
       inadvertent departure of a participant/participants, and  to  ensure
       that nothing had been missed by anyone. The  appellant  adduced  new
       evidence which I admitted as Mr Tan raised  no  objections,  despite
       some of it being produced only on the day of  the  hearing,  and  in
       light  of  the  fact  that  it  was  potentially  relevant  to   the
       determination of the appeal.

Evidence & Submissions - Remaking

    7. The appellant's partner, AB, gave evidence in English. She confirmed
       her identity and address, and that the contents  of  her  statements
       were true. In short summary her evidence, from  her  statements  and
       oral evidence is as follows. She is the fianc�e  of  the  appellant.
       She met him in 2014 in Kosovo, and travelled with him to Albania  in
       2015 but did not in any way know about or help arrange  his  illegal
       trip to the UK, although it was her wish that he come  to  join  her
       lawfully in the UK. They lived together after the appellant came  to
       the UK illegally in May 2015.  They have a  son  born  in  September
       2016 who is a British citizen.

    8. On 11th October 2016 her car exploded and  was  destroyed  near  her
       home. She reported the matter to the police the same day but at that
       time she did  not  know  why  it  had  happened  at  the  time.  She
       understood in a  very  general  way  that  the  appellant  had  some
       serious, potentially life threatening, problems relating to  a  debt
       in Albania from 2014 onwards but knew none of the  detail  of  those
       problems until he told her about these  in  full  in  December  2016
       (when he was in remanded in custody relating to the index  offence).
       She thought the appellant had not told her the full  details  before
       then as when he had  threatening  calls  in  the  UK  she  had  been
       pregnant or had a new born baby, and so he had not wanted to  stress
       her. When she  was  told  the  whole  story  in  December  2016  she
       understood that those who had destroyed the car and said  that  they
       would harm her and her son next were doing this as a result  of  the
       debt  her  partner  owed  to  gangsters  in  Albania.  This  is  why
       subsequent reports to the police about further  suspicious  activity
       which indicated people were trying to enter her flat include details
       of the appellant's problems in Albania as she was aware of  them  by
       that stage.

    9. AB maintained her relationship with the appellant  when  he  was  in
       prison through visits and phone  calls,  and  on  his  release  from
       prison in August 2018 the appellant came to live with  her  and  her
       family. This was as part of  an  extended  household  including  her
       parents and brother. The appellant and their son have a very  strong
       bond. The appellant cared for her son whilst she was studying for  a
       law degree, and at points of time when she has worked. She wants  to
       be allowed to remain in  her  country  of  nationality  and  not  in
       Albania which is a foreign country to her, and feels that it  is  in
       the best interests of her son to stay here with better education and
       career options in the future, and surrounded by his extended family.

   10. In February 2020 her brother, HB, was attacked by the  Selrack  gang
       on the Aldriche Way Estate and went to live with an uncle for safety
       reason; in March she took her brother back to get his belongings and
       there was an attempt to stab him and kidnap him by the same gang;  a
       few days later in March 2020 she was in her car with  the  appellant
       and her brother and they were shot on the Aldriche Way Estate. Three
       suspects were arrested in relation to these  attacks.  They  are  of
       Albanian origin. They are  people  who  she  grew  up  with  on  the
       Aldriche Way Estate and has known since childhood, and one  of  them
       had been in Albania recently when he  was  arrested.  They  are  now
       being charged with attempted murder, possession of firearms,  public
       disorder and endangerment. They are  remanded  in  custody  and  the
       trial will take  place  in  February  2021.  She  is  a  prosecution
       witness, as is her mother, but her brother, HB,  and  the  appellant
       are not, partly because they do not wish to be  seen  as  "snitches"
       but also because her brother is traumatised by the attacks  and  the
       appellant is not seen as  a necessary witness because  he  can  only
       say the same things that she can.

   11. These incidents have understandably made her very anxious. They have
       had to remove their son from his nursery on the Aldriche Estate; and
       they have been rehoused in London away from  the  area  because  the
       Metropolitan police believe they are in serious  danger  there.  She
       does not believe that her brother, HB, had any gang involvement:  he
       is training to be a plumber and  has  no  issues  with  anyone.  She
       speculates that the attacks  might  be  something  to  do  with  the
       appellant's problems in Albania. The appellant is not  mentioned  in
       the police letter, which was written to assist with their rehousing,
       because he is not a witness and  does  not  appear  on  the  tenancy
       agreement. The appellant is however living with her, her parents and
       their son at the new temporary address.

   12. AB also understands that the  appellant's  mother  and  sister  have
       recently come to the UK and claimed asylum in Scotland, but she does
       not think that they have had their full asylum interviews as yet.

   13. The appellant gave evidence through  the  Albanian  interpreter  and
       confirmed his identity and that his statements  were  true.  He  was
       able to remember  only  a  few  details  of  his  current  temporary
       address, but correctly identified whom he lived with  and  knew  the
       door number.

   14. The appellant's claim is in summary as follows. He says that  he  is
       at real risk of serious harm due to threat from a  serious  criminal
       gang led by two gangsters, NK and his right-hand man RZ, as a result
       of a debt of around 25,000 Euros which passed to him from his father
       on his father's death in 2007 in accordance with Albanian  tradition
       or Kanun. He accepts that he has no evidence about  the  debt  which
       was taken on for his father's cancer treatment, or  of  the  medical
       treatment his father received  in  Belgium  whilst  living  with  an
       uncle, but has never  been  asked  to  provide  this.  There  was  a
       notebook which had details of the sums owed which he  tried  to  get
       sent to him from Albania, but  he  failed  in  these  attempts.  His
       father did not die in 2012 as is recorded in the  probation  service
       interview in 2017, this must have been a misunderstanding.

   15. The appellant asserts that he  is  at  real  risk  of  serious  harm
       because of a history of violent attacks and threats both in  Albania
       and in the UK. The appellant claims the threats to kill  started  in
       2009, and that they started at this point as previously he  was  not
       an adult. In response he moved, within days, firstly to Italy  where
       he stayed for several months, then through  France  and  to  Belgium
       where he stayed for about 9 months  before  being  removed  back  to
       Albania by the Belgians in 2011, and going to live in Tirana. He had
       support from an uncle who had connections with the chief  of  police
       at that time, who found him employment. He says  that  there  was  a
       bomb explosion in his flat  in  Tirana  in  October  2011  which  he
       believes was planted by RZ (and which was reported in  the  Albanian
       newspaper,  Panorama),  and  that  the  gang  planted  drugs  in  an
       unsuccessful attempt to incriminate him. He claims he was then  shot
       in the leg whilst driving in Tirana by RZ in  November  2011.  After
       five months in an uncle's house (that  uncle's  wife  was  a  senior
       nurse) recovering from the  shooting  he  then  flew,  in  2012,  to
       Amsterdam, but was denied entry but negotiated  removal  to  Kosovo,
       rather than Albania, where he stayed from 2012 to 2015.

   16. The appellant then travelled to the UK illegally with the assistance
       of his uncle in  2015  by  first  returning  to  Albania  to  get  a
       passport, and then travelling to the UK via France and Italy. He has
       cohabited with his partner  ever  since  bar  time  in  prison.  His
       partner's car was damaged in an explosion in the UK in October  2016
       in an attack he maintains was carried out  by  an  associate  of  NK
       after he had been told he needed to pay off his debt to the gangster
       in a phone call. This UK attack was, the appellant claims,  followed
       by a threat of serious harm to his wife and  child  if  he  did  not
       carry a package on behalf of the gangster. As a result he agreed  to
       do this, and this, in turn, led to his criminal conviction.

   17. The appellant explained that his partner knew in  some  general  way
       that he had problems and had to leave Albania, but  not  the  detail
       until the first or second visit to him in prison after his arrest on
       drugs charges in 2016. He did not tell her the details  because  she
       is female, and grew up in a European  country  and  would  not  have
       understood that he could not simply leave Albania using  legal  visa
       processes. He did not tell her about the threats prior  to  her  car
       being blown up because they had a new-born baby and he did not  want
       to put her under stress. He could not  move  his  family  away  from
       their address as he had no right to work. He believes  that  he  had
       two or three phone calls prior to the car being  blow  up  in  2016,
       although  he  had  said  numerous  in  a  statement  submitted  with
       representations against the signing of  the  deportation  order  and
       just one call in his asylum  interview.  His  asylum  interview  was
       conducted without an interpreter in prison, and he  thought  he  had
       misunderstood that the question was how many calls on the day before
       the explosion. He had been asked by his solicitors if the  interview
       was correct and he believed that it was. He was certain that it  was
       the gang members who blew up the car as a few  hours  later  he  got
       their package (of drugs) and decided that he  had  to  follow  their
       instructions to deliver it.   He  was  not  present  when  his  wife
       reported the explosion of the car to the police in October 2016, and
       she was unaware of the threats connecting this with his debt at that
       time so would not have mentioned them in her report.

   18. The appellant regrets the decision to commit this crime due to these
       threats, and particularly because it separated him from his  partner
       and son with whom he has a very close relationship for the period of
       his imprisonment.

   19. The appellant believes that he remains at risk of  serious  harm  in
       Albania, and that the recent attacks on his  wife's  family  may  be
       connected to his problems as one of the  men  accused  had  recently
       been in Albania. He does not know the Selrack gang on  the  Aldriche
       estate beyond recognising them by sight and saying hello, and has no
       reason to believe that they are  connected  to  the  gang  which  is
       threatening him regarding the debt bar the fact that one of them had
       recently been in Albania and the fact that his partner's brother had
       previously  had  no  problems  so  there  appears  to  be  no  other
       explanation. He is willing to be a witness if the police  need  him,
       and has informed them of this fact, but he would prefer  not  to  be
       one because as a man as he does not want to be seen  as  a  "snitch"
       and in any case he cannot say anything as a witness  more  than  his
       partner. The police have confirmed that they do not need  him  as  a
       witness at present.

   20. The appellant believes that the Albanian police will not protect him
       and cannot do so, as they are corrupt and inefficient, and incapable
       of doing so as the gang had  connections  with  the  government  and
       police in Albania. As the gang has found him  and  made  threats  to
       kill in London, and destroyed his partner's car, he does not believe
       he could find safety by internal relocation in Albania  either.   He
       has an on-going very close relationship with his son, and wants  him
       to grow up in the country of his nationality, with all the  benefits
       that will bring, and believes that it would be unduly harsh for  him
       to have to move to Albania or for  his  son  to  remain  in  the  UK
       without him.

   21. Mr  Tan  argues  for  the  respondent  that  the  appeal  should  be
       dismissed. Reliance was placed on the relevant parts of the  reasons
       for refusal letter dated 21st May 2018 and oral submissions.  It  is
       argued that the appellant's removal is not prohibited by  Article  3
       of the European Convention on Human Rights.

   22. It is argued that the appellant's protection claim is  not  credible
       because he  was  not  consistent  as  to  the  amount  owed  to  the
       gangsters, whether it was 20,000 Euros or 25,000 Euros,  or  whether
       his mother knew of the debt. It is also not considered credible that
       the money was owing as the history provided by the appellant is that
       the gangster, NK, did not try to get the money back from him for two
       years, between 2007 (when his father died)  and  2009  when  he  was
       living in the same area of Tropoje. Further there is no evidence  of
       any threats/attacks  on  his  mother  or  other  adult  male  family
       members, which would be expected if this is a family debt, either in
       this earlier period or whilst the appellant was abroad  for  various
       period of time from 2011 to now. There  was  also  an  inconsistency
       about the date of his father's death  in  the  probation  report  of
       2017, which records it as 2012.

   23. It is also said to be inconsistent with his  being  afraid  for  his
       life that the appellant returned and worked in Tirana in 2011, after
       he was deported from Belgium, if he was receiving threats  from  NK.
       It is argued to be speculative that the explosion  at  his  home  in
       2011 was caused by the gangsters. It is argued not  to  be  credible
       that the appellant would have gone back to Tirana to get a  passport
       in 2015 given the threats to kill  him  in  that  city.  It  is  not
       considered consistent that the gangsters would allow  the  appellant
       to pay off his debt in the  UK  by  couriering  drugs  for  them  if
       previously, in 2009 and 2011, they had threatened and  attempted  to
       kill him. It is also argued that it is not believable  that  he  was
       coerced into couriering drugs by the gangsters because  he  did  not
       tell the police this at the earliest  possible  opportunity  or  run
       duress as a defence.

   24. It is argued that the appellant  has  been  inconsistent  about  the
       number of calls he received from the gang prior to  the  destruction
       of his  partner's  car  in  2016:  it  was  numerous  in  his  first
       statement; one in his asylum interview and two  or  three  today  in
       oral evidence,  and  there  had  been  no  attempt  to  rectify  the
       erroneous statement in the asylum interview. It is argued that it is
       not credible that the appellant did not tell his partner  about  his
       detailed history of problems until he was in prison at  the  end  of
       2016; and thus that the information was not included about the  gang
       in her first police report about her car being blow up in 2016.  The
       connection with the recent problems  for  his  partner's  family  is
       accepted for the appellant as being speculative,  and  there  is  no
       explanation as to why his partner's brother would be the main target
       of this violence if the cause was  the  appellant's  debt.  We  know
       nothing about the reasons behind the appellant's mother  and  sister
       coming to the UK and making an asylum claim, so this adds nothing to
       the appellant's claim.

   25. It is argued that in any case there is sufficiency of protection  in
       Albania because the appellant's own case is that the  main  gangster
       who poses a threat to him, RZ, is now in prison and NK is  dead.  It
       was not considered correct that if the appellant told the police  of
       his problems with the gangsters that this would  bring  problems  to
       him and his family, or  reasonable  that  he  decided  not  to  seek
       protection from the authorities as  he  did  not  believe  it  would
       assist in any way. It is considered  that  there  is  a  functioning
       police force in Albania, although country of  origin  sources  cited
       indicate  that  there  are  serious  problems  with  inadequacy  and
       corruption in policing in Albania, there  are  mechanisms  by  which
       problems  can  be  addressed  or  complained  about.  It  should  be
       concluded that the appellant had failed to take reasonable steps  to
       prevent his persecution by using the Albanian legal system.

   26. It is also argued that the appellant could have relocated internally
       within Albania away from NK and his associates as his problems  were
       in Tirana he could have gone to the town  of  Vlore,  for  instance,
       which is some 153km south of Tirana. It is argued that the appellant
       could live there and would be unknown to anyone, and  has  shown  an
       ability to obtain employment given his  track  record  of  obtaining
       jobs.

   27. The expert report of Dr James Korovilas is argued to be one on which
       only little weight can be placed.  This is because  he  starts  from
       the proposition that there is truly a family debt when there are  in
       fact many  reasons  to  disbelieve  this  is  correct.  Further  the
       gangster NK is now dead and RZ is serving a  long  prison  sentence,
       and there is no hard evidence that the gang remains operative. It is
       speculative  that  this  criminal  network  remains.  Further   when
       considering sufficiency of protection and internal flight there is a
       failure to consider that the appellant has an uncle who used to work
       for the police.

   28. As there is no real risk of serious harm engaging  Article  3  ECHR,
       the Article 8 ECHR conclusions of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal
       Pooler should stand. There is no supporting evidence beyond that  of
       the two witnesses regarding the impact on the family of the  current
       criminal proceedings which could  lead  to  a  conclusion  that  the
       appellant's deportation was now unduly harsh particularly as AB  and
       her child could remain in the UK, and as they continue to live  with
       the appellant's partner's parents they  could  assist  AB  with  the
       child.  The appeal should be dismissed.

   29. Ms Bayati relied upon her skeleton argument and  made  further  oral
       submissions. In summary she says the  following  on  behalf  of  the
       appellant.   Firstly,  it  is  argued,  that  there  is  substantial
       evidence accepted and preserved from the  First-tier  Tribunal  that
       the appellant and his partner has been the subject of the  contended
       attacks, and of the  appellant  having  scars  consistent  with  the
       attacks and some symptoms of PTSD.

   30. The complete evidence now also includes the court documents relating
       to the explosion at the appellant's flat in Tirana in  October  2011
       which confirm that drugs were found but the appellant was cleared of
       charges relating to these. The evidence of the expert, Dr  Korovilas
       and Wikipedia  confirms  the  existence  of  NK  and  his  gang.  Dr
       Korovilas'  opinion  is  that  the  claim  the  appellant  makes  is
       plausible: the Kanun could make the debt  one  which  the  appellant
       would inherit from his father and he could be violently targeted and
       exploited by the gang who had loaned his father money in Albania and
       the UK. It is plausible that the gang continues to  exist  after  NK
       died and RZ was  imprisoned  because  it  was  "too  large  and  too
       integrated into the Albanian establishment for it to just  disappear
       upon the death of a significant member". There is  evidence  in  the
       statement of the appellant's criminal solicitor advocate,  the  pre-
       sentence report and the OASYS report that the appellant did raise  a
       defence of duress initially, but it is clear that he was advised  by
       his criminal lawyers that he had insufficient evidence for it to  be
       likely to succeed and so eventually decided that the  risk  of  this
       failing was too great given the lesser sentence he would receive  if
       he entered a guilty plea.

   31. The fact that there is no evidence of the debt  or  the  appellant's
       father's medical treatment is of no significance  as  such  evidence
       has never been an issue in the case, and there would not  likely  be
       such evidence after such a long period of time. With respect to  the
       discrepancies about the number of calls prior to the destruction  of
       his partner's car the asylum interview was conducted in English  and
       it could have been a misunderstanding as claimed by  the  appellant.
       The expert report of Dr Korovilas should be given weight as  it  was
       clear that the oldest male child would be the responsible person for
       such a debt, and the expert has properly concluded that the claim is
       plausible with reference to significant country of origin  materials
       without going into matters of credibility which are the  prerogative
       of the Tribunal. It made sense that the appellant was not approached
       until he was an adult, and thus in 2009. The appellant's  claim  was
       not incredible because of his return to Tirana, as at that point  he
       had the help of his uncle in the police.  The expert  was  aware  of
       the appellant having this uncle and clearly considered  all  of  the
       evidence when writing his report as this is summarised at the  start
       of the report.  It  was  also  psychologically  plausible  that  the
       appellant would not have told his partner, AB, who had a very  young
       baby, about the threats in the autumn of 2016, and that historically
       he had not wanted to burden her with the details  of  his  problems,
       and that he would have felt himself compelled  to  comply  with  the
       gangs demands to transport the drugs to attempt to  rid  himself  of
       the problem of the debt. The police reports are consistent with  the
       history of AB not knowing the details of  the  appellant's  troubles
       with the gang until after the appellant's  remand  in  custody.  The
       documents also support  his  contention  that  he  initially  raised
       duress by the gang in relation to his criminal offence.

   32. Ms Bayati accepts that there is currently only speculation that  the
       2020 incidents targeting primarily the appellant's partner's brother
       are linked to the appellant's problems with the debt in Albania, and
       we know nothing of the detail of the claims made by the  appellant's
       sister and mother in Scotland.

   33. Ms Bayati argues that there  is  no  sufficiency  of  protection  in
       Albania, or internal flight alternative for  the  appellant  because
       the gang he fears is linked with the Albanian establishment, and  in
       light of the level of corruption in the Albanian  police  and  their
       lack of willingness to  take  on  powerful  and  dangerous  criminal
       gangs. The appellant's uncle is no longer with  the  police  and  so
       cannot use his position  to  assist  him.  The  appellant  would  be
       required to register if he returned to Albania for  work  and  other
       reasons, and so would not be able to live  without  his  whereabouts
       becoming known.

   34. It is argued for the appellant that whilst the First-tier Tribunal's
       decision on the Article 8 ECHR appeal was found not to err in law if
       this Tribunal were to find that there was some risk of serious harm,
       even if this was not a real  risk,  and  that  the  appellant  faced
       threats in Albania it ought to be found  that  it  would  be  unduly
       harsh for the appellant's  partner  and  British  citizen  child  to
       accompany him to Albania,  particularly  given  the  harsh  economic
       circumstances in Albania and the fact that  the  appellant's  family
       (mother and sister) are no longer in that  country  to  assist  them
       settle there. It is also argued that it would be  unduly  harsh  for
       the appellant's partner and child to remain in the  UK  without  him
       particularly in light of the recent traumatic threats made  to  them
       in the UK and her role as a key prosecution witness in an  attempted
       murder trial. Further even if it were not found to be  unduly  harsh
       it is argued that there are very compelling circumstances  over  and
       above the exceptions given  the  low  risk  of  recidivism  and  the
       background of duress which led to the crime being committed, and all
       of the other circumstances of this case.

   Conclusions - Remaking

   35. This remaking is primarily an article 3  ECHR  human  rights  appeal
       against the deportation of the appellant under  s.32(5)  of  the  UK
       Borders Act 2007. I have  preserved  from  the  First-tier  Tribunal
       decision that the refugee appeal is conceded by the  appellant,  and
       today Ms Bayati, for the appellant, has  agreed  that  he  does  not
       pursue  the  humanitarian  protection  appeal.  The  appellant   was
       convicted of possession of cocaine with intent  to  supply  and  was
       sentenced to three years and six months imprisonment on  30th  March
       2017. He was previously of good character and pleaded guilty to  the
       offence after the pre-trial hearing.

   36. In determining the Article 3 ECHR appeal I put no weight at  all  on
       the 2020 events  which  have  led  to  the  attempted  murder  trial
       relating to the Aldriche Way Estate gang in  which  the  appellant's
       partner, AB, is a  prosecution  witness  as  the  appellant,  whilst
       rightly providing this information for  completeness,  accepts  that
       any connection to his problems is speculative. Likewise, I place  no
       weight on the fact that  the  appellant's  mother  and  sister  have
       apparently recently claimed asylum in Scotland, as no details of the
       basis of their claims have been provided.

   37. I will firstly decide whether  the  appellant  presents  a  credible
       claim to have experienced the history of attacks on himself and  his
       partner that he has claimed, and secondly examine if  these  attacks
       are for the reasons he has claimed. In this process no weight is  to
       be given to the letters from the appellant's uncles, as  this  is  a
       finding I have preserved from the First-tier Tribunal. I  have  also
       preserved that the following matters arising  under  s.8  8  of  the
       Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc.)  Act  2004
       negatively affect his credibility: that he failed to claim asylum in
       Italy, France and Belgium and failed to claim asylum until two years
       after his arrival in  the  UK,  and  thus  after  his  imprisonment,
       despite the fact that this was suggested  by  his  partner  who  had
       experience working in a law firm and a law  degree.  This  does  not
       mean, however, that when everything is considered in  the  round  he
       may not be found to be a credible witness in whole or in part.

   38. As noted in the introduction I have preserved  from  the  First-tier
       Tribunal the fact that the appellant's partner, AB, is found to be a
       generally credible witness and medical evidence from  her  GP  shows
       that she suffers from depression and anxiety. It  is  also  accepted
       that the appellant has suffered from a severe depressive episode and
       anxiety, and has trauma  related  symptoms,  based  on  the  medical
       report of Dr Sinha,  who  also  recorded  scars  which  were  highly
       consistent with him being struck by shrapnel in October 2011  and  a
       scar consistent with being caused by a  gunshot  wound  in  November
       2011. The  Panorama  Online  article  dated  22nd  October  2011  is
       consistent with the history of an explosion at the appellant's  flat
       in October 2011 and mentions a link to a drugs gang dispute but does
       not mention NK by name. It is accepted as likely that the  appellant
       was injured in 2011 in an explosion in Tirana, and possible that  he
       received a gunshot wound in 2011 too It is accepted that appellant's
       car was damaged in the UK in an explosion in October 2016 because of
       the credibility of AB's evidence on this matter.

   39. I find there is the following  additional  material  evidence  which
       supports the contention that  the  appellant  has  been  exposed  to
       Albanian gang threats/intimidation in the UK:

          . The witness statement of his partner (who  is  found  to  be  a
            credible witness) at D10 of the  respondent's  bundle  includes
            information about the police installing a panic button  and  an
            intruder alarm in their home due to intimidation, this is  also
            repeated at H 20 in the appellant's Pre-sentence Report and  at
            H10 in the OASys Report, and at pages 191  -199  in  the  crime
            reports to the police made by the appellant's partner about her
            windscreen being smashed and tampering with her door  in  March
            2017. Although it is also the  case  that  the  initial  report
            regarding that the appellant's  partner  makes  to  the  police
            regarding her car exploding in October 2016 does not  attribute
            this to Albanian gangs trying to attack her partner

          . From the Sentencing Remarks at B2-3 of the respondent's bundle,
            the pre-sentence report at H20 of the respondent's  bundle  and
            from the statement of Mr R Shah, his solicitor advocate in  his
            criminal proceedings it is clear that  at  the  outset  of  the
            criminal proceedings that the appellant had intended to  run  a
            defence of duress which was subsequently abandoned, as  he  was
            advised he did not have sufficient evidence to support it. This
            defence  related  to  the  appellant's  claim   that   he   was
            pressurised into acting as  a  drugs  courier  to  pay  of  his
            father's debt by Albanian organised criminals. At  H21  of  the
            respondent's bundle, in the risk assessment section of the pre-
            sentence report, it is concluded that although the current risk
            of serious harm is low: "there appears to be  ongoing  risk  of
            harm to him and his family from criminal associates." The OASys
            Report at H10 of the  respondent's  bundle  also  includes  the
            conclusion  under  analysis  of  offences  that  his   criminal
            behaviour was either "for financial gain or as he claims  under
            duress to repay his father's debts",  and  if  his  version  is
            correct concludes: "he and his partner and son are at risk"

   40. Mr Tan has questioned whether if the cause of the  incidents  was  a
       dangerous criminal gang the appellant would have returned to  Tirana
       after his expulsion from Belgium in 2011, having left that city  due
       to threats of death if the debt were not paid back, and  whether  he
       would have gone back to Tirana from Kosovo to get a passport in 2015
       before travelling to the UK. The appellant says that he only went to
       Tirana in 2011 after his uncle, with connections with the police had
       found him work with him as a driver and accommodation. I  find  that
       this is a  satisfactory  explanation:  at  this  stage  nothing  had
       happened beyond threats and it is reasonable  to  think  working  so
       close with his uncle he would be safe, and that this  was  the  best
       option after attempts to settle abroad had  failed.   The  appellant
       says he returned to Tirana for a few days 2015 because he needed  to
       do this to obtain a passport and was only there for a short time.  I
       find that this is not inconsistent with the appellant's  history  to
       be at risk from the gang.

   41. Mr Tan has argued that it is not credible that the  appellant  would
       not tell his partner the  full  detailed  history  about  his  past,
       particularly at the point when threats were made in London prior  to
       exploding her car in October 2016. I accept however  the  consistent
       evidence of the appellant and his partner that she had not been told
       the full detailed story of the appellant's problems with the gang in
       Albania or about a threatening phone call that proceeded the  attack
       until  December  2016  when  he  was  remanded  having  been  caught
       transporting drugs. The failure to provide his partner with the full
       history until he was in prison is consistent  with  the  appellant's
       rather  chauvinistic view of  the  world  in  which  women  are  not
       generally, and until absolutely necessary, told about male conflicts
       and troubles which are to be resolved by them and amongst them,  and
       with his partner's evidence that she is a private person  who  would
       not have expected or perhaps even wanted a full explanation  of  his
       past troubles.

   42. On the basis of this evidence I find to the lower civil standard  of
       proof that the events took place: the appellant was attacked in  the
       way in claims in 2011 and his partner was subjected to  the  violent
       and intimidating attacks in 2016.

   43. Mr Tan has argued that  the  appellant  has  not  shown  that  these
       attacks were by the criminal gang headed up by NK and RZ. I have  no
       trouble finding that this group exists. I find  that  the  Wikipedia
       gangster article about NK is sourced and thus is supportive evidence
       for this fact, and the expert, Dr Korovilas, confirms that they  are
       a  powerful  and  prolific  well-connected  criminal  network  which
       operates both in UK and Albania. Whilst Mr Tan  suggested  I  should
       not  give  weight  to  the  report  as  ultimately  supporting   the
       appellant's claim to be at risk he did not suggest that Dr Korovilas
       was not a suitable expert on Albania, nor did he  suggest  that  the
       report was not written to proper standards. I find  that  he  is  an
       appropriate expert on Albania country conditions and that the report
       contains a statement of truth that Dr Korovilas understands his duty
       to the court and that his opinion is objective and unbiased. I  also
       accept that the appellant's partner is giving truthful evidence that
       she believes that the incidents with her car and the tampering  with
       her door were related to the gang, and note  that  the  police  were
       sufficiently concerned to take measures to assist her on this basis.
       Of course, her information comes only from the appellant.

   44. Mr Tan argues that there is insufficient evidence that the appellant
       owes money through an inherited debt from his father to the criminal
       gang: he points to the fact that there is no evidence of the medical
       treatment his father was said to have received using the money; that
       there was some variation  in  the  exact  amount  owed  and  in  one
       probation report the  date  of  death  for  the  appellant's  father
       appears as 2012;  he notes that  there  is  no  claim  other  family
       members were threatened for the money even when the appellant  spent
       periods of years abroad; and that there was a  delay  in  commencing
       the threats to the appellant between the supposed date of  death  of
       the appellant's father in 2007 and 2009; he suggests also  that  the
       modus operandi of the gang is inconsistent,  sometimes  wanting  the
       appellant simply dead for failing to pay and sometimes  wanting  him
       to work for them to pay it off.

   45. I note that Dr  Korovilas  finds  it  entirely  plausible  that  the
       appellant could have preyed upon by this criminal gang  for  a  debt
       owed by his father prior to his death,  and  that  particularly,  at
       paragraph 21 of his report (page 142 of the bundle) that a debt owed
       by a father would be seen as that owed by his son once he became  an
       adult. I therefore do not find it implausible  that  the  gang  have
       gone after the appellant rather than other family members,  or  that
       they waited until 2009 to do so. I do not find that the inconsistent
       date of death in the probation document is  anything  more  than  an
       error of understanding by the writer due to the consistency in  this
       date in all of the other accounts. I find that a criminal gang might
       veer opportunistically between dangerous acts intended to intimidate
       a person into paying up  somehow,  but  which  are  reckless  as  to
       whether the death of that individual  results  but  would  no  doubt
       reinforce their ruthlessness and the need for compliance with  their
       demands to others, and forcing a person into  working  for  them  in
       drug smuggling and thus obtained a benefit from their  indebtedness:
       there is nothing implausible about this. I accept that the appellant
       might not have known the precise amount his father borrowed for  his
       treatment (and in  response  to  question  39  in  his  full  asylum
       interview he is careful to say the amount is  "about  25,000  Euros)
       and note that he was only 13  or  14  years  old  at  the  time  the
       transaction is said to have taken place. I find  it  plausible  that
       the appellant had not understood a medical receipt from Belgium  for
       treatment 15 years  ago  might  be  helpful  to  verify  his  claim,
       particularly as he never visited his father in Belgium when  he  was
       being treated and given he died in that country, with his body being
       returned to Albania for burial, so would not have known the name  of
       the hospital (as indeed he confirmed in his  asylum  interview)  and
       other details. From a legal perspective evidence of the existence of
       the treatment would not of course prove the existence of the debt. I
       have considered the  description  of  the  appellant's  father  ill-
       health,  treatment  and  death  given  at  interview  and  find   it
       commensurate  with  what  it  might  be  expected  a  child  of  the
       appellant's age would have known.

   46. I now consider the general credibility of the appellant: I  consider
       the s.8 matters which negatively affect  this  credibility  and  his
       criminal conviction for class A drugs which means that he is  not  a
       person of  good  character.  The  appellant,  perhaps  for  cultural
       reasons, has also given evidence which reflects his having a  rather
       low  regard  for  the  law  as  an  effective  process  of   dispute
       resolution, seemingly  regarding  it  as  a  western  European  and,
       curiously, a female preserve, which he would rather not engage  with
       unless absolutely necessary: preferring not to claim asylum until it
       was the only option; preferring to commit a crime for the gang  that
       threatened him rather than put the matter of seeking protection from
       the threats into the hands of the British police; and preferring not
       to be a witness when his partner's brother  was  the  victim  of  an
       attempted murder, in part at least,   as  he  might  be  seen  as  a
       "snitch" even though the  accused  are  not  his  personal  friends.
       Ultimately, I am however satisfied to the lower  civil  standard  of
       proof that what I have been told is true as it  is  consistent  with
       the country  of  origin  evidence,  with  his  specific  documentary
       evidence and with the credible evidence of  his  partner  AB.  Thus,
       when I consider everything in the round, I find that I am  satisfied
       to the lower civil standard of proof  that  the  appellant's  father
       died as claimed having borrowed money for his cancer treatment  from
       the criminal gang. I also accept that the appellant has  shown  that
       as a result of this debt the appellant and his partner were targeted
       by this gang in the ways that he has described.

   47. Mr Tan argues that even if the events took place that the  appellant
       could return to Albania as the appellant has failed to show that the
       gang remains  an  active  entity  following  the  death  of  NK  and
       imprisonment of RZ; and further there is sufficiency  of  protection
       and the possibly of finding safety by internal relocation.

   48. I am satisfied to the lower civil standard of proof  that  the  gang
       continues to be able to pose a real risk  of  serious  harm  to  the
       appellant. As the expert, Dr Korovilas, has pointed out  documentary
       evidence of gangs is hard to come by, but his anecdotal  information
       based on his being a senior lecturer at UWE Bristol, who since  1996
       has specialised in studying Albania and Kosovo, and who was last  in
       Albania on a research trip in March 2020, is that the gang continues
       despite the death of NK and imprisonment  of  RZ.  In  addition,  Dr
       Korovilas' view is that "the gang to which  they  belonged  was  too
       large and too integrated into the Albanian establishment for  it  to
       just disappear upon the death of one significant member."  There  is
       no country of origin information which suggests  that  this  is  not
       true.

   49. I find that given that I have accepted that the criminal  gang  have
       targeted  the  appellant  in  the  UK  in  2016  that  there  is  no
       possibility of internal relocation to  a  place  of  greater  safety
       within Albania. My  conclusions  are  informed  by  material  in  Dr
       Korovilas' report at paragraph 38 to 46. Factors in my reaching this
       conclusion are: that Albania is a small country; the  appellant  has
       been threatened in his home area of Tropoje in northern Albania  and
       attacked in the capital Tirana; the gang who poses  the  threat  has
       significant connections with the Albanian establishment giving  them
       countrywide reach; there are cultural issues  making  identification
       of family and area  of  origin  necessary  for  obtaining  work  and
       accommodation; and there is a formal legal requirement  to  register
       at any new address which is needed to  obtain  state  services,  and
       there is access to this registration data by criminals  should  they
       so wish due to problems of corruption.

   50. This leaves the issue of sufficiency of protection.  Sufficiency  of
       state protection means a willingness and ability on the part of  the
       receiving state to provide through its  legal  system  a  reasonable
       level of protection from ill-treatment.  The  effectiveness  of  the
       system provided is to be judged normally by its systemic ability  to
       deter and/or to prevent the form of persecution of which there is  a
       risk, not just punishment of it  after  the  event.  Notwithstanding
       systemic sufficiency of state protection in the receiving  state,  a
       claimant may still have a well-founded fear of  persecution  if  she
       can show that its authorities know or ought to know of circumstances
       particular to her case giving rise to her fear, but are unlikely  to
       provide  the  additional  protection  her  particular  circumstances
       reasonably require.

   51. I have regard for the fact that the gang which the  appellant  fears
       is one with extensive contacts with  the  establishment,  NK  had  a
       friendship with former leader of the Albanian Socialist party  Fatos
       Nano formed in  prison,  and  kept  this  friendship  and  "business
       connections" until he died  (  as  set  out  in  the  report  of  Dr
       Korovilas at page 144 of the bundle). The Socialist Party remains in
       government in Albania. Dr Korovilas also cites, at paragraphs 32 -33
       of his report,  the latest  US  State  Department  Report  on  human
       rights in Albania as supportive of the position  that  the  Albanian
       police are unwilling to take action or  provide  protection  against
       threats made by powerful and dangerous criminal gangs and are poorly
       trained, unprofessional and corrupt. In the view of Dr Korovilas the
       ombudsman complaints system, which can  be  of  assistance  in  some
       contexts, cannot be seen as providing sufficiency of  protection  as
       it would not provide a remedy at a point in time when the  appellant
       was in imminent risk of being attacked or was being intimidated by a
       criminal gang. It is notable also that, as cited  in the reasons for
       refusal letter, the  European  Commission  2016  report  on  Albania
       records that with respect to organized crime  that  the  police  and
       prosecution  failed  to  identify   criminal   gangs   behind   drug
       cultivation and trafficking, and there is seldom efficient  judicial
       follow up in criminal  proceedings.  Mr  Tan  has  argued  that  the
       appellant can turn to his uncle for protection as he has connections
       with the police. The appellant says that his uncle no  longer  holds
       this position and can no longer help, but whether  or  not  he  does
       history shows that his uncle's position, whilst useful in  obtaining
       a passport in 2015, was not sufficient to protect the  appellant  in
       2011 from attacks, and I do not find it would be now.  With  respect
       to the particular risks faced by this  appellant  I  find  that  the
       appellant will not have the sufficiency of protection he  reasonably
       requires in the context of the difficulties endemic in the  Albanian
       police and the potency of the threat he faces  from  the  particular
       gang.

   52. As such I conclude that the appellant is entitled to succeed in  his
       appeal against deportation as his removal to Albania would place him
       at real risk of serious harm contrary to Article 3  ECHR.  In  these
       circumstances I do not need to consider separately the appeal  under
       Article 8 ECHR, although it is clearly implicit  in  my  conclusions
       that it would be contrary to Article 8 ECHR for him and  his  family
       to return to Albania.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      deportation appeal of the claimant on human rights grounds.

   3. I remake the appeal by allowing the appeal on  Article  3  ECHR  human
      rights grounds.





Signed    Fiona Lindsley                            8th January 2021
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley



Annex A: Error of Law Decision


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction



    1. The appellant is a citizen of  Albania  born  in  February  1992.  He
       arrived in the UK illegally in May 2015. On 30th March  2017  he  was
       convicted of possession with intent to supply class A drugs and given
       a three year' and six month sentence of imprisonment.  A  deportation
       order was signed against him as a result of this  conviction  and  he
       made an asylum and human rights  claim,  which  was  refused  in  the
       respondent's decision of 21st  May  2018.  His  appeal  against  that
       decision was dismissed on all grounds by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
       Pooler in a determination promulgated on the 5th December 2019.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum on 17th
       February 2020 on the basis that it is arguable  that  the  First-tier
       Tribunal erred in  law  when  considering  the  protection  claim  by
       mistakenly disregarding the arguably sourced Wikipedia  evidence;  by
       failing to consider the full evidence of the appellant's partner  who
       was found to be a credible witness; and by arguably  overlooking  the
       reference to threats to the appellant in the pre-sentence report  and
       in requiring corroborative evidence  from  the  police.  The  grounds
       relating to Article 8 ECHR are found not to be arguable, although the
       outcome of the appeal on this basis will be affected by  the  success
       of the arguments relating to the protection claim.

    3. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread of Covid-
       19 and with regard to the overriding object  set  out  in  the  Upper
       Tribunal  Procedure  Rules  to  decide  matters  fairly  and   justly
       directions were sent out to  the  parties  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
       Mandalia  by email on 28th April 2020 seeking written submissions  on
       the assertion of an error of law with  a  view  to  determining  that
       issue on the papers, and giving an opportunity for any party who felt
       that a hearing was necessary in the  interests  of  justice  to  make
       submissions on that issue too. Submissions  were  received  from  the
       appellant but not  the  Secretary  of  State  in  response  to  these
       directions, despite these being resent to the Secretary of State with
       a copy of the submissions of the  appellant  by  the  Upper  Tribunal
       lawyers by email on 2nd July 2020.

    4. The matter came before me to determine whether it is in the interests
       of justice to decide this matter without  a  hearing  and  if  so  to
       determine whether the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law and if  so
       whether the decision should be set aside. I find, whilst appreciating
       that this is an issue of great importance to the claimant given  that
       it determines  his  Article  3  ECHR  rights  in  the  context  of  a
       deportation which will potentially separate him from  his  family  in
       the UK, that the issues which arise are discrete and the appeal  can,
       I find, be decided fairly and justly in this way.  Whilst there is an
       objection to this matter proceeding by way of a paper  decision  from
       the appellant the objections are all generic and do not  address  why
       this part of this individual case cannot be fairly determined on  the
       papers, thus  progressing  the  appellant's  appeal  without  further
       delay.

Submissions - Error of Law

    5. In the grounds of appeal and submissions drafted by Ms  C  Bayati  of
       counsel for the appellant argues that the  First-tier  Tribunal  made
       errors of law in the assessment of the credibility of the appellant's
       account by requiring corroborative evidence when such is not required
       and could not be obtained without undue difficulty (contrary  to  the
       proper direction on this point at paragraph 45 of  the  decision)  at
       paragraph 46 of the decision, and in a context where the evidence  of
       his partner was accepted as credible at paragraph 43 of the  decision
       and went to the bombing of her car,  intimidation  of  the  appellant
       after his arrest and an  attempted  burglary.  The  partner  had  not
       simply sent an email, as contended by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  but
       had also sent  a  letter  and  three  crime  references  about  these
       matters. The First-tier Tribunal also accepted that the appellant had
       injuries as a result of an explosion in Tirana and a  gunshot  injury
       based on medical evidence.

    6. Further the First-tier Tribunal  found  that  there  was  a  complete
       absence of evidence that the appellant couriered the drugs which  led
       to his conviction due to  threats  made  to  him  but  this  was  not
       accurate because  reference  was  made  to  this  in  the  Sentencing
       Remarks, pre-sentence  report  and  OASYS  report  .  The  First-tier
       Tribunal also erred in law in not  giving  weight  to  the  Wikipedia
       article about NK, the gangster he says threatened him,  as  this  was
       done on the basis that there  were  no  sources  when  in  fact  this
       article was  sourced.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  also  rejected  the
       evidence from the Panorama online report about the explosion  in  the
       appellant's flat in Tirana as it failed to mention  NK  and  RZ  were
       responsible, but as the appellant says that they have influence  with
       the authorities it is unlikely that a news report would mention them.



    7. It is also argued that there were errors in assessing the  Article  8
       ECHR claim because the appellant's son would be left in the sole care
       of the appellant's partner who suffers from anxiety and depression, a
       factor not considered by the  First-tier  Tribunal  when  determining
       whether it would be unduly harsh if the appellant were deported.

   Conclusions - Error of Law

    8. The appellant's protection claim  is  based  on  a  threat  from  two
       gangsters, NK and his right-hand man RZ, as a result  of  a  debt  of
       25,000 Euros which passed to him from  his  father  on  his  father's
       death in 2007. The appellant asserts that  he  is  at  real  risk  of
       serious harm contrary to Article 3  ECHR  because  of  a  history  of
       violent attacks and threats both in Albania and in the UK  from  this
       gang which might be briefly  summarised  as  follows.  The  appellant
       claims the threats to kill  started  in  2009;  followed  by  a  bomb
       explosion in his flat in Tirana in October 2011  said  to  have  been
       planted by RZ; followed by being shot in the leg  whilst  driving  in
       Tirana by RZ in November 2011; followed by the appellant's car  being
       damaged in an explosion in the UK in October 2016 carried out  by  an
       associate of NK; which was followed by threats if he did not carry  a
       package on behalf of the gangster, which he agreed to  do  and  which
       led to his criminal conviction.

    9. The First-tier Tribunal correctly directs itself at paragraph  45  of
       the decision that an account may properly be found to be shown on the
       lower civil standard of proof without corroborative  evidence  unless
       such evidence could have been obtained by the appellant without undue
       difficulty or risk.

   10. The First -tier Tribunal finds that the appellant's partner,  AB,  is
       found to be a generally credible  witness  at  paragraph  10  of  the
       decision. The medical evidence from her GP is that she  suffers  from
       depression and anxiety, and took an overdose of paracetamol in  2008.
       At paragraph 43 it is accepted that appellant's car  was  damaged  in
       the UK in an explosion in October 2016 because of the credibility  of
       her evidence on this matter.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal accept that the appellant suffers from severe
       depressive episode and anxiety, and trauma related symptoms based  on
       the medical report of Dr Sinha, who also recorded  scars  which  were
       highly consistent with him being struck by shrapnel in  October  2011
       and a scar consistent  with  being  caused  by  a  gunshot  wound  in
       November 2011 at paragraphs 36 and 37 of the decision. The First-tier
       Tribunal finds that the Panorama Online article  dated  22nd  October
       2011  was  consistent  with  the  history  of  an  explosion  at  the
       appellant's flat in October 2011 and a link to a drugs  gang  dispute
       but notes it does not mention NK by name, see paragraphs 40 to 42  of
       the decision. At paragraph 49 it is accepted as likely  that  he  was
       injured in 2011 in an explosion  in  Tirana,  and  possible  that  he
       received a gunshot wound in 2011 too.

   12.  S.8  matters  aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal  finds  against   the
       appellant's credibility in his history of being at real risk from  NK
       and his gang,  despite  the  above  accepted  evidence,  particularly
       because there is nothing about the UK explosion in 2016  having  been
       reported to the police as being related to the NK gang ; or  evidence
       that he raised the issue that it was threat from this gang which  led
       to his criminal behaviour and conviction in 2017.

   13. I find however that the First-tier Tribunal has erred in  law  as  it
       has failed to take account of the following material  evidence  which
       potentially supports the  contention  that  the  appellant  has  been
       exposed to Albanian gang violence in the UK:

       . The witness statement of his partner (who is found to be a credible
         witness)  at  D10  of  the  respondent's  bundle   which   includes
         information about the police  installing  a  panic  button  and  an
         intruder alarm in their home due  to  intimidation,  this  is  also
         repeated at H 20 in the appellant's Pre-sentence Report and at  H10
         in the OASys Report.

       . From the Sentencing Remarks at B2-3 of the respondent's  bundle  it
         is clear that at the outset of the criminal  proceedings  that  the
         appellant had intended to run  a  defence  which  was  subsequently
         abandoned,  and  from  the  pre-sentence  report  at  H20  of   the
         respondent's bundle it is clear that this would have been a defence
         based on duress, as he says he was pressurised  into  acting  as  a
         drugs courier to pay of his father's  debt  by  Albanian  organised
         criminals and at H21 in the risk assessment it  is  concluded  that
         although the current risk of serious harm is low: "there appears to
         be ongoing risk of  harm  to  him  and  his  family  from  criminal
         associates." The OASys Report at H10  of  the  respondent's  bundle
         also includes the conclusion under analysis of  offences  that  his
         criminal behaviour was either "for financial gain or as  he  claims
         under duress to repay his father's debts", and if  his  version  is
         correct concludes: "he and his partner and son are at risk".

   14. I also find that the Wikipedia gangster article about NK is  in  fact
       sourced and so could not be discounted on the basis that it  is  not,
       as is, at least in part, done at paragraph 39 of the decision by  the
       First-tier Tribunal and that this amounts to  a  material  error  for
       failing to give weight to evidence for mistaken reasons of fact which
       could have provided corroborative  evidence  of  the  nature  of  the
       threat the appellant says he is facing.

   15.  The  grounds  do  not  identify  any  evidence  which  supports  the
       contention that the appellant's  partner's  depression  and  anxiety,
       which are treated with sertraline, would impact on her  parenting  of
       their son such as to make it unduly harsh, a test  going  beyond  the
       normal effects of deportation of a loved parent on a child,  for  her
       to be their child's sole parent in the UK whilst he was deported. The
       medical evidence from Handsworth Medical Practice does not raise  any
       such issue, and clearly the appellant's partner  managed  to  be  his
       sole parent and primary carer during the period  of  the  appellant's
       imprisonment. In any case the First-tier Tribunal found that it would
       not be unduly harsh for the appellant's partner and son to  accompany
       him to Albania at paragraph 65 of the decision, where  the  appellant
       could continue to be his son's primary carer  if  this  is  what  the
       family found to be best for all. I do not find any separate error  of
       law in the determination of the appeal on Article 8 ECHR grounds.

   16. Clearly all of the findings and outcome on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds
       will however have to be revisited in the remaking of the appeal if on
       remaking the appellant is found to be at  Article  3  ECHR  risks  on
       return to Albania.

   17. I specifically preserve the following from the decision of the First-
       tier Tribunal:

       . the concession from the appellant that an appeal was not pursued on
         asylum grounds at paragraph 4 of the decision

       . the assessment that the appellant's partner is a  credible  witness
         at paragraph 10 of the decision

       . the common ground summary of  the  appellant's  criminal  offending
         history at paragraph 12 of the decision

       . the findings with respect to the medical evidence at paragraphs  33
         to 38 of the decision, and the finding at  paragraph  49  that  the
         appellant's injuries make it likely  that  he  was  injured  in  an
         explosion in Tirana and possible that he received a gunshot injury.

       . the  findings  with  respect  to  the  Panorama  online  report  at
         paragraphs 40 to 42 of the decision

       . the findings with respect to  the  appellant's  partner's  evidence
         about the explosion which damaged the appellant's  car  in  October
         2016 and the attempted burglary at paragraphs  43  and  44  of  the
         decision

       . the s.8 of the Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,
         etc.) Act 2004 findings at paragraph 48 of the decision

       . the finding that no weight could be placed on the letters from  the
         appellant's uncles at paragraph 50 of the decision.

   18. The rest of the findings in the credibility section  are  set  aside,
       particularly those at paragraphs 39, 46-47, 51, and those  after  the
       third sentence at paragraph 49 of the decision.

   19. The remaking will take place in the Upper Tribunal as I find that  it
       does not involve extensive new fact finding.



          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal of the claimant on human rights grounds.

   3. I adjourn the remaking hearing.


Directions - Remaking

1.    Having regard to the Pilot Practice Direction and the  UTIAC  Guidance
      Note No 1 of 2020, the Upper Tribunal is provisionally of  the  view
      that the forthcoming hearing in this appeal  might  properly  be  held
      remotely, by Skype for Business or other similar platform, on a date
      to be fixed.


2.    No later than 14 days after these directions are sent  by  the  Upper
      Tribunal (the date of sending is on the covering letter  or  covering
      email):

      (a)   the parties shall file and serve by email any objection  to  the
           hearing being a remote hearing at all/by the proposed means;  in
           either case giving reasons; and

      (b)   without prejudice to the Tribunal's consideration  of  any  such
           objections, the parties shall also file and serve:

           (i)   Skype contact details and a contact telephone number for
                 any person who wishes to  attend  the  hearing  remotely,
                 which might include the advocates, the original appellant
                 or an instructing solicitor; and

           (ii)  dates to avoid in the period specified.

3.    If there is an objection to a remote hearing, the Upper Tribunal will
      consider  the  submissions,  and  will  make  any  further  directions
      considered necessary.

4.     If  there  is no  objection to  a  remote  hearing,  the  following
      directions supersede any previous case management directions and shall
      apply.

   i. The parties shall have regard to the Presidential Guidance Note: No 1
      2020: Arrangements During the Covid-19 Pandemic  when  complying  with
      these directions.


      ii.   The parties shall file with the Upper Tribunal and serve on each
      other (a) an electronic skeleton argument  and  (b)  any  rule  15(2A)
      notice to be relied upon within 28 days of the date this notice  is
      sent.


      iii.  The appellant shall be responsible for compiling and serving an
      agreed consolidated bundle of documents which both parties can rely on
      at the hearing. The bundle should be compiled and served in accordance
      with the Presidential Guidance Note [23-26] at least 7 days before the
      hearing.


5.    The parties are at liberty to apply to amend these directions,  giving
      reasons,  if  they  face significant   practical difficulties in
      complying.

6.    Documents or submissions filed in response to these directions may  be
      sent by, or attached to, an email  to  [email]  using  the  Tribunal's
      reference number (found at the top of these directions) as the subject
      line.  Attachments must  not  exceed  15  MB.  This  address  is  not
      generally available for the filing of documents.

7.    Service on the Secretary of  State  may  be  to  [email]  and  to  the
      original appellant, in the absence of any contrary instruction, by use
      of any address apparent from the service of these directions.



Signed    Fiona Lindsley                           10th July 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

