
[pic]

The Upper Tribunal
Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Appeal Number: PA/07654/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 May 2017                        |On 12 May 2017                       |
|Prepared on 11 May 2017               |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HOLMES

                                   Between

                                    S. V.
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Gayle, Solicitor, Elder Rahimi Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The Appellant says that he is a citizen of Iran.  He  entered  the  UK
      illegally and made an application for protection on 20  January  2016.
      The Respondent refused that application  on  11  July  2016,  and  the
      Appellant's appeal to the First tier  Tribunal  ["FtT"]  against  that
      decision was heard on 25  November  2016.  It  was  dismissed  on  all
      grounds, in a decision promulgated on 25 January 2017  by  First  Tier
      Tribunal Judge Mensah.
   2. The Appellant was granted permission to appeal  that  decision  on  20
      February 2017 by First tier Tribunal Judge Gillespie on the basis that
      the decision contained a number  of  errors  and  appeared  to  be  an
      incomplete draft lacking adequate reasoning for the decision. Thus  it
      was arguable the Appellant had not  enjoyed  a  fair  hearing  of  his
      appeal.
   3. The Respondent has filed no Rule 24 Notice in relation to the grant of
      permission. Neither  party  has  made  formal  application  to  adduce
      further evidence. Thus the matter comes before me.


   Error of Law?
   4.  The  grounds  note  that  the  decision   incorrectly   records   the
      representative who appeared at the hearing on behalf of the Appellant,
      and that the section of  the  decision  entitled  "Findings"  contains
      none. Both points are fairly made.
   5. In the circumstances the decision discloses a material  error  of  law
      that renders the dismissal of the appeal unsafe, and the decision must
      in the circumstances  be  set  aside  and  remade.  I  have  in  these
      circumstances considered whether or not to remit  the  appeal  to  the
      First Tier Tribunal for it to be reheard, or  whether  to  proceed  to
      remake it in the Upper  Tribunal.  In  circumstances  where  it  would
      appear that the relevant evidence has not properly been considered  by
      the First Tier Tribunal, the effect of that error of law has  been  to
      deprive the Appellant of the opportunity for his case to  be  properly
      considered by  the  First  Tier  Tribunal;  paragraph  7.2(a)  of  the
      Practice Statement of 25 September 2012. Moreover the  extent  of  the
      judicial fact finding exercise is such that having regard to the over-
      riding objective, it is appropriate that the appeal should be remitted
      to the First Tier Tribunal; paragraph 7.2(b) of the Practice Statement
      of 25  September  2012.  Having  reached  that  conclusion,  with  the
      agreement of the parties I make the following directions;
     i) The decision is set aside, and the appeal is remitted to the  First
        Tier Tribunal for rehearing at the North  Shields  hearing  centre.
        The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Mensah.
    ii) A Farsi interpreter is required for the hearing of the appeal.
   iii) The time estimate is estimated to be 3 hours.
    iv) It is not anticipated by the Respondent that she  has  any  further
        evidence to be filed. The Appellant anticipates that  a  review  of
        the evidence is required and that a short further witness statement
        may be filed. The Appellant is therefore  to  file  and  serve  any
        further evidence to be relied upon at his appeal by 5pm 25 May 2017
     v) The appeal may be listed at short notice as a filler on  the  first
        available date at the North Shields hearing  centre  after  29  May
        2017 for final hearing, but given the location of  the  Appellant's
        representatives it shall only be listed after consultation with the
        Appellant's solicitors. Whilst it is desirable  that  Mr  Gayle  be
        available to present the appeal it is not necessary that he  should
        do so.
    vi) No further  Directions  hearing  is  presently  anticipated  to  be
        necessary.  Should  either  party  anticipate  this  position  will
        change, they must inform the Tribunal immediately,  providing  full
        details of what (if any) further evidence they seek to rely upon.
   vii) The Anonymity Direction previously made by the First Tier  Tribunal
        is preserved.




Decision

   6. The decision promulgated on 25 January 2017 did involve the making  of
      an error of law sufficient to require the decision to be set aside and
      reheard. Accordingly the appeal is remitted to the First Tier Tribunal
      with the directions set out above.

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal JM Holmes

Dated 11 May 2017
