
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07590/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 16 March 2020                     |On 22 April 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                  B. A. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    Mr. C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

The appellant is a national of Iraq and an ethnic Kurd. He hails from Mosul
and is presently aged 25. He appeals against a decision of the respondent,
dated 5 June 2018, to refuse to grant him international protection.

Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Garratt dismissed the appellant's appeal
by a decision dated 1 August 2018. The appellant was granted permission to
appeal to this Tribunal and by a decision sent to the parties on 8 May 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Farrelly set aside Judge Garratt's decision in
respect of two identified issues:

         i)   the appellant's ability to return to his home area in Mosul,
             and

         ii)  the reasonableness of his relocating to the Independent
             Kurdish Region ('IKR').

The resumed hearing was listed on 19 August 2019. DUTJ Farrelly heard
submissions from the parties and agreed to adjourn the hearing pending the
outcome of the then awaited country guidance concerning Iraq. The Upper
Tribunal subsequently promulgated the country guidance decision in SMO, KSP
and IM (Article 15(c); identity documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC)
on 20 December 2019.

Consequent to a transfer order of Principal Resident Judge O'Connor, dated
13 January 2020, the appeal hearing came before me on 16 March 2020. The
appellant attended unrepresented. Although his previous representatives,
ADL Solicitors, remained on the Tribunal record, the appellant informed me
that they were no longer representing him. He was content to proceed with
his hearing in the absence of legal representation.

Anonymity

DUTJ Farrelly issued an anonymity direction and there was no request from
the parties that it be set aside. The direction is confirmed at the
conclusion of this decision.

Preserved findings of fact

Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was applied for, and granted, on
a narrow basis, namely that the First-tier Tribunal Judge failed to
acknowledge that the appellant was from a contested area and failed to
follow the guidance provided in the country guidance decision of AA
(Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544, as amended by the Court of Appeal
in AA (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ
944. The Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge determined at [13] of the decision of
8 May 2019:

         "In summary the judge erred in law in suggesting the appellant
         could return to Mosul without further explanation bearing in mind
         the country guidance decision of AA Iraq. The judge's assessment of
         the reasonableness of relocation to the IKR also erred in law as it
         failed to evaluate his prospects and the reasonableness of a move."

No error of law was identified as to the First-tier Tribunal's rejection of
the underlying claim as to persecution in Iraq at the hands of ISIS.

The appellant states that he resided in Mosul prior to his leaving Iraq in
2015 and that he clandestinely arrived in this country on 21 August 2015,
claiming asylum three days later. For the purpose of my consideration
relevant preserved findings of fact include:

         (a)  The appellant did not leave Mosul because he was targeted  for
             recruitment by ISIS.

         (b)  The appellant left Iraq as an economic migrant at a time  when
             Mosul was coming under the control of ISIS.

         (c)  The appellant is a fit, healthy male who works in the building
             industry and has skills as a plasterer.

         (d)  The appellant had relatives in Iraq who could help him  secure
             possession of a Civil Status Identity Card ('CSID').

The First-tier Tribunal further determined at [30]:

         "The appellant has been in the United Kingdom for about two and a
         half years since leaving Iraq yet admits that he has taken no
         significant steps towards finding out what has happened to his
         family or the uncle who is claimed to have generously funded his
         departure from Iraq. I do not accept that language difficulties
         would have been a bar to the appellant seeking information about
         these relatives if he was genuinely concerned about them. It is
         clear that the appellant has had the benefit of legal advice which
         could have extended to the relevant issue of tracing his relatives.
         If he had approached the Red Cross for assistance, then it is
         reasonable to assume that language would not have been a barrier to
         him seeking that organisation's assistance. Additionally, the
         appellant has made no attempt to seek identity documents through
         the Iraqi Embassy or its consulates."

The hearing

The appellant gave evidence before me, with the aid of an interpreter. He
was asked by Mr. Bates as to which side of the Tigris river he resided on
when living in Mosul. He initially stated that he was unable to say whether
it was the east or west side. When asked again by Mr. Bates, he stated that
he had resided on the 'Kurdish' side.

He stated that he has tried to contact his family in Iraq whilst residing
in this country but has been unsuccessful. In turn, he sought to ask
members of the Kurdish community living in the United Kingdom and hailing
from Mosul as to whether they have had any communication with or have
knowledge of the present circumstances of his family members in Iraq but he
has received no positive information. He informed me that the only member
of his family who used a mobile phone was his father and as he could not
remember his father's number, he was unable to phone him.

The appellant accepted that he had been aided in leaving Iraq by an uncle
and his evidence to me was clear as to his having lost contact with his
uncle immediately upon leaving Iraq. His uncle lived in the same
neighbourhood as his family, some 30 minutes away by walking, but they had
lost contact because his uncle had been explicit when handing him over to
the smuggler that he was to trust the smuggler. He understood this to mean
that he was not required to remain in contact with his uncle. When asked by
Mr Bates as to why his uncle had provided the appellant with no means of
contacting either him or other members of the family the appellant simply
responded that his uncle had said, 'do not worry go with this man'.

Asked about his recollection of his CSID card the appellant confirmed that
he could not remember any of its details. He informed me, 'it [CSID] is not
important there (Iraq). We don't need it much there, not that much.' In
answer to a question from me he said that he only used his CSID when going
to hospital or to secure a monthly food ration. These were the only times
he used his CSID.

The appellant confirmed to Mr Bates that he did possess an Iraqi passport,
but he did not take it with him when he left Iraq because it was located at
his home, and he had been away from his home when warned not to return
because ISIS were looking for him. It was for this reason that he was
unable to collect his passport. I reminded the appellant that he had been
found to be wholly incredible on this aspect of his personal history. I
permitted the appellant time to consider and reply to Mr. Bates' question.
The appellant again confirmed that he was unable to take his passport with
him because he had received news when returning from work that ISIS were
looking for him and it was not safe to return home.

Decision

The issues remaining to be decided upon by this Tribunal are limited and
identified at [2] above. I observe that there are preserved findings of
fact, relevant findings to my decision being detailed at [8]-[9] above.

I found the appellant to be an unimpressive witness. He was extremely vague
as to where he resided in Mosul before he left to travel to this country.
For someone who has been accepted to have been born and brought up in that
city, he proved wholly unwilling to confirm where he had lived, resorting
to asserting that he lived on the 'Kurdish' side. I observe that the
population of Mosul commonly refers to the east side of the river as the
'Left Bank' and the west side as the 'Right Bank'. The appellant is also no
doubt aware, having resided in Mosul all his life, that Mosul is not
divided into Kurdish and Arab sectors, though there were majority Arab
areas in certain parts of the downtown area. I find that the appellant was
deliberately vague in an effort to hide from the Tribunal where he and his
family resided. To the lower standard, I am satisfied that he did not
reside with his family in the Old Town, or the West Bank, which has been
significantly affected by the civil war. I find that the appellant has
sought to hide the fact that he resided in an urban area on the East Bank,
which the Tribunal concluded in SMO was nowhere near as badly devastated,
at [258]. The Tribunal held at [261] that upon considering the evidence as
a whole, there is not such a high level of indiscriminate violence in the
East Bank that substantial grounds exist for believing that an ordinary
civilian would, solely by being present there, face a real risk which
threatens their life or person.

The appellant's evidence as to why he has not been in in contact with his
family, including his uncle, is implausible. He has been found to be an
economic migrant, and he accepts that he received support from family
members such as his uncle so as to travel to Europe. I note the observation
of Ouseley J, sitting as the President, in MM (DRC - plausibility)
Democratic Republic of Congo [2005] UKIAT 00019; [2005] Imm. A.R. 198 that
while it is correct that the assessment of credibility may involve an
assessment of plausibility of what has been said, the assessment of
plausibility is not a separate stage in the assessment of credibility. A
story can be implausible and yet taken as credible. I further observe that
Ouseley J held that a decision as to whether an appellant is credible
should be founded on the totality of the evidence, including consistency on
essentials or major inconsistencies, omissions and details, improbabilities
or reasonableness. I therefore consider the evidence in the round. I note
that the appellant has previously been found to be untruthful in much of
his account and has sought, unsuccessfully, to hide that he is an economic
migrant. Appropriate weight can be given to the fact that he used an agent
to travel to this country and he was aided by his family in paying to
secure the services of the agent. I am therefore satisfied to the requisite
standard that the appellant is not being truthful in asserting that he has
no contact with his family, and in particular he does not know his father's
telephone number or as to his assertion that his uncle does not possess a
phone, in circumstances where the family would at least hope, and at its
highest expect, that he will send financial remittances back to them in
Iraq. The appellant has consistently sought to hide the true state of
affairs by providing vague and untrue evidence and in this matter he has
sought to deceive the Tribunal as to his continuing contact with his family
who remain living in their home area.

The First-tier Tribunal's finding of fact as to the appellant having
relatives in Iraq who can help him secure possession of his CSID is a
preserved finding of fact, at [34} of the First-Tier Tribunal's decision:

         "I acknowledge that, if the appellant is returned to Iraq because
         he is not a refugee, he will be returned to Baghdad. He cannot be
         returned there unless he is in the possession of a CSID or will be
         able to obtain one, reasonably soon after his arrival with
         assistance from family or other members likely to be able to
         provide a means of support: AA (Iraq). The appellant's evidence
         does not satisfy me, to the lower standard, that he will have no
         relatives in Iraq who can help him. I have already indicated my
         reasons for that conclusion, above. AAH identifies factors to be
         considered in relation to the obtaining of a new CSID. These
         include any other form of documentation or information about the
         location of his entry in the civil register. Further is the
         existence of male family members who would be able and willing to
         attend a civil registry with the appellant. On the basis that the
         appellant can return to Baghdad with the benefit of a resettlement
         grant and that he has not shown that he had no relatives upon whom
         he can call for assistance, I am satisfied that he will be able to
         obtain the necessary CSID bearing in mind that he has conceded that
         he held one before leaving Iraq and it was left at his home ..."

I observe the appellant's evidence as to the reason for his not being able
to recall the personal details on his CSID, namely that he was rarely
required to use it. This is at odds with the importance placed upon the
document by expert evidence in several country guidance cases, including
SMO, at [336]-[337]

         "Iraq is a bureaucratic country which has suffered from a range of
         security concerns in the 21st century. For both of those reasons,
         issues surrounding the documents needed to return to Iraq and to
         survive in that country have played a prominent part in the country
         guidance cases decided to date. The first such case was MK (Iraq)
         CG [2012] UKUT 126 (IAC), in which the Upper Tribunal listed the
         three critical documents at [6]:

             "The first is the Civil Status Identity Card (CSID). The
             second is the Iraqi Nationality Certificate (Shahdat al-
             Jinsiya al-Iraqiya) (INC), the third is the Public
             Distribution System (PDS) card (food ration card)."

         It was common ground in MK (Iraq) that the most important of these
         documents is the CSID because 'without the CSID card it is
         impossible to access any of the other documents listed above, and
         this has a clear impact on ability to move around Iraq, to relocate
         within Iraq and to enjoy socio-economic rights, housing and food
         rations and to access aid and humanitarian support': [22]. At [24],
         it cited Dr Fatah's statement that the CSID is the physical
         manifestation of an individual's official registration record,
         which is a record of the individual's birth, held in manuscript
         ledgers in the local Civil Registry."

I find to the requisite standard that the appellant sought to distance
himself from his CSID because he was aware that an admission that it was
present at the family home, or that he could recall the page and volume of
the book holding the family records, would adversely impact upon his
appeal. I am satisfied that he was not truthful to the Tribunal because his
CSID remains with his family and, further, that he has the necessary
knowledge of the family records to secure a new CSID upon request to the
Iraqi authorities in this country, via the Iraqi Consulate, with the aid of
his family both on his father's and his mother's side. I am further
satisfied, to the requisite standard, that the appellant's passport remains
with his family in Iraq and that he can therefore return to Baghdad, or in
the alternative secure a Laissez Passer: SMO, at headnote B. I find that
the appellant can secure a CSID before his return to Baghdad or be provided
with his CSID by family members upon his arrival: SMO, headnote C.

He can therefore travel onto Mosul and re-join his family who are residing
in an urban area on the East Bank of the city, away from the devastated
areas.

In the alternative, being in possession of a CSID, or able to provide the
required documentary evidence and relevant information to secure an Iraqi
National Identity Card ('INID'), I find to the requisite standard that the
appellant, being of Kurdish ethnicity, is able to travel from Baghdad to
the IKR by land, such journey being affordable and capable of being
undertaken without a real risk of the appellant suffering persecution,
serious harm or ill-treatment breaching protected article 3 rights. He can
if he wishes board a domestic flight from Baghdad to the IKR, being in
possession of a CSID and being entitled to apply for a grant under the
Voluntary Returns Scheme ('VRS'). I further find that the appellant will
not be subject to a particular risk of ill-treatment upon arrival at the
IKR, having no family with a known association with ISIL. He can evidence
the fact of his recent arrival from the United Kingdom to dispel any
suggestion of having arrived directly from ISIL territory. In establishing
himself in the IKR, the appellant will be able to rely upon his grant from
the VRS and, as found by the First-tier Tribunal and a preserved fact, he
would have little difficulty in obtaining employment consequent to his
building skills as a plasterer: SMO, headnote E.

In all of the circumstances, the appellant is unable to establish to the
requisite standard that he is a refugee, or that his protected article 3 or
article 8 rights will be breached upon his return to Iraq. I find that he
is able to return to Baghdad and safely relocate to join his family in
Mosul or relocate to the IKR.

Notice of Decision

By means of a decision dated 8 May 2019 this Tribunal set aside a decision
of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 1 August 2018 pursuant to section
12(2)(a) of the Tribunal, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 ('TCE').

The decision is re-made, and the appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs otherwise no report of these
proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly
identify the appellant. This direction applies to, amongst others, the
appellant and the respondent. Any failure to comply with this direction
could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 31 March 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As no fee award was payable in this  appeal  and  as  the  appeal  has  been
dismissed no fee award can be made.


Signed: D O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Date: 31 March 2020


        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email
