
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07445/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |                                     |
|Remotely by Microsoft Teams          |                                     |
|On 27 May 2021                       |On 16 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     SR
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Islam, Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS



 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka who was born  on  18  September
    1954.

 3. The appellant arrived in the United Kingdom on 11  September  2012  and
    claimed asylum.  The Secretary  of  State  refused  that  claim  on  30
    January 2013 and the appellant's  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    (Judge  McAll)  was  dismissed  on  15  March  2013.   His   subsequent
    application for permission to appeal was refused on 3  May  2013.   The
    appellant became appeal rights exhausted on 17 May 2013.

 4. The appellant lodged further submissions on 12 August 2013  which  were
    refused on 15 August 2015 with no right of appeal.  Further submissions
    were then lodged on 29 February 2016 and 19  April  2017.   These  were
    refused respectively on 3 March 2017 and 26 May 2017.

 5. The appellant lodged further submissions on 20 December  2018.   On  16
    July 2019, the Secretary of State refused the  appellant's  claims  for
    asylum, humanitarian protection and  under  the  ECHR.   The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  The appeal was dismissed  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal but subsequently,  on  20  March  2020,  the  Upper
    Tribunal (DUTJ Roberts) set aside the First-tier Tribunal's decision on
    the basis that it had materially erred in law and remitted  the  appeal
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

 6. That remitted appeal was heard by Judge Ford on 15 December 2020.  In a
    decision sent on 29 December 2020, Judge Ford dismissed the appellant's
    appeal on all grounds.  The judge rejected the appellant's account that
    he had been detained for three years between September  2009  and  July
    2012 by the Sri Lankan authorities on the basis that he was believed to
    be a member of the LTTE or a collaborator who had  acted  as  a  driver
    transporting for the LTTE.  The judge did not accept that the appellant
    had been detained as he claimed or tortured before being released.   In
    addition, the judge did not accept that  the  appellant's  claimed  sur
    place activities in the UK with the  TGTE  were  genuinely  politically
    motivated and would expose him to risk on return to Sri Lanka.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

 7. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on  two
    grounds.  First, the judge had failed to give adequate reasons for  his
    adverse credibility findings and in concluding that the appellant would
    not be at risk because of his  sur  place  activities.   Secondly,  the
    judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for  concluding  that  the
    appellant could not succeed under para 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
    Rules (HC 395 as amended).

 8. On 2 February 2021, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Keane)  granted  the
    appellant permission to appeal.  In granting  permission,  Judge  Keane
    observed that the appellant's grounds based upon inadequate reasons was
    a  "characterisation  [which]  perhaps  fell  short  of   an   adequate
    expression  of  concerns".   Nevertheless,  the  judge  went   on   and
    specifically identified two points, not directly raised in the grounds,
    which he considered to be arguable.  Those related to paras 36  and  37
    of the judge's decision where the judge had found first,  that  it  was
    incredible that the Sri Lankan  authorities  would  have  waited  three
    years whilst the appellant was in detention to, as he claimed,  torture
    him and force him to  sign  a  confession  before  releasing  him  from
    prison; and secondly, that it was incredible that the  appellant  would
    have sought treatment at a hospital on his release if he was wanted  by
    the authorities.  Judge Keane stated that:

         "The judge arguably was substituting the judge's own  understanding
         as to what constituted reasonable conduct, arguably did not  embark
         upon that global assessment which is the essence of  an  assessment
         of credibility  and  the  judge's  use  of  the  word  'incredible'
         arguably amounted to a pure rejection of the appellant's claims  of
         fact".

 9. On 8 February 2021, the Secretary of State filed  a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision and, in particular, his  adverse
    credibility findings on the basis that the judge had provided  detailed
    reasons for his decision and that his findings were within the range of
    conclusions properly open to him.

10. Following directions issued by  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  appeal  was
    listed for a remote hearing at the Cardiff Civil Justice  Centre.   The
    hearing was conducted remotely by Microsoft Teams.  The  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Islam and the respondent by Mr Diwnycz, both of  whom
    joined the hearing by Teams.

Discussion

11. Mr Islam essentially relied upon  five  points  derived  from  the  two
    identified by Judge Keane in granting permission and three  based  upon
    the grounds of appeal.

12. First, Mr Islam submitted that the judge had irrationally concluded  in
    paras 36 and 37 respectively of his decision that it  was  "incredible"
    that the appellant had been only tortured and released  from  detention
    after three years and that he had sought hospital treatment after being
    released.  Mr Islam submitted that these two paragraphs influenced  the
    judge in reaching his adverse credibility finding as a  vital  part  of
    the appellant's case was that he had been detained and ill-treated.

13. The judge said this in paras 36 and 37 of his determination:

         "36. The evidence shows that the appellant was treated for injuries
             at a hospital in July 2012.  This was 3 years  after  the  war
             ended.  The appellant has given account of being tortured  and
             forced to sign a confession when  he  was  detained  and  then
             securing the help of an influential individual to  secure  his
             release.  But he had been in detention for 3  years  by  then.
             If he knew someone of influence then I find it incredible that
             he would have waited so long to get out of prison.

         37.  If he was wanted by the authorities then I find it  incredible
             that he should have sought treatment  at  a  hospital  on  his
             release.  I note that the treatment card refers to  him  being
             assaulted by unknown assailants.  I would not  expect  him  to
             disclose if he was assaulted by  government  agents  while  in
             detention but given that he has been detained for 3  years  by
             them and a confession obtained, why was he being assaulted  so
             long after his initial detention?  He has not  suggested  that
             he held out  against  signing  any  confession  or  disclosing
             information for 3 years.  He mentions being tortured for about
             10 and 15 days.  It is not credible that he was  detained  for
             three years and only then did the authorities decide  that  he
             was important enough to interrogate and torture.  He  has  not
             given a credible explanation for the delay in  producing  this
             medical card.  He says that his  family  are  afraid  yet  his
             sister sent his medical card and the Red Cross letter to  him.
             I find that the appellant was treated  for  injuries  that  he
             received in July 2012 but even to the low  standard  of  proof
             applicable I do not accept that his assailants were in any way
             connected to the authorities".

14. The latter part of para 37 is a reference to  some  of  the  additional
    documents relied upon before Judge Ford and which were not available at
    the earlier appeal  hearing  before  Judge  McAll.   These  included  a
    medical  card  from  a  hospital  showing  treatment  received  by  the
    appellant in July 2012 shortly after his claimed release from detention
    and a Red Cross letter dated 10 December  2009  relating  his  mother's
    visits to their office when he disappeared.

15. Although Judge Keane, in granting permission, criticised Judge Ford for
    reasoning that both these  aspects  of  the  appellant's  account  were
    "incredible", what Judge Ford was undoubtedly seeking to  identify  was
    that the appellant's account in these two  regards  was  "implausible".
    In other words, these were aspects of the account which the  judge  did
    not consider could reasonably have occurred in the  circumstances.   As
    is well-known, judges must exercise caution in concluding that  aspects
    of an individual's account, particularly when it relates to conduct  or
    activities in other countries, was implausible  unless  there  is,  for
    example, other supporting evidence for that conclusion such as  country
    background  evidence  or   other   evidence   inconsistent   with   the
    individual's account (see HK v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ  1037).   In  HK
    Neuberger LJ (as he then was) (and with whom  Chadwick  and  Jacob  LJJ
    agreed) said this (at [29]-[30]):

         "29. Inherent probability, which may be helpful  in  many  domestic
         cases, can be a dangerous, even a wholly inappropriate,  factor  to
         rely on in  some  asylum  cases.  Much  of  the  evidence  will  be
         referable to societies with customs  and  circumstances  which  are
         very different from those of which the members of the  fact-finding
         tribunal have any (even  second-hand)  experience.  Indeed,  it  is
         likely that the country which an asylum-seeker  has  left  will  be
         suffering from the sort of problems and dislocations with which the
         overwhelming majority of residents of this country will  be  wholly
         unfamiliar. The point is well made in Hathaway on Law  of  Refugee
         Status (1991) at page 81:


              "In assessing the general human rights information, decision-
              makers must  constantly  be  on  guard  to  avoid  implicitly
              recharacterizing the nature of the risk based  on  their  own
              perceptions of reasonability."


         30. Inherent improbability in  the  context  of  asylum  cases  was
         discussed at some length by Lord Brodie in Awala -v- Secretary  of
         State [2005] CSOH 73. At paragraph 22, he pointed out that it  was
         "not proper to reject an applicant's account merely on the  basis
         that  it  is  not  credible  or  not  plausible.  To  say  that  an
         applicant's account is not  credible  is  to  state  a  conclusion"
         (emphasis added). At paragraph 24, he  said  that  rejection  of  a
         story on grounds of implausibility  must  be  done  "on  reasonably
         drawn inferences and not simply on conjecture or  speculation".  He
         went on to emphasise, as did Pill LJ in Ghaisari, the  entitlement
         of the fact-finder to rely "on his common sense and his ability, as
         a practical and informed person, to identify  what  is  or  is  not
         plausible". However, he accepted that "there will  be  cases  where
         actions  which  may  appear  implausible  if  judged  by...Scottish
         standards, might be plausible when considered within the context of
         the applicant's social and cultural background".


16. However, the need for  caution  does  not  mean  that  a  judge  cannot
    properly infer  that  an  aspect  of  an  appellant's  account  is  not
    plausible and take that into account as a factor in  assessing  whether
    the appellant's account to be believed.  In Y v SSHD  [2006]  EWCA  Civ
    1223, having cited Neuberger LJ's view in HK, Keene LJ (with whom  Ward
    and Carnwath LJJ agreed) said this at [25]-[27]:

          "25. There seems to me to  be  very  little  dispute  between  the
         parties as to the legal principles applicable to the approach which
         an adjudicator, now known as an  immigration  judge,  should  adopt
         towards issues of credibility.  The  fundamental  one  is  that  he
         should be cautious before  finding  an  account  to  be  inherently
         incredible, because there is a considerable risk that  he  will  be
         over influenced by his own views on what is or  is  not  plausible,
         and those views will have inevitably been  influenced  by  his  own
         background in this country and by the customs and ways of  our  own
         society. It is therefore important that he should seek to  view  an
         appellant's account of events, as Mr Singh rightly argues, in  the
         context of conditions in  the  country  from  which  the  appellant
         comes.  The  dangers  were  well  described  in   an   article   by
         Sir Thomas Bingham, as he then was, in 1985 in a passage quoted by
         the IAT in Kasolo v SSHD 13190, the passage being taken from an
         article in Current Legal Problems. Sir Thomas Bingham said this:


             "'An English judge may have, or think that he  has,  a  shrewd
             idea of how a Lloyds Broker or  a  Bristol  wholesaler,  or  a
             Norfolk  farmer,  might  react  in  some  situation  which  is
             canvassed in the course of a case but  he  may,  and  I think
             should, feel very much more uncertain about the reactions of a
             Nigerian merchant, or an Indian ships' engineer, or a Yugoslav
             banker. Or even,  to  take  a  more  homely  example,  a  Sikh
             shopkeeper trading in Bradford. No judge worth his salt  could
             possibl[y]  assume  that  men  of   different   nationalities,
             educations, trades, experience, creeds and temperaments  would
             act as he might think he would have done or even -  which  may
             be quite different - in accordance with his concept of what  a
             reasonable man would have done."


         26. None of this, however, means that an adjudicator is required to
         take at face value an account of facts proffered by  an  appellant,
         no matter how contrary to common  sense  and  experience  of  human
         behaviour the account may be. The decision maker is not expected to
         suspend his own judgment, nor does Mr Singh contend that he should.
         In appropriate cases, he is entitled to find  that  an  account  of
         events is so far-fetched and contrary to reason as to be  incapable
         of belief. The point was well put in the Awala case by Lord Brodie
         at paragraph 24 when he said this:


             "... the tribunal of  fact  need  not  necessarily  accept  an
             applicant's account simply because it is not  contradicted  at
             the relevant hearing. The tribunal of fact is entitled to make
             reasonable findings based on  implausibilities,  common  sense
             and  rationality,  and  may  reject  evidence  if  it  is  not
             consistent with the probabilities  affecting  the  case  as  a
             whole".


         He then added a little later:


             "...  while  a  decision  on  credibility  must   be   reached
             rationally, in doing so the decision maker is entitled to draw
             on his common sense  and  his  ability,  as  a  practical  and
             informed person, to identify what is or is not plausible".


         27. I agree. A decision maker is entitled to regard an  account  as
         incredible by such standards, but he must take care not  to  do  so
         merely because it would not seem reasonable if it had  happened  in
         this country. In essence,  he  must  look  through  the  spectacles
         provided by the information he has about conditions in the  country
         in question. That is, in effect, what Neuberger LJ was  saying  in
         the case of HK and I do not regard Chadwick LJ  in  the  passage
         referred to as seeking to disagree."


17. As was emphasised in  both  decisions  of  the  Court  of  Appeal,  the
    assessment  of  whether  an  individual's  account  is  truthful  -  is
    "credible" - requires  an  holistic  assessment  of  all  the  evidence
    including that of the appellant, any supporting  evidence,  any  expert
    evidence and any  background  evidence.   However,  providing  a  judge
    exercises due caution and does not fall into the trap identified in HK,
    it is permissible for a judge, as  part  of  their  reasoning  that  an
    appellant's account is not to be accepted, to conclude that aspects  of
    the account cannot stand up  to  a  common  sense  yardstick  as  being
    "plausible".

18. In my judgment, in paras 36 and 37 Judge Ford did  not  fall  into  the
    trap identified in HK.  It was open  to  Judge  Ford  as  a  matter  of
    reasonable inference to take into account that it was  implausible  or,
    put another way, unlikely that the appellant would have  been  detained
    for three years only to be tortured and forced to sign a confession and
    then released as a result of the intervention of an influential  person
    - three years after having been initially detained   -  whom  he  could
    have intervene earlier. As the judge pointed out, it was no part of the
    appellant's case that he had been resisting the Sri Lankan  authorities
    over that period and the emphasis of his evidence was upon  the  events
    that he said occurred to him in detention after some  three  years  and
    shortly before his release.  I  see  nothing  irrational,  perverse  or
    Wednesbury unreasonable in the judge inferring that  that  account  was
    not plausible or not likely to be true.

19. Likewise, the approach of the judge in para 37 was reasonable  and  not
    irrational in assessing the appellant's own evidence and  the  evidence
    which he put in to support his claim that he had been tortured,  namely
    that he had gone  to  hospital  shortly  after  he  was  released  from
    detention.  The judge accepted, in the end, that to the  "low  standard
    of proof" the appellant had established that he had  been  treated  for
    injuries in July 2012 but not that those injuries were caused,  in  the
    way he claimed, during his detention by  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities.
    The judge's conclusion that the link between his injuries  and  claimed
    detention was not established was not based solely on his view that  it
    was implausible that the appellant would have  sought  treatment  at  a
    hospital on his release.  The judge did refer  to  that  point  at  the
    beginning of para 37 of his determination but the judge  gave  multiple
    reasons for not accepting the claimed connection between detention  and
    injury  in  reaching  his  overall  adverse  credibility  finding   and
    rejection of the appellant's underlying account.  His reasons  are  not
    restricted to those in para 37.

20. Of course, the judge was, in  this  appeal,  taking  as  his  "starting
    point", following Devaseelan [2003] Imm AR 1,  Judge  McAll's  findings
    that the appellant  had  not  established  he  had  been  arrested  and
    detained in Sri Lanka and that he had not been suspected  of  assisting
    the  LTTE.   Read  as  a  whole,  para  37  does  not  irrationally  or
    unreasonably  focus  upon  the  fact  that  the  appellant  had  sought
    treatment at a hospital on his release but, in  any  event,  I  do  not
    accept that it was not within the range of reasonable  inferences  that
    the judge was entitled to draw on the evidence that it was  implausible
    that the appellant would have sought assistance  in  this  way  if  his
    account was true that he  had  been  released  from  detention  by  the
    authorities shortly after having been tortured.

21. That, then, deals with points 1 and 2 relied upon by Mr Islam  which  I
    conclude do not establish any arguable error of law.

22. The third point relied upon by Mr Islam in the  grounds  and  his  oral
    submissions was that the judge was wrong in paras  41  and  46  of  his
    decision to reject the appellant's account  that  he  was  at  risk  on
    return as a result of his sur place activities in the UK.   There,  the
    judge said this:

         "41. In relation to his sur place activities, the only  evidence  I
             have of his involvement is some photographs of him attending a
             Tamil protest or protests in the UK on unknown dates  and  the
             TGTE letter.

         ....

         46.  He has supplied his Tamil Eelam card and  I  have  taken  this
             into account.   He  has  shown  some  evidence  of  sur  place
             activities, but those ended in 2018, he  supplied  the  letter
             from the TGTE very late in  the  day  without  any  reasonable
             explanation  for  the  delay,  and  the  description  of   the
             appellant's activities for the TGTE and his profile  does  not
             fit with his own account and seems greatly exaggerated.   Even
             if the author of the letter is accurate in his description  of
             the extent of the appellant's activities, I am  not  satisfied
             that those activities (selling some tickets for  a  fundraiser
             and attending a limited number of protests) will be  known  to
             the Sri Lankan authorities or be of any interest to them.  The
             appellant is not a person of any influence  in  the  TGTE.   I
             find that given the timing and the level  of  his  involvement
             with the TGTE, his activities for the group are entirely self-
             serving and not motivated by any  genuine  commitment  to  the
             cause of an independent Tamil state.  He gave  no  account  of
             any activities over  the  last  two  years  and  says  he  has
             difficulty travelling due to his sight  problems.   I  am  not
             satisfied that he does  have  such  difficulties.   I  am  not
             satisfied that he has an adverse profile with the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities, that he has a  history  of  detention,  that  the
             authorities will wish to question him on his  return  or  that
             even with the scars he bears, he will encounter any  problems.
             Even if he is challenged about  those  scars,  I  can  see  no
             reason why he can't refer to the hospital record of  treatment
             following assault by unknown assailants".

23. Then at para 47 the judge concluded:

         "I do not accept  that  this  appellant  is  genuinely  politically
         motivated".

24. The judge's finding has to be  seen  in  the  context  of  his  overall
    rejection of the appellant's account that  he  had  been  detained  and
    tortured as a result of being suspected of  activities  supporting  the
    LTTE.  That had been the judicial finding made by Judge McAll  in  2013
    and was also the finding made by Judge Ford in the instant appeal.   In
    the light of that, the appellant was relying  upon  claimed  sur  place
    activities in the UK despite the fact that it was not accepted that  he
    had any LTTE involvement before coming to the  UK.   In  addition,  the
    judge noted that the evidence of the TGTE had also to be  seen  in  the
    context that the appellant had not shown any activities since  2018  in
    the UK.  The judge set out the letter from Tamil Eelam at para 24(e) of
    his determination.  That letter was produced at the appeal hearing  and
    the appellant told the judge that he had obtained it from the  TGTE  on
    the day it was written, namely 3 December 2020 which was some ten  days
    before the hearing.  In those  circumstances,  it  was  reasonably  and
    rationally open to the judge not  to  accept  that  the  appellant  was
    genuinely politically  motivated  based  upon  his  claimed  sur  place
    activities in the UK.  In those circumstances, it was open to the judge
    consistently with the country guidance decision in GJ and Others (post-
    civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and MP  (Sri
    Lanka) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 to conclude that  the  appellant  had
    not established that he was on a stop list and had not established that
    he was known to  the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  or  was  likely  to  be
    questioned on return.  Of course, if he were questioned, the  appellant
    could not truthfully  say  that  he  was  an  LTTE  supporter  and  had
    previously been detained by the Sri Lankan authorities or that  he  had
    engaged in genuine sur place activities.

25. Given  Judge  McAll's  earlier  finding  that  the  appellant  had  not
    established he was at risk as a result of  sur  place  activities,  the
    judge was legally entitled  to  find,  taking  that  as  his  'starting
    point', that the evidence in this appeal did  not  establish  that  the
    appellant would be at risk on that basis on return.

26. Finally as regards the appellant's asylum claim, Mr  Islam  took  issue
    with the judge's finding that the risk factor was not established  that
    the appellant had illegally left Sri Lanka  on  a  false  passport  was
    contrary to the appellant's evidence given in para  4  of  his  witness
    statement dated 19 December 2018 and the judge had  given  no  adequate
    reason for not making a  finding  in  line  with  that  evidence.   The
    difficulty with this argument is that the  judge  did  not  accept  the
    appellant's account or that he  was  a  truthful  witness.   The  judge
    rejected the appellant's evidence.  In the light  of  that,  the  basis
    upon which the appellant said that he had left Sri Lanka illegally on a
    false passport with the aid of an agent fell away.  As, of course,  was
    the effect  of  the  judge's  adverse  credibility  finding  given  the
    finding, as with Judge McAll previously, that  the  appellant  was  not
    telling the truth as to his circumstances in Sri Lanka and why he  left
    Sri Lanka.  The reason why the judge did  not  accept  the  appellant's
    evidence that he had illegally left Sri Lanka  using  an  agent,  on  a
    false passport was simply that.

27. It follows that I reject each of the points relied  upon  by  Mr  Islam
    challenging the judge's adverse credibility finding and  his  dismissal
    of the appellant's international protection appeal.

28. Standing back, the judge's determination is, in my judgment, read as  a
    whole a fair and careful assessment of  the  appellant's  claim  based,
    before Judge Ford, upon  additional  documentary  evidence,  given  the
    adverse credibility finding made in 2013 by Judge McAll  rejecting  the
    appellant's account.  The judge's reasons at paras 22-50  (setting  out
    the documentary evidence with commentary, the relevant country evidence
    relied upon and reaching factual findings and conclusions) were  cogent
    and adequate to sustain his ultimate  adverse  finding  which  was  not
    irrational, perverse or otherwise unreasonable.

29. That then leaves the final  point  relied  upon  by  Mr  Islam  and  in
    relation to the judge's assessment of Art 8.  In his oral  submissions,
    Mr Islam criticised the judge in para 53 for stating that the appellant
    had made a "false asylum claim" and with which he  had  "persisted  ...
    for 7 years" and he had "abused the immigration system in the UK".   Mr
    Islam submitted that was not the case.  However, as I pointed out to Mr
    Islam during the course of his submissions, the judge in  this  appeal,
    as had the judge in the earlier appeal, found that  the  appellant  had
    fabricated his account and that it was not true.  Given  that  finding,
    which the judge was entitled to carry over into  his  assessment  under
    Art 8, it was not inaccurate to describe the appellant as having made a
    "false asylum claim" with which he has persisted since  he  arrived  in
    the UK in 2012.  In any event, the  judge's  observation  was  properly
    factored  in  when  carrying  out  the  proportionality  assessment  as
    identified in para 54 as the public interest  in  the  "maintenance  of
    immigration  control".   Mr  Islam  did  not  seek  to  put  forward  a
    contention that the appellant had a strong Art 8 claim but merely  said
    that the claim was borderline.  The judge's reasons at paras 51-54  are
    relatively brief.  However, and the  contrary  was  not  argued  by  Mr
    Islam, it was properly open to the judge to find that the appellant had
    not established that there were "very  significant  obstacles"  to  his
    integration on return to Sri Lanka where his family lived and with whom
    he was still in touch.  Likewise, given his immigration history it  was
    inevitable that the public interest  would  outweigh  any  interference
    with his private life in the UK which, as I have said, Mr Islam did not
    seek to put forward as a claim of strength.

30. For these reasons, the judge did not  err  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on international protection grounds  and  under  the
    ECHR.

Decision

31. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal did not involve the making of an error of law.   That  decision,
    therefore, stands.

32. Accordingly, the appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.


                                                                      Signed

                                                                Andrew Grubb

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                                 2 June 2021
