
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07128/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8 January 2020                    |On 27 January 2020                   |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between


|           |Mr S S                                            |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

                                  Anonymity

I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No  report
of these proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other
persons. Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings. The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this  order,
with reasons.
I make this order because the appellant has made a protection claim.

Representation:
For the appellant:     No appearance.
For the respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of India born on 16 September 1982,  appeals,
    with permission  granted  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  ("UT"),  against  a
    decision of Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Kainth  (hereafter  the
    "judge")  who,  in  a  determination  promulgated  12  September   2019
    following a hearing on 28 August 2019, dismissed his appeal  on  asylum
    grounds, humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds.

 2. The appellant had claimed asylum because he said  he  was  at  risk  of
    persecution in India for the following reasons: (i) he  or  his  father
    owed money to people which had not been repaid; and (ii)  he  had  been
    involved with the Khalistan Movement in India. At  the  hearing  before
    the judge, he confirmed that he did not wish to pursue the claim  based
    on his or his father's unpaid debt obligations.

 3. The sole issue in this appeal is whether the failure of  the  judge  to
    adjourn the hearing of the appellant's appeal in order to allow him  to
    obtain  representation  has  resulted  in  the  appellant  having  been
    deprived of a fair hearing.

 4. Permission to appeal was refused by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT"). An
    Upper Tribunal Judge ("UTJ") granted permission to appeal. The UTJ said
    that it was arguable that "there was a lack of procedural  fairness  in
    the manner the appellant's application for an adjournment  was  decided
    by the judge".

 5. On the day when this appeal was listed for hearing before me, there was
    no appearance by or on behalf of the appellant. The clerk telephoned FR
    solicitors, the appellant's representatives. They sent an email to  the
    UT which was received on the same day at 12:51 hours in which they said
    that they had no knowledge of the  hearing  on  8  January  2020.  They
    confirmed that they had not received a Notice of Hearing and that  they
    only became aware of the hearing upon receiving a telephone  call  from
    the UT asking whether someone would attend the hearing. They  requested
    that  the  hearing  be  adjourned  so  that  they  could  take  further
    instructions from the appellant.

 6. I considered whether to exercise my discretion to adjourn the  hearing.
    I took into account the  fact  that  the  Notice  of  Hearing  dated  3
    December 2019 (Form IA113) had  been  sent  to  the  appellant  at  the
    address held  on  file  for  him  in  addition  to  being  sent  to  FR
    Solicitors. I was satisfied that this address was the  correct  address
    for him, as last notified to the Tribunal. I was satisfied that he  had
    been properly served with the Notice of Hearing and  that  it  had  not
    been proven that the Notices of hearing addressed to the appellant  and
    to his representatives had both been lost in the post.

 7. It was most unlikely that both Notices of hearing were lost in the post
    or had somehow gone astray. Even if the appellant's representatives had
    not received the Notice of Hearing, there was no  explanation  for  the
    appellant's  absence.  It  is  evident  from  the  procedural   history
    (described at para 10 below) and  the  non-appearance  at  the  hearing
    before me that this appellant has a track  record  for  requesting  his
    hearings to be adjourned. To date, he has made three requests  for  his
    hearings to be made, two requests during the course of the  proceedings
    in the FtT and the third being  the  request  to  adjourn  the  hearing
    before me.

 8. Having considered all of the circumstances,  the  overriding  objective
    and the needed for fairness (which is not limited to  fairness  to  the
    appellant but also includes fairness to the respondent), I  refused  to
    adjourn the hearing. I decided to exercise  my  discretion  to  proceed
    with the hearing in the absence of the appellant and any representation
    on his behalf.

 9. I heard briefly from Mr Lindsay.

10. The Tribunal's file shows that:

    i)     On 30 July 2019, a Notice was sent to the appellant  and  Morden
    Solicitors LLP, his then representatives, that the  pre-hearing  review
    would take place on 21 August 2019 and the full hearing  on  28  August
    2019. The appellant was in detention at that time. On  2  August  2019,
    the appellant was bailed to an address in Newcastle.

    ii)    On 9 August 2019, Morden Solicitors LLP  requested  the  FtT  to
    adjourn the hearing on 28 August 2019 and relist the  appeal  near  the
    appellant's residence.

    iii)   On 22 August 2019, the application to adjourn the hearing on  28
    August 2019 and transfer the appeal was refused by Judge of the  First-
    tier Tribunal L.S. Bulpitt.

    iv)    On 23 August 2019, the FtT received by facsimile a letter  dated
    23 August 2019 from Morden Solicitors LLP informing the  FtT  that  the
    appellant had withdrawn his instructions.

11. It is clear from the above that the appellant  chose  to  withdraw  his
    instructions from Morden Solicitors LLP knowing  that  the  adjournment
    request for the hearing on 28 August 2019 had been refused. He withdrew
    his instructions in the knowledge that  his  hearing  was  expected  to
    proceed on 28 August 2019.

12. The judge's Record of Proceedings  ("RoP")  shows  that  the  appellant
    initially stated that he wished to proceed with the  hearing,  that  he
    did not require legal representation and that there would no  witnesses
    other than himself. However, he subsequently changed his mind and  said
    that he wanted an  adjournment  and  that  he  was  trying  to  arrange
    finances via friends to obtain legal representation.

13. At paras 27-33, the judge  set  out  some  of  the  procedural  history
    explained above and gave  his  reasons  for  refusing  to  adjourn  the
    hearing. Paras 27-33 read:

         "27.     On the Tribunal file was a letter from  Morden  Solicitors
             LLP dated 23rd August 2019. It read:-

                  "We write to inform you that the  above-named  client  has
                  withdrawn his instruction and we are no longer acting  for
                  him. Please note that we will not be assisting him at this
                  hearing which is scheduled for  28th  March  2019.  Please
                  update your record and further  correspondence  should  be
                  made directly to  client.  Should  you  have  any  queries
                  regarding this matter please don't hesitate to contact our
                  office."

         28.      That letter was  sent  following  an  application  by  the
             solicitors under cover of 9th August for a  change  of  venue.
             Duty Judge Bulpitt on 22nd August 2019 refused the application
             stating: -

                  "... The appellant's application to adjourn the hearing on
                  28th August 2019 and transfer the hearing of the appeal is
                  refused. It is noted that the appellant is now on bail and
                  living in Newcastle. The Tribunal Procedure Rules identify
                  that  dealing  with  cases  fairly  and  justly   includes
                  avoiding  delay,  so  far  as   compatible   with   proper
                  consideration of the issues. It  is  now  more  than  four
                  months  since  the  appellant  claimed   asylum   and   an
                  adjournment and transfer of the hearing will result  in  a
                  significant further delay. In all the circumstances it  is
                  in the interest of dealing with the case fairly and justly
                  that the appeal proceed on the date fixed ..."

         29.      Initially, the appellant confirmed that he  was  ready  to
             proceed with the appeal, did not require legal  representation
             and had no documentation upon which he sought to rely upon.

         30.      A few minutes into the hearing, the appellant changed  his
             mind and requested an adjournment. He confirmed  that  he  was
             not relying or  calling  any  witnesses.  The  reason  for  an
             adjournment was in order to secure  legal  representation.  He
             did not have the requisite financial means to instruct lawyers
             currently  but  would  ask  friends   to   provide   financial
             assistance in order that he could secure legal representation.

         31.      The application to adjourn was opposed by Mr  Grennan  who
             represented the respondent.

         32.      I gave careful consideration to the application. There  is
             no guarantee that the appellant now on bail would be  able  to
             secure sufficient funds to instruct legal representatives. The
             appellant confirmed that he was not relying upon  any  further
             documentation. He did not propose to call  any  witnesses.  He
             stated that the account he provided during the course  of  his
             screening  and  asylum  interviews  was  correct.  He  further
             confirmed that the  only  issue  for  consideration  was  with
             respect to his  impugned  political  affiliation  and  not  as
             previously stated by him  during  the  course  of  his  asylum
             interview, that he is wanted by a moneylender in India on  the
             basis that his father took a loan out which had not been  paid
             because of his untimely death and the loan has now transferred
             to the appellant.

         33.      The application to adjourn was refused."

14. In summarising the oral evidence at the hearing,  the  judge  said,  at
    para 56:

         "56.     The appellant was asked a  number  of  questions  by  both
             myself and Mr Grennan with respect to his involvement with the
             Movement and  the  basis  of  his  claim.  The  appellant  was
             hesitant in answering questions. He repeated on more than  one
             occasion "I need to speak to my lawyer to get advice  and  pay
             him." The appellant was invited to explain in as  much  detail
             as possible why he was unable to return to India. The  account
             he  gave  during  the  course  of  his   oral   evidence   was
             inconsistent with what he said during the course of his asylum
             interview."

15. The judge proceeded to consider the appellant's account of his  alleged
    fear of persecution on account of  his  alleged  involvement  with  the
    Khalistan Movement, taking into account, in summary, the following:

    i)     the change in the basis of his asylum claim,  from  his  alleged
    fear on account of the financial debt in his first screening  interview
    in 2009 to "He claims to belong to a certain political  party  ...  The
    parties had a dispute over land his father was murdered..." in his most
    recent screening interview (paras 52-53 of the judge's decision);

    ii)    that, during the course of his interview  on  8  May  2019,  the
    appellant distanced himself from the  reference  to  the  land  dispute
    because at question 259 he said that there was  no  such  land  dispute
    (para 54 of the judge's decision);

    iii)   that the account he gave in oral evidence was inconsistent  with
    his answers at his asylum interview, as the judge explained at paras 57-
    66 which read:

         "57.     During his asylum interview (AIV 52) he  stated  that  his
             problems in India commenced in 1997 however, later on  in  the
             interview he stated that his problems commenced in  2006  (AIV
             161).

         58.      The appellant joined the Movement  (called  Akalidhal)  in
             2005. This is some years after he claimed  that  his  troubles
             commenced in 1997 and in the alternative  one  year  after  in
             2006. There is an internal inconsistency with respect to  when
             the claimed difficulties arose.

         59.      The appellant claimed that he had been arrested  on  three
             separate occasions the first arrest in  June  2006  (AIV  74).
             However, to question 166 he stated his  first  was  arrest  in
             1995/1996.

         60.      The appellant during his oral evidence said that his first
             arrest was in around June 2006, his  second  arrest  two/three
             months later and he was last arrested in June  2007.  That  he
             was admitted to more than one hospital as consequence of being
             assaulted viciously by the police. Whilst I  acknowledge  that
             the  appellant  is  not  required  to  provide   corroborative
             evidence, it  would  not  have  been  too  difficult  for  the
             appellant to have obtained appropriate medical  evidence  from
             the hospital in India to confirm that he was admitted and  the
             treatment he received.

         61.      He claimed that his deceased father was a  member  of  the
             Movement (AIV 64) but later on in the interview (AIV  127)  he
             said that his father was  a  prominent  leader  in  the  party
             notwithstanding his earlier response  coupled  with  the  fact
             that his father was uneducated and a farmer.

         62.      That his father had been arrested  on  multiple  occasions
             (AIV 126/127) but criminal charges  although  initiated,  were
             subsequently  withdrawn  (129).  That  his  father  was   last
             arrested when the appellant was age [sic] 10 (AIV 138),  which
             would mean that his late father's last arrest was in or around
             1992. This  significantly  predates  the  appellant's  claimed
             involvement with the Movement.

         63.      As stated above, during  the  course  of  the  appellant's
             original screening interview in 2009, he made no reference  to
             his involvement with any political party/Khalistan Movement.

         64.      I  do  not  find  it  credible  that  if  the  appellant's
             involvement in demonstrations was as prolific  as  he  claims,
             resulting in three  arrests  and  significant  beatings  as  a
             consequence by  the  police,  he  would  be  released  without
             charge.

         65.      Within the body of the Rule 35 report,  the  Doctor  noted
             that the appellant claimed to have been tortured in  India  in
             2007 due to a property dispute. That  his  father  was  killed
             over property and that the police were involved as well as his
             uncle who had paid the police off. That he was tortured with a
             burning rod  and  was  stabbed  with  a  knife.  The  injuries
             recorded were multiple burn scars to the right lower  leg  and
             scar to the abdomen which required stitches in hospital.  That
             explanation to  the  Doctor  is  inconsistent  with  what  the
             appellant had  to  state  during  the  course  of  his  asylum
             interview when he claimed that he had been assaulted via  rod,
             iron pipes and a leather strip (AIV 98, 114 and 119).

         66.      An additional inconsistency with respect  to  the  account
             provided to the Medical Examiner is that during the course  of
             his asylum interview, the appellant claimed that he  had  been
             targeted by the police because of  his  involvement  with  the
             Khalistan Movement and because they wanted to build their  own
             temple in Punjab (AIV 37 and 60). The Rule 35  report  coupled
             with a body map and the  observation  made  by  the  examining
             physician  are  not  corroborative   with   respect   to   the
             appellant's account. The  report  is  not  in  line  with  the
             Istanbul Protocol and the appellant's injuries as noted by the
             Medical Examiner could have been inflicted in  any  number  of
             ways. In line with the case of Mibanga and SA (Somalia) [2006]
             EWCA Civ 1302, the injuries as noted could have been  everyday
             injuries and are not determinative of the appellant's claim."

The grounds

16.  The  grounds  refer  to  the  Upper  Tribunal's  decision  in  Nwaigwe
    (adjournment: fairness) [2014] UKUT  00418  (IAC)  and  the  overriding
    objective in rule 2 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)
    (Immigration and Asylum Chamber) Rules 2014. They further refer to  the
    fact that:

    i)     the appellant was unrepresented at the hearing;

    ii)     there  was  no  appellant's  bundle  and  not  even  a  witness
    statement;

    iii)   Morden Solicitors LLP had come off the records five days  before
    the hearing;

    iv)    there was no exploration by the judge why Morden Solicitors  LLP
    had come off the record;

    v)     the judge failed to consider the issue of fairness, whether  the
    appellant would be deprived of a fair hearing, as there was no  mention
    of this anywhere in his decision; he erred in refusing the  adjournment
    request solely on the basis that the appellant "would not  be  able  to
    secure  sufficient  funds  ...  was  not  relying  upon   any   further
    documentation [and] did not propose to call any witnesses".

    vi)    the appellant had repeatedly raised the issue of  representation
    on more than one occasion as mentioned by the judge at para 56  of  his
    decision;

    vii)   it was clear that without the benefit of closing  argument,  let
    alone an appellant's bundle or witness statement, the  appellant  could
    not receive a fair hearing; and

    viii)  the issues in the appeal were "not especially straightforward".

Assessment

17. FR Solicitors  made  the  applications  to  the  FtT  and  the  UT  for
    permission. The same grounds were relied upon.  They  were  settled  by
    Counsel. Neither FR Solicitors nor Counsel appeared to  be  aware  that
    the appellant had withdrawn his instructions from Morden Solicitors LLP
    five days before the hearing on 28 August 2019 and that he  did  so  in
    the full knowledge that an adjournment request had already been refused
    and it was therefore expected that the full hearing would proceed.

18. Far from it being the case, as contended in the grounds, that the judge
    was obliged to explore the reasons why  Morden  Solicitors  LLP  ceased
    acting just five days before the hearing, it was for the  appellant  to
    explain why, having instructed legal representatives so as to be in the
    position of being legally represented  at  his  hearing,  he  chose  to
    withdraw his instructions from Morden Solicitors  LLP  just  five  days
    before the hearing date and leave himself in the position of  attending
    his hearing without representation.

19. As Judge Bulpitt said in refusing the adjournment request of  9  August
    2019, four months had elapsed since the appellant made his asylum claim
    on 12 April 2019. Furthermore, the appellant has  been  in  the  United
    Kingdom since  2  September  2009  when  he  claimed  to  have  entered
    illegally. The events that he based his asylum claim upon had  occurred
    before he entered the United  Kingdom.  Plainly,  it  was  not  in  his
    interest nor was it fair for there to be  any  further  delays  in  the
    determination of his asylum claim.

20. The grounds say nothing about the judge's assessment of the appellant's
    substantive case. They fail to engage with the judge's reasoning in any
    way and explain precisely how legal representation could have  assisted
    in a fair assessment of his asylum claim.

21. It is evident from the judge's reasoning that the appellant  was  given
    every opportunity to explain the discrepancies in his evidence. In  the
    absence of any explanation in the grounds, it is impossible to see  how
    legal representation at the hearing could have made a difference.

22. In all of the circumstances, I have concluded that it  simply  has  not
    been shown that the appellant has been deprived of a fair hearing.

23. I have therefore concluded that the  judge's  refusal  to  adjourn  the
    hearing on 28 August 2019 did not  deprive  the  appellant  of  a  fair
    hearing.




    Decision

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of any error of law sufficient  to  require  it  to  be  set
    aside.

    Accordingly, the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  to  dismiss  the
    appellant's appeal against the respondent decision on  asylum  grounds,
    humanitarian protection grounds and human rights grounds stands.


[pic]

Signed      Date: 20 January 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

