
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07037/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th March 2018                             |On 6th April 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    bakf
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal in a decision dated
    5th February 2018 following an  error  of  law  hearing  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal. That decision is appended hereto.

The hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 2. There were  a  number  of  findings  of  fact  preserved.   These  were
    highlighted by Ms Jones in  her  skeleton  argument  prepared  for  the
    resumed hearing.  The issues left in dispute were those  identified  at
    (i) and (ii) at paragraph 6 of the skeleton argument and relate to  the
    background to the Appellant's arrest in Sri  Lanka  in  December  2007.
    The other issues in dispute were those identified at (vi) and (vii)  of
    paragraph 6 of the skeleton argument which relate to the  detention  of
    the Appellant's younger brother and evidence about ongoing interest  in
    the Appellant since his departure from Sri Lanka.

 3. In remaking the decision in this appeal I had the  following  documents
    before me:

       . The Respondent's First-tier Tribunal bundle.

       . Appellant's First-tier Tribunal bundle.

       . Appellant's supplementary bundle.

       . Appellant's chronology.

       . Appellant's Upper Tribunal Skeleton argument.

 4. I heard oral evidence from the Appellant through an interpreter  having
    ensured that the Appellant and the interpreter understood  each  other.
    I heard submissions from Mr Clarke and  Ms  Jones  and  I  reserved  my
    decision.

 5. In oral evidence the Appellant adopted his two  witness  statements  of
    22nd August 2017 and 5th March 2018.  He  drew  attention  to  a  Human
    Rights Watch report  which  was  exhibited  to  his  witness  statement
    highlighting that one of  the  case  studies  reported  therein  was  a
    Sinhalese person who had been arrested  by  the  authorities.   He  was
    asked in examination-in-chief why in his asylum interview  at  question
    86 he referred only to one visit by the authorities to his family  home
    in December 2016 and he said  that  he  answered  the  question  as  he
    understood it.  He understood that he  was  being  asked  about  recent
    visits by the authorities and that is why he only  mentioned  the  most
    recent visit.

 6. In cross-examination the Appellant was  asked  a  number  of  questions
    about the application said to have been made in  2010.   He  was  asked
    questions about the two men he had said stayed at his father's house in
    2007.

My Findings

Asylum

 7. The First-tier Tribunal Judge made a number of findings of  fact  which
    were not challenged and have been preserved.  It has been accepted that
    the Appellant was detained on 24th December 2007 and  was  released  by
    way of a bribe on 21st January 2008.  It was accepted that he had  been
    ill-treated in detention.  The Appellant remained in  Sri  Lanka  until
    June or July 2008 when he came to the UK  on  his  own  passport.   The
    Appellant claimed asylum on 4th January 2017.

 8. One of the issues in dispute before me is around the  reasons  for  the
    Appellant's arrest  and  detention  in  2007.   In  oral  evidence  the
    Appellant said that the two men were staying in his father's house.  In
    the asylum interview at question 99 the  Appellant  said  that  he  was
    arrested because the authorities thought that he was  involved  and  he
    helped them providing accommodation and being friendly with  these  two
    men.

 9. The Appellant said in his asylum interview  that  two  friends  of  his
    brothers stayed in the Appellant's family home and that  the  Appellant
    and his brother  were  arrested.   The  Appellant  said  that  when  he
    returned to Sri Lanka from Russia these two friends were staying in his
    room in the Appellant's family home.  He said that these two  men  left
    in October 2007 and that in December  2007  the  authorities  came  and
    arrested the Appellant and his brother for questioning.  The  Appellant
    said (question 34) that when he was arrested he was  shown  photographs
    and asked if he could identify any people.  These included the two  men
    who had stayed in the family home.  This had arisen because the two men
    who had stayed in the house were said by the authorities to  have  been
    involved in an attack on an air force camp and that they both  died  in
    that attack.  In his asylum interview the Appellant said  that  he  did
    not know why his father had not been arrested  but  said  that  it  was
    because his father was elderly (question 41).

10. Mr Clarke  submitted  that  there  was  a  conflict  between  what  the
    Appellant said in his  asylum  interview  and  what  he  said  in  oral
    evidence. However,  I  accept  the  Appellant's  account  that  he  was
    arrested because these two men had stayed in their  house  and  because
    the Appellant had been friendly with them.  I do not  accept  the  fact
    that the Appellant's father was not arrested to  cast  any  significant
    doubt on the Appellant's account as to why he  was  arrested.   In  the
    context of the judge's unchallenged findings  that  the  Appellant  was
    arrested and tortured as claimed, I accept the  reasons  given  by  the
    Appellant for being arrested in these circumstances.

11. In considering the issue of risk on return I have considered Section  8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants etc.)  Act  2004.
    The Appellant entered the UK in June or July 2008  and  did  not  claim
    asylum until 4th January 2017. There was therefore a  very  significant
    delay in claiming asylum.

12. The Appellant claimed that two weeks after he arrived  in  the  UK  his
    brother disappeared being re-detained by the authorities.   It  appears
    that the Appellant's leave to enter the UK  expired  at  some  time  in
    2010.  The Appellant claimed that an application for further  leave  to
    remain was made on his behalf  in  2010.   At  the  hearing  Mr  Clarke
    submitted a  Home  Office  document  entitled  'Notice  of  Immigration
    Decision Notice of Removal' in relation to  the  Appellant  dated  23rd
    March 2016 which states that the Appellant was a person with  no  leave
    to enter or remain in the UK and that  a  decision  had  been  made  to
    curtail/revoke his leave so that it expired with immediate effect.  The
    reasons given for that decision were that the Appellant  had  no  legal
    basis in the UK and failed to regularise his stay or leave  in  the  UK
    committing offence under Section 24(1)(b)(i)  of  the  Immigration  Act
    1971.  The Notice states that the Appellant arrived in the UK  on  28th
    April 2005 with a general family visit visa dated  until  28th  October
    2005.  At the hearing it was clarified that this related to a  previous
    visit to the UK.  The notice goes on to state that on  16th  June  2010
    the Appellant made an application for leave outside of the  Immigration
    Rules which was refused on 22nd June 2010.  The notice stated that  the
    Appellant had  made  no  attempt  to  regularise  his  stay  since  his
    application for leave to remain on 22nd June 2010 and that  he  had  no
    outstanding applications or appeals.

13. In his supplementary bundle the Appellant submitted a letter  from  his
    previous representative and a letter from the  Home  Office  dated  4th
    November 2010 in relation  to  an  application  for  a  certificate  of
    approval for marriage for the Appellant and his wife.  Both letters are
    dated 4th November 2010.  The Appellant said in oral evidence  that  he
    had not received any correspondence in 2010 in  relation  to  his  2010
    application.  He said in  oral  evidence  that  he  believed  that  the
    application made in 2010 was outstanding and pending with  no  decision
    and that he was not informed of anything at all during the period  from
    2010 until 2016.   He  said  that  he  chased  up  the  application  by
    enquiring with his solicitor who acted for him until 2016. He said that
    when he enquired about the 2010 application his solicitor told  him  to
    wait patiently and said that his  passport  and  other  documents  were
    still with the Home Office and they were in the process of  considering
    it.  He said that this went on for six years.  He said that he paid his
    solicitors for this work.  He said that when he saw  his  solicitor  in
    2010 he told him about his fear in Sri  Lanka  but  he  did  not  claim
    asylum because the solicitor told him that if he  was  sent  home  that
    nothing could be done about it.  He said that  his  previous  solicitor
    told him not to claim asylum as he would be sent  back  to  Sri  Lanka.
    The solicitor told him that the alternative application which was being
    made would take some time and would succeed and the Appellant would not
    be caused any  problems  during  the  period  whilst  waiting  for  the
    decision.  He said that he used to go to  the  solicitor's  office  and
    spoke to him every two months or so and each time he was told  to  wait
    and be patient as the application was being  processed.  He  was  asked
    whether he  had  made  any  complaint  about  the  solicitor  since  he
    instructed his new solicitors.  He said that he had told  them  but  he
    did not know whether any complaint had been made.

14. There are significant discrepancies between this oral evidence and what
    the Appellant said in the asylum interview on 14th June 2017.

15. At question 98 the Appellant was asked why he did not claim asylum upon
    arrival in the UK.  He said that he saw a solicitor when he arrived and
    as he had a visa for two years he was frightened but  he  thought  that
    when his brother was released that he could go back to Sri Lanka within
    the two years time.  He was asked at question 103 why he did not  claim
    asylum when his leave to remain in the UK expired but he answered  that
    it had not expired because he had applied for "FLRO".  He  claims  that
    the response to the  FLRO  came  "last  year".   At  question  106  the
    Appellant was asked why he could not remember where his  solicitor  was
    based if it was only last year when he was dealing with  them  and  the
    Appellant said, "I applied for FLRO in 2010 and I did  not  go  to  the
    office but I think it is in Uxbridge.  If I go to see him I need to pay
    the fees.  I haven't got the fees".  In  my  view  this  is  clearly  a
    conflict with the Appellant's oral evidence that he  went  to  see  his
    solicitor every two months  between  2010  and  2016.   There  is  also
    conflict between the Appellant's oral evidence when he said that he did
    not owe his solicitor any fees. This conflict goes to the core  of  the
    Appellant's claimed reason for not claiming  asylum  between  2010  and
    2016 and his claim that he believed that his  application  was  pending
    with the Home Office for six years. It may well be that  he  failed  to
    contact his former solicitor during those years. There is  no  evidence
    from the previous solicitors to corroborate the Appellant's claim  that
    he was not aware of the refusal in 2010 until 2016.

16. The Appellant is seeking to  rely  on  alleged  poor  advice  from  his
    previous solicitor yet there is no evidence that any complaint was made
    about the solicitor or that the solicitor was given any opportunity  to
    address the complaints made about him. This is particularly relevant in
    light of the decision in BT  (Former  solicitors'  alleged  misconduct)
    Nepal  [2004] UKIAT 00311 where the guidance is summarised in the head
    note as follows:

         "If an appeal is based in whole or in part on allegations about the
         conduct of former representatives,  there  must  be  evidence  that
         those allegations have been put to the former  representative,  and
         the Tribunal must be shown either the  response  or  correspondence
         indicating that there has been no response."

17. In the absence of any evidence that these have been put to  the  former
    solicitors I cannot attach weight to these allegations.

18.  A  further  issue  which  arises  from  the  correspondence   in   the
    supplementary Appellant's bundle is the contents of a letter  from  the
    Appellant's previous solicitors dated 12th April 2016 which  refers  to
    the notice of removal of March 2016 referred to above.  The section 120
    notice gives a number of  reasons  for  the  Appellant's  inability  to
    return to Sri Lanka including the fact that the  Appellant's  wife  was
    said to be a Sri Lankan Sinhalese national and his  wife  is  a  failed
    asylum seeker whose fear of persecution remains undiminished  and  that
    he fears for his life and liberty on the basis of his imputed political
    opinion as the husband of one who fears persecution  for  a  Convention
    reason. There is no mention of the Appellant's  own  claimed  fears  of
    return to Sri Lanka. When I asked him about this in oral  evidence  the
    Appellant said that the solicitor told him that he was writing a  reply
    to what the Home Office had sent him and that when he received feedback
    he would take the next step. However this response does not make  sense
    in the context of a section 120 notice.

19. The Appellant has not established that he did not receive the  decision
    of 2010 as claimed. He failed to claim asylum in 2010 and has  provided
    no evidence that his allegations that he received poor advice were  put
    to  his  former  solicitors.  Further,  he  has  given  an   inadequate
    explanation as to why he failed to claim asylum in 2016  when  he  says
    that he was aware of the refusal of his application. He has  failed  to
    put claims of negligence or the failure to give proper  advice  to  his
    previous solicitors and has not pursued any complaint against them.

20. In these circumstances I find that the  Appellant's  failure  to  claim
    asylum on arrival, in 2010, or in 2016 when he claims that he knew that
    his  application  had   been   refused,   significantly   damages   his
    credibility.  He has not provided any reasonable  explanation  for  his
    failure to do so. The Appellant has  already  been  found  credible  in
    relation to his description of events in Sri  Lanka.   However,  in  my
    view the Appellant's failure to claim asylum damages the credibility of
    his claim that he is at ongoing risk upon return to Sri Lanka.

21. A further issue in dispute is  around  visits  to  his  father  by  the
    authorities. In his asylum interview at question 86 the  Appellant  was
    asked why he felt the authorities would still be interested in  him  if
    he returned.  He answered, "last December 2016, there was a visit  from
    CID to my house, they searched the home".  The Appellant went on to say
    that the authorities had called  because  the  Appellant's  father  was
    looking for his brother and they told him not to tell people  that  his
    son was missing and they said that if his father looked for the brother
    they would look for him as well.  He said that they were searching  the
    house to see if there was any involvement with the  Appellant  and  his
    family and find out where the Appellant was living  [Q.  91].   He  was
    again asked why the authorities would be still interested in him and he
    said that they threatened that if he  did  not  stop  looking  for  his
    brother they would find the Appellant. In oral evidence  the  Appellant
    said that by 2010 the authorities had visited his father "many  times".
    In cross-examination the Appellant was asked why he said in his  asylum
    interview at question 86 that the authorities had come in December 2016
    and he said that he was answering the question he had been asked and he
    understood that it referred to the most recent visit and that is why he
    referred to the most recent visit. However in the series  of  questions
    from Q86-92 about  the  authorities  visits  the  Appellant  failed  to
    mention more than one visit and he did not  give  any  explanation  for
    that failure.

22. I note that in his first witness statement at paragraphs 23 and 24  the
    Appellant said that he spoke to his father two weeks after  he  arrived
    in the UK and he said that the authorities had called to look  for  the
    Appellant and that they took his younger brother and at paragraph 24 he
    said that the Sri Lankan authorities had been  going  to  his  parents'
    house continually from the time of his escape from detention.

23. The Appellant's father made  two  witness  statements.   In  his  first
    witness statement dated 18th August 2017 he said that  the  authorities
    were continuously visiting his family home after the Appellant  escaped
    from detention and that they took the younger son when they were unable
    to find the Appellant.  He said that the Sri Lankan authorities came to
    their home more than 50 times during the ten year period and  the  last
    time they had come was 22nd June 2017.  In his witness statement  dated
    28th February 2018 he said that the authorities continued  to  come  to
    the family home and the last time they visited  was  on  11th  February
    2018.

24. I find that  there  is  a  very  significant  discrepancy  between  the
    Appellant's  answers  in  his  asylum  interview  and  in  the  witness
    statements and oral evidence given subsequently. In the context of  all
    of the questions asked I do not accept the Appellant's explanation that
    he  was  only  being  asked  about  recent  visits.  I  find  that  the
    Appellant's evidence since the asylum interview has  been  embellished.
    His  credibility  in  relation  to  this  issue  has   been   seriously
    undermined.

25. In oral evidence the appellant said that he  had  never  supported  the
    LTTE or Tamil separatists and that he had never been  involved  in  any
    anti-Sri Lanka Government activities in the UK. He  confirmed  that  he
    was not aware of having been the subject of any arrest warrant  in  Sri
    Lanka and had not been charged with any  offences.  When  asked  by  Mr
    Clarke why he had not instructed a legal adviser in Sri Lanka  to  deal
    with the issues with the  authorities  there  he  gave  no  explanation
    saying that he watches and reads the news from here.

26. The relevant country guidance is that set out in GJ and  others  (post-
    civil war: returnees)  Sri  Lanka  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC).  The
    guidance is summarised in the head note as follows:

         "(1) This determination replaces all existing country  guidance  on
         Sri Lanka.

         (2) The focus of the Sri Lankan government's  concern  has  changed
         since the civil war ended in May  2009.   The  LTTE  in  Sri  Lanka
         itself is a spent force and there have been no terrorist  incidents
         since the end of the civil war.

         (3)  The  government's  present  objective  is  to  identify  Tamil
         activists in the diaspora who are working for Tamil separatism  and
         to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state enshrined in  Amendment
         6(1) to the Sri Lankan Constitution in 1983,  which  prohibits  the
         'violation of territorial integrity' of Sri Lanka.  Its focus is on
         preventing both (a) the resurgence of the LTTE or any similar Tamil
         separatist organisation and (b) the revival of the civil war within
         Sri Lanka.

         (4) If a person is detained by the  Sri  Lankan  security  services
         there remains a  real  risk  of  ill-treatment  or  harm  requiring
         international protection.

         (5) Internal relocation is not an option within  Sri  Lanka  for  a
         person at real risk from the  Sri  Lankan  authorities,  since  the
         government now controls the whole  of  Sri  Lanka  and  Tamils  are
         required to return to a named address  after  passing  through  the
         airport.

         (6) There are no detention facilities at the airport.   Only  those
         whose names appear on a "stop"  list  will  be  detained  from  the
         airport.  Any risk for those in whom the Sri Lankan authorities are
         or become interested exists not at the airport, but  after  arrival
         in their home area, where their arrival will be verified by the CID
         or police within a few days.

          (7)  The current categories of persons at real risk of persecution
         or serious harm on return to Sri Lanka,  whether  in  detention  or
         otherwise, are:

             (a)  Individuals who are, or are perceived to be, a threat  to
             the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state because they are,
             or are perceived to have a significant  role  in  relation  to
             post-conflict Tamil separatism within the  diaspora  and/or  a
             renewal of hostilities within Sri Lanka.
             (b)       Journalists (whether in print  or  other  media)  or
             human rights activists, who, in either case,  have  criticised
             the Sri Lankan government,  in  particular  its  human  rights
             record, or who are associated with  publications  critical  of
             the Sri Lankan government.
             (c)  Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the  Lessons
             Learned and  Reconciliation  Commission  implicating  the  Sri
             Lankan  security  forces,  armed  forces  or  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities in alleged war crimes.  Among those who  may  have
             witnessed war crimes during the conflict, particularly in  the
             No-Fire Zones  in  May  2009,  only  those  who  have  already
             identified themselves by giving such evidence would  be  known
             to the Sri Lankan authorities and therefore only they  are  at
             real risk of adverse attention or  persecution  on  return  as
             potential or actual war crimes witnesses.
             (d)  A person whose name appears on a computerised "stop" list
             accessible at the airport, comprising a list of those  against
             whom there  is  an  extant  court  order  or  arrest  warrant.
             Individuals whose name  appears  on  a  "stop"  list  will  be
             stopped at the airport and handed over to the appropriate  Sri
             Lankan authorities, in pursuance of such order or warrant.

         (8)  The Sri Lankan authorities' approach is based on sophisticated
         intelligence, both as to activities within Sri  Lanka  and  in  the
         diaspora.  The Sri Lankan authorities know  that  many  Sri  Lankan
         Tamils travelled abroad as economic migrants and also that everyone
         in the Northern Province had some level  of  involvement  with  the
         LTTE  during  the  civil  war.   In  post-conflict  Sri  Lanka,  an
         individual's past history will be relevant only to the extent  that
         it is perceived by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  as  indicating  a
         present risk to the unitary Sri Lankan  state  or  the  Sri  Lankan
         Government.

         (9)   The  authorities  maintain  a  computerised  intelligence-led
         "watch" list. A person whose name appears on a "watch" list is  not
         reasonably likely to  be  detained  at  the  airport  but  will  be
         monitored by the security services after his or her return. If that
         monitoring does not indicate that such a person is a Tamil activist
         working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state or  revive  the
         internal armed conflict, the individual  in  question  is  not,  in
         general, reasonably likely to be detained by the  security  forces.
         That will be a question of fact in  each  case,  dependent  on  any
         diaspora activities carried out by such an individual.

         (10) Consideration must always be given to whether, in the light of
         an individual's activities and responsibilities  during  the  civil
         war, the exclusion clauses are engaged (Article 1F of  the  Refugee
         Convention and  Article  12(2)  of  the  Qualification  Directive).
         Regard should be had to the categories for exclusion set out in the
         "Eligibility Guidelines For Assessing the International  Protection
         Needs of Asylum-Seekers from Sri Lanka", published by UNHCR  on  21
         December 2012."

27. In MP & NT v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 829 Underhill LJ said  at  paragraph
    50:
         "...I would, however,  like  to  emphasise  one  point.  The  clear
         message of the Upper Tribunal's guidance is that a record  of  past
         LTTE activism does not as such constitute a risk factor for  Tamils
         returning to Sri Lanka, because the  Government's  concern  is  now
         only with current or future threats to the integrity of  Sri  Lanka
         as a unitary state; and that that is so even if the returnee's past
         links with the LTTE were of the  kind characterised  by  UNHCR  as
         "more elaborate". I respectfully agree with the Vice-President that
         that is a conclusion which it was entitled to  reach.  It  is  also
         clear that the Tribunal believed that "diaspora activism",  actual
         or perceived, is the principal basis on which the Government of Sri
         Lanka is likely to treat returning Tamils as posing  a  current  or
         future threat; and I agree that that too was a conclusion which  it
         was entitled to reach. But I do not read para. 356 (7) (a)  of  its
         determination as prescribing that diaspora  activism  is  the  only
         basis on which a returning Tamil might be regarded as posing such a
         threat and thus of being at risk on return. Even apart from cases
         falling under heads (b)-(d) in para. 356  (7),  there  may,  though
         untypically, be other cases (of which NT may be an  example)  where
         the evidence shows  particular  grounds  for  concluding  that  the
         Government might regard the applicant as posing a current threat to
         the integrity of Sri Lanka as a single state even in the absence of
         evidence that he or she has been involved in diaspora activism."

28. On the preserved findings and my additional findings in relation to the
    background in Sri Lanka the appellant was  detained  on  24th  December
    2007 because of two young Tamils who had been  staying  in  the  family
    home. He was tortured in  detention.  He  was  released  following  the
    payment of a bribe on 21st  January  2008.  This  past  persecution  is
    relevant, however in determining whether the Appellant is  at  risk  on
    return I must consider the Appellant's account of past persecution  and
    ongoing interest in light of the background and risk factors identified
    in GJ.

29. Ms Jones submitted that at paragraph 50 of MP Underhill LJ  highlighted
    that there may be other cases which could  be  allowed.  She  submitted
    that the Appellant comes within the UNHCR guidelines referred to in  MP
    and that the Appellant comes within 7 (iv) or (vi) of those guidelines.
    However in my view the Appellant was perceived to have been  associated
    with two young Tamil men in 2007 he accepts that he is not a Tamil  and
    has had no links with the LTTE or Tamil separatist groups and has  been
    involved in no activity in the UK.  I  do  not  accept  that  his  past
    perceived association could conceivably seen as a tamil activist within
    the guidelines set out in GJ.

30. There are fundamental conflicts between the Appellant's account in  his
    asylum interview and since then as to claimed  ongoing  visits  to  his
    father's  house  by  the  authorities.  This  conflict  undermines  the
    credibility of his account in relation to  this  matter.  Significantly
    the Appellant did not claim asylum for 9 years in the UK.  I  have  not
    accepted the explanations he has given for this failure  and  this  too
    fundamentally undermines his claim. Further, even in 2016 when his then
    representatives raised asylum issues these  were  only  raised  in  the
    context of his wife's claimed fear in Sri Lanka.  This  too  undermines
    the Appellant's claim to have been in fear  of  return  to  Sri  Lanka.
    Significantly too, there are no arrest warrants or charges against  the
    Appellant and he does not support the LTTE or Sri Lanka separatists and
    has  not  been  involved  in  any   diaspora   activities.   In   these
    circumstances he does not come with any of the risk factors in GJ.

31. Taking all of the evidence into account I find that the  Appellant  has
    not demonstrated that he has a well-founded fear of persecution in  Sri
    Lanka for a Convention reason.

Humanitarian Protection

32. I find that, for the reasons above, the Appellant has  not  established
    that he would face a real risk of suffering serious harm in Sri Lanka.

 Articles 2 & 3

33. In light of my findings above I am not satisfied that if he returns  to
    China the Appellant may be subjected to torture, inhuman  or  degrading
    treatment or punishment or face death in breach of Articles 2 or  3  of
    the ECHR.



Private and Family life

Article 8

34. At the hearing Ms Jones relied on the skeleton argument in relation  to
    the Appellant's private and family life. It is claimed that  he  has  a
    wife and daughter aged 6. However there was no oral evidence  from  the
    Appellant as to his private and family life. I had no witness statement
    or oral evidence from the Appellant's wife. There was no evidence as to
    her immigration status.  Although  the  marriage  certificate  and  the
    daughter's birth certificate were produced in  the  Appellant's  First-
    tier Tribunal bundle there was little evidence  before  me  as  to  the
    nature and extent of the family life enjoyed by the Appellant.  In  the
    absence of adequate evidence I am unable to find that the Appellant has
    established that there will be a disproportionate interference with his
    private or family life in the UK.

Notice of Decision

The  appeal  is  dismissed  on  humanitarian  protection  and  human  rights
grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 30th March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed                              Date: 30th March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-CK-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07037/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2018                          |                              |
|                                              |..............................|
|                                              |.........                     |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES

                                   Between

                                    BAKF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, Counsel, instructed by A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of  Sri  Lanka,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  5th  July
    2017 to refuse his application for asylum.  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Cameron dismissed his appeal in a decision promulgated on 8th September
    2017.  The Appellant appeals to this Tribunal with  permission  granted
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Pickup on 21st November 2017.

 2. The Appellant claims that he is a  Sri  Lankan  national  of  Sinhalese
    origin.  He claims that two of his brother's friends  who  were  Tamils
    were living in their family home and that in December 2007 he  and  his
    brother were taken by the CID and detained for a period of three  weeks
    during which time he was questioned about the two men.  He claims  that
    he has two younger brothers.  He says that  the  brother  next  to  him
    lives in Russia with his Russian wife and that the youngest brother  is
    the one who was arrested with him.  He claims that he was released upon
    payment of a bribe and taken to his maternal uncle's house and that his
    youngest brother was released three  weeks  later  and  came  to  their
    uncle's house as well.  The Appellant claims that he left Sri Lanka  on
    a student visa.  He entered the UK on foot of that visa in June or July
    in 2008.  He claimed asylum on 4th January 2017.

 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge considered the witness statement and  the
    oral evidence of the Appellant along with the  witness  statement  from
    his father and medical evidence from Dr  Izquierdo-Martin.   The  judge
    concluded at paragraph 69:

         "69. The Appellant's evidence in relation to his detention in  2007
             has on the whole been consistent.   He  has  provided  medical
             evidence confirming that he has a number of scars on his  body
             which support his statement that he was ill-treated during his
             detention.  The medical report provided by Dr Izquierdo-Martin
             deals with the relevant scars which are stated  to  be  either
             consistent or typical within  the  Istanbul  Protocol.   I  do
             place particular weight on the burn scars  the  Appellant  has
             which are consistent with the independent  evidence  available
             in relation to the type of torture  used  by  the  Sri  Lankan
             authorities and which Dr Izquierdo-Martin finds to be  typical
             of unwilling and deliberately caused injuries.

         70.  I have had an opportunity  to  hear  oral  evidence  from  the
             Appellant and to consider all of the other evidence available.
              I am satisfied to  the  lower  standard  of  proof  that  the
             Appellant was detained in  2007  and  was  subjected  to  ill-
             treatment.  The Appellant's evidence as to the extent of  that
             ill-treatment is consistent and is supported  by  the  medical
             evidence now provided."

    The judge went on to accept that the  Appellant  was  released  on  the
    payment of a bribe.  These findings have not been challenged.

 4. The judge considered whether the Appellant would be at risk  on  return
    to Sri Lanka at this time.  The judge took into account  the  delay  in
    the Appellant's claiming asylum and  did  not  accept  the  Appellant's
    claim that he was unaware of the possibility of making an asylum claim,
    particularly in the context of the fact that his wife was  pursuing  an
    application for asylum.  The judge  concluded  at  paragraph  74  that,
    whatever the Appellant's knowledge of his wife's actual claim,  he  was
    clearly aware by August 2010 that an application for  asylum  could  be
    made.  The judge did not  accept  the  Appellant's  statement  that  he
    believed things would improve.

 5. The challenge to this decision centres around the judge's  findings  in
    relation to a witness statement provided from the  Appellant's  father,
    who is in Sri Lanka.  That statement is dated 18th  August  2017.   The
    statement says at paragraph 2:

         "[The Appellant] is my first son.  I read back my  son's  statement
         dated 18th August 2017 and hereby confirm  that  the  contents  are
         true and accurate in respect of my son's problem in Sri Lanka.   My
         third son is still missing and we have no clue of his  whereabouts.
         He was arrested by CID  after  one  week  of  my  first  son,  [the
         Appellant], left the country.  Sri Lankan authorities  continuously
         visiting home after my son escaped from detention.  When they  came
         after my son left the country I told them that [the Appellant] went
         to the UK they got angry and took my second son.   We  are  keeping
         quiet as we were threatened not to make any statement or  publicity
         of his disappearance in the media or anywhere and  if  we  fail  to
         listen to them we would face the consequences."

 6. The judge notes at paragraph 76 that there is some confusion within the
    letter from the father where he states that  his  third  son  is  still
    missing and his third son was arrested one week  after  his  first  son
    left the country but goes on to state that this was in fact his  second
    son.  The judge noted that there was a conflict between  that  and  the
    Appellant's own evidence in his witness statement which indicates  that
    the brother next to him settled in Russia and that his youngest brother
    is missing.  The judge said at paragraph 76: "It is not clear therefore
    if his brother who was arrested with him has  also  been  released  and
    gone to Russia."  The judge returns to  this  issue  at  paragraph  85,
    saying that there are concerns with the father's statement and saying:

         "He refers to his third son being missing and having been  arrested
         one week after the Appellant left for the UK. There may well  be  a
         typing error with regard to the statement then  referring  to  that
         son as the second son but I do have some concerns  given  that  the
         Appellant's  own  evidence  as  indicated  above  in  his   witness
         statement is that one of his brothers is now in Russia."

 7. At paragraph 89 the judge says that, given the inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence as to when the authorities  sought  the  Appellant  after  his
    release on a bribe, he was not satisfied "that the  evidence  given  by
    the Appellant or his father can be relied upon  to  indicate  that  his
    younger brother was in fact taken by the authorities or  that  in  fact
    the authorities have sought the Appellant subsequent to his release  on
    the payment of a bribe".

 8. Apart from the delay in claiming asylum  the  other  main  point  taken
    against the Appellant in the assessment of credibility is at  paragraph
    87 where the judge said that  the  Appellant's  father  also  indicated
    within his witness statement that the  authorities  told  him  to  keep
    quiet and not make any  statement  or  publicity  in  relation  to  the
    disappearance of his son, whereas at question 88 in the  interview  the
    Appellant said that the CID had come to the house  because  his  father
    was looking for his brother and they told  his  father  not  to  go  on
    telling people that his son is missing and if he continued to look  for
    his brother they would also look for the Appellant.   At  paragraph  88
    the judge said that this does not "make  sense"  with  the  Appellant's
    father's evidence, which gives no indication that he  was  looking  for
    his son.

 9. It is clear from reading these paragraphs that  there  are  three  main
    reasons for the judge finding that he did not  accept  the  Appellant's
    account of ongoing interest by the  Sri  Lankan  authorities  were  the
    delay in the claim  for  asylum,  the  confusion  within  the  father's
    witness statement, and the apparent discrepancy between the Appellant's
    evidence and that of his father as to whether the  father  was  looking
    for the brother who had disappeared [paragraphs 87 to 90].

10. It is contended in the Grounds of Appeal that the judge made a material
    error of fact in that the judge mistakenly concluded from the  father's
    witness statement that the second son (the son who,  according  to  the
    Appellant, is settled in Russia) is also missing whereas the  reference
    in the witness statement to the second son was,  it  was  submitted,  a
    typographical mistake and is consistent with the  Appellant's  father's
    adoption of the Appellant's own statement.  It is contended that, apart
    from the mistaken reference in the father's statement to "second  son",
    all of the evidence makes clear that the Appellant's second brother  is
    in Russia, that it was his youngest brother (the  third  son)  who  was
    arrested with the Appellant and, again,  who  is  missing  after  being
    taken by the authorities after the Appellant came to  the  UK.   It  is
    contended that this error or misunderstanding was  highly  material  to
    the issue as to whether the Appellant is at risk on return  today  such
    that the judge's assessment of risk on return was fundamentally flawed.

11. It is further contended that the First-tier Tribunal Judge erred in his
    assessment of risk on return to Sri Lanka in light of the fact that the
    Appellant is Sinhalese and could be viewed with  significant  suspicion
    upon return.

The hearing

12. At the hearing Ms Jones submitted that it is  clear  from  all  of  the
    evidence that the Appellant has two younger brothers, the one  next  to
    him is in Russia and, apart from a mention  at  the  beginning  of  the
    witness statement as to his whereabouts in Russia, that brother was not
    mentioned again in the Appellant's case.  The Appellant's case is  that
    his youngest brother  was  arrested  and  detained  with  him  and  was
    released after him.  That brother, it is claimed,  was  detained  after
    the Appellant left Sri Lanka.  Ms Jones submitted  that  the  Appellant
    was not asked any questions in cross-examination or by the judge  about
    the father's letter and she submitted that no-one asked  the  Appellant
    about any  confusion  about  which  brother  had  been  detained.   She
    referred to the judge's decision where the  Appellant's  oral  evidence
    had been recorded and in particular highlighted paragraphs 64, 65,  66,
    67 and 68, leading to the findings at paragraph  69  and  further  oral
    evidence recorded at paragraphs 73 and 74.  She pointed out  that  none
    of these paragraphs refer to  any  issue  about  the  father's  witness
    statement.  In her submission the claimed confusion was not put to  the
    Appellant.  She therefore submitted that this was procedurally  unfair.



13. Ms Jones referred to  the  other  apparent  conflict  in  the  evidence
    highlighted by the  judge  which  she  submitted  was  not  in  fact  a
    conflict. She submitted that at paragraph 90 the judge referred to  the
    Appellant's father making no mention of the authorities looking for the
    Appellant's other brother and submitted that the reference to the other
    brother being in Russia highlights that  the  judge  misunderstood  the
    evidence.  It is submitted that the judge got the two brothers confused
    and that this led to confusion in the judge's findings.  She  submitted
    that the issue of the raised profile  as  a  result  of  the  Sinhalese
    ethnicity meant that it was incumbent on the judge to consider the risk
    categories set out in the country guidance case of GJ (post-civil  war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC). She submitted that  at
    paragraphs 87 and 88 the judge again referred to  a  discrepancy  about
    whether the Appellant's father was looking for his brother  whereas  in
    fact there was no discrepancy there.

14. Ms Fijiwala submitted that the grounds seek to reargue what was  before
    the judge.  She submitted that at paragraph 33 the judge noted that the
    father referred to the authorities taking his  second  son.  The  judge
    noted the Appellant's account at paragraph 46.  The judge  referred  at
    paragraph 55 to the Appellant's interview saying that  the  father  was
    looking for his brother after  he  disappeared.   The  judge  noted  at
    paragraph 62 that the Appellant said that his first younger brother was
    in Russia and his second younger brother was  missing.   She  submitted
    that the judge referred to the confusion between  the  father's  letter
    and the Appellant's witness  statement  [76].   It  is  clear,  in  her
    submission, that the judge took full account of the Appellant's account
    and this was not a matter for cross-examination for clarification.   In
    her submission it should have been a matter for examination-in-chief or
    for the Appellant's own evidence to deal with the  discrepancy  in  the
    father's witness statement.  The judge noted the inconsistency  and  in
    her submission it was open to the judge to find that the  inconsistency
    affected the Appellant's credibility.  She  submitted  that  the  judge
    highlighted further concerns in relation to the  father's  evidence  at
    paragraph 85 and it was open to the judge to reach  these  conclusions.
    She highlighted that the judge noted that the Appellant stated that his
    parents were looking for his brother but the  father's  statement  does
    not say this and in her submission it was open to the judge to conclude
    at paragraphs 89 and 90 that the father's evidence could not be  relied
    upon.  She submitted that the confusion was  created  by  the  evidence
    before the judge.  Given the evidence before the judge  it  is  unclear
    what more the judge could have found.

15. Ms Fijiwala submitted in relation to Ground 2 that there was nothing in
    the skeleton argument and no background evidence put to  the  judge  to
    corroborate the assertion that the Appellant would be at increased risk
    because he is of Sinhalese ethnic origin.  She submitted that the judge
    properly considered the GJ risk factors and  considered  whether  there
    was any ongoing risk.

16. In response Ms Jones submitted that Ms Fijiwala's submission  would  be
    to reverse the burden as a matter that appears to be  an  inconsistency
    should be put to the Appellant.  The Appellant should have  been  given
    an opportunity to address that apparent confusion.  She submitted  that
    there was confusion about one brother and that the judge  had  attached
    too  much  weight  to  that.   She  submitted   that   an   alternative
    interpretation of paragraph 2 of the father's witness statement is that
    the reference to his second son could be referring to the second son to
    be arrested, in other words, the third son.  In her  submission,  given
    the finding  that  the  Appellant  had  previously  been  subjected  to
    persecution, the judge would have had to have  strong  evidence  for  a
    finding that there is no ongoing risk and should not  have  based  that
    finding on what could just be a typing error.  In  her  submission  the
    judge created even more confusion referring to the brother who  was  in
    Russia and that this matter should have been put to the Appellant.

Error of Law

17. I have given careful consideration to the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal in the context of the Tribunal's unchallenged finding that the
    Appellant was subjected to persecution in detention  in  Sri  Lanka  in
    2007.  It is the case that the father's witness statement is apparently
    inconsistent with the evidence given by the Appellant as to  which  son
    disappeared and this matter might not be  material  if  the  judge  had
    other significant reasons for finding against the Appellant in relation
    to ongoing interest in him by the Sri Lankan authorities.  However,  on
    close analysis it appears that the delay in claiming asylum  (which  of
    course was a  matter  that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider  as
    affecting the Appellant's credibility adversely) was one factor against
    the Appellant. The other main issue identified in the decision  relates
    to the apparent inconsistency between the Appellant's evidence and that
    of his father as to whether the father  was  looking  for  the  brother
    after the brother disappeared.  The judge  dealt  with  this  issue  at
    paragraph 87 where he contrasts the father's witness statement with the
    Appellant's answer at interview to question  88.  At  question  88  the
    Appellant was asked: "What did the CID say was the reason they came  to
    the house?"  The response was: "My father is looking for my brother and
    they told my father not to go telling people that his son is  missing."
    At question 89 the  Appellant  was  asked:  "So  did  the  CID  mention
    anything about you personally to your family?"  In  response  he  said:
    "They said to my father, if they started looking for the brother,  they
    will look for me as well."  At question 90 he  was  asked:  "Could  you
    explain what exactly the CID said to your father?", and in response  he
    said: "They told my father not to look for my brother.  If they  won't,
    they  can  look  for  me  as  well."   In  his  witness  statement  the
    Appellant's father said: "We are keeping quiet as  we  were  threatened
    not to make any statement or publicity  of  his  disappearance  in  the
    media or anywhere and if we fail to listen to them we  would  face  the
    consequences."  I do not see any significant  discrepancy  between  the
    Appellant's interview answers and his father's witness statement.  Both
    refer to the father being warned not to look for the  missing  brother.
    As there is no significant discrepancy in this part of the evidence  it
    appears that, apart from the delay issue, the only  matter  left  which
    was considered to be adverse to  the  Appellant's  credibility  is  the
    issue of the father's witness statement and  the  apparent  discrepancy
    therein.

18. I do not accept Ms Jones' submission that all matters  adverse  to  the
    Appellant should have been put to him, particularly where these  relate
    to matters in evidence from sources other than the  Appellant  himself.
    In this case the apparent discrepancy was  in  the  evidence  from  the
    Appellant's father and it may well be that the Appellant may  not  have
    been able  to  given  an  explanation  in  relation  to  this  apparent
    discrepancy.

19. However, in this case the judge had found the Appellant's claim  as  to
    past persecution to be credible. In light of the fact that the  primary
    reason for rejecting the Appellant's claim  that  the  authorities  are
    still looking for him was based  on  an  apparent  discrepancy  in  the
    father's witness statement which was not put to the  Appellant  at  the
    hearing, in these very particular circumstances  I  consider  that  the
    judge's findings in relation  to  ongoing  risk  on  return  contain  a
    material error of law in light of the procedural unfairness.

20. I note that there has been no challenge to the findings in relation  to
    past persecution.  Accordingly this matter must be remade  in  relation
    to risk on return.

21. Whilst I indicated at the hearing that, should I determine  the  appeal
    in favour of the Appellant, it may well be  appropriate  to  remit  the
    appeal to the First-tier Tribunal,  on  reflection,  given  the  narrow
    issue to be determined in relation to the assessment of risk on return,
    it is apparent that this does not require  a  wholesale  assessment  of
    evidence.  Instead it is a  matter  in  relation  to  which  the  Upper
    Tribunal can consider any further  evidence  as  to  events  since  the
    Appellant's departure from Sri Lanka and make an assessment of risk  on
    return.

22. In these circumstances I find that the judge made a material  error  of
    law in relation to the assessment of risk on return.  I set aside  that
    part of the decision, maintaining the findings of fact in the  decision
    in relation to past persecution.  I accordingly adjourn the hearing  to
    be relisted for a resumed hearing to consider risk on return.

Directions

23. The resumed hearing will take place in the Upper Tribunal  on  6  March
    2018.

24. The parties are directed to file any further evidence to be relied upon
    at the resumed hearing no later than seven days before the date of  the
    resumed hearing.


Signed                              Date: 5 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD


No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
