
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07161/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 January 2019                   |On 09 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS


                                   Between

                                    t k m
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Dixon C ins Genesis Law
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 I make an order prohibiting the disclosure or publication  of  any
    matter likely to lead members of the public to identify the  Appellant.
    Breach of this order can be punished as a contempt  of  court.  I  make
    this order because this  is  a  protection  claim  and  people  seeking
    international protection are generally entitled to anonymity.

 2. This is an appeal by a citizen of Zimbabwe against the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal against  a  decision  of  the
    Secretary of State refusing her asylum and refusing her leave on  human
    rights grounds.

 3. There is no criticism of  the  decision  to  refuse  her  asylum.   The
    possible error in the case concerned the decision to refuse  her  leave
    on human rights grounds to remain in the United Kingdom.

 4. The short point is that the appellant is the mother  of  two  children.
    Presently both children reside in the United Kingdom and it was  argued
    that it was not only in their best interests  that  she  remained  with
    them but that it was a disproportionate interference with their  rights
    to remove her.

 5. It is right to make plain, as did Mr Mills and Mr Dickson  did  at  the
    beginning of the hearing, that the proposal by the Secretary  of  State
    is to remove the appellant to Portugal.  This is important. The  First-
    tier Tribunal considered as a possibility removal to Zimbabwe which  is
    the appellant's country of nationality.  That was never  the  Secretary
    of State's intention and it is now plain from Mr Mills' concession this
    morning, if it  was  not  plain  already,  that  this  case  only  ever
    concerned removal to Portugal.  Portugal, of course, is the country  of
    choice because the appellant daughter is  a  Portuguese  national.   It
    follows there is no question of this decision involving children losing
    their rights to reside in the European Union and the  cases  that  rule
    against that are not relevant because it is not going to happen.

 6. The appellant's daughter was born in 2002.   Clearly  in  the  ordinary
    course of events it is desirable that she has close contact  with  both
    of her parents but sadly the parents have separated.  They have decided
    that it is best to arrange their affairs so that the boy lives with his
    father, I understand in Leeds, and the daughter lives with her  mother,
    I understand presently in Leicester.  The family is split.   There  was
    evidence before the First-tier Tribunal that the  appellant's  daughter
    enjoyed a proper relationship with her father and there are photographs
    of happy times together.   This is wholly unremarkable but this is  not
    a case put on the basis that the relationship between the child and her
    father was more than ordinarily important.   It  is  not  a  case,  for
    example, where there is evidence of  the  possibility  of  real  damage
    because of the separation, rather the reality is  that  separation  has
    already happened. Family members live in separate  households  and  the
    Secretary of State's proposal is to remove the appellant  so  that  the
    family members live further apart. Portugal is not the far ends of  the
    earth. It is somewhere  within  the  European  Union  where  access  is
    straightforward and unrestricted. There is no  suggestion  that  it  is
    unconscionably costly or otherwise difficult for visits to  take  place
    with reasonable frequency.  The telephone and Skype and no doubt  other
    contact mechanisms presently in place can continue.

 7. These points were considered briskly at paragraphs 38  and  39  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal's decision but they were most certainly considered.
     The judge had in mind the interference in the private and family  life
    of the child that would be consequent on  separation  and  found  that,
    given the family  had  already  split  and  given  that  contact  could
    certainly continue, that the interference was wholly proportionate.

 8. With the benefit of hindsight and bearing  in  mind  that  the  judge's
    attention was focused rather away from that point but on conditions  in
    Zimbabwe, the part of the Decision and Reasons dealing with the welfare
    of the children could have been done better but there are few decisions
    of Judges that could not have been done  better  with  the  benefit  of
    hindsight and the relevant points  are  considered  the  conclusion  is
    rational.

 9. I add a slight rider to this because the  appellant  insists  that  she
    cannot go to Portugal.  The evidence for that is  skimpy  and  consists
    simply of an email chain in which the Portuguese Embassy, which was not
    appraised of the full position, seemed to suggest that she would not be
    allowed to go. It was never suggested to them, as far  as  I  can  see,
    that she would be accompanying a child who was a national  of  Portugal
    and she would be exercising her treaty rights.  That point is not  made
    out but even if it  is,  it  is  something  to  consider  in  a  future
    decision. It is  not  indicative  of  anything  being  wrong  with  the
    decision that is made.  It follows therefore that I am  satisfied  that
    the points that needed to be considered  have  been  considered  and  a
    proper conclusion given.  I find no material error and  I  dismiss  the
    appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 4 April 2019                   |



