
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07999/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via video (Skype for Business)|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |On 14 January 2021            |
|On 4 January 2021                            |                              |
|                                             |                              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between


                                     IB
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms L Brakaj, Counsel, instructed by Iris Law Firm
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

      1. This decision follows a remote hearing in respect  of  which  there
         has been no objection by the parties. The form of  remote  hearing
         was by video (V), the platform was Skype for Business. A  face  to
         face hearing was not held because it was not  practicable  and  all
         issues could be determined in a remote hearing.


      2. This is a remade decision following the identification of  material
         legal errors in the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
         Cope, promulgated on 11 December 2019,  dismissed  the  appellant's
         appeal against the respondent's decision dated  7  August  2019  to
         refuse his protection and human rights  claim  and  his  claim  for
         humanitarian protection. The  'error  of  law'  decision  was  made
         without a hearing pursuant to rule 34  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
         (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Background

      3. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq who hails from Erbil in
         the Kurdish Region of Iraq (KRI). He is 51 years old and is married
         with four children.


      4. I summarise the appellant's claim. He was a long-time member of the
         Patriotically Union of Kurdistan (PUK), a Kurdish political  party,
         and had been employed by  the  Kurdish  Regional  Government  (KRG)
         since 1993 within the autonomous Iraqi Kurdish  Region  (IKR).  His
         duties  included  welcoming  and  looking  after  visitors  at  the
         Kurdistan Presidency of  the  Council  of  Ministers  building  and
         testing food and drink for the  Prime  Minister  and  Deputy  Prime
         Minister. He was  also  secretly  paid  by  the  Zanyari,  the  PUK
         intelligence service, to gather information, particularly about the
         Kurdish Democratic Party (KDP - a rival Kurdish  political  party).
         In  his  statement  dated  17  September  2019  (paragraph  7)  the
         appellant stated that he had "a good relationship" with  Dr  Barham
         Salih, who had been the PUK Prime Minister of the KRG  until  2012.
         In 2017 Dr Salih left the PUK to set up his own political movement.
         The appellant was asked by the Zanyari  to  spy  on  Dr  Salih.  He
         refused. He was subsequently threatened by the Zanyari and lost his
         job. Fearing for his safety from the Zanyari, the PUK, and the  KDP
         (because it became aware that the appellant had spied  on  it),  he
         eventually fled Iraq on 29 October 2018. Dr Salih became  president
         of Iraq on 2 October 2018.


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal


      5. Although the respondent did not consider the appellant  provided  a
         credible account of events that caused him  to  leave  Iraq,  Judge
         Cope found the appellant's account credible. The judge accepted, on
         the lower standard of proof, the appellant's account as  summarised
         above. In particular, Judge Cope accepted that  the  appellant  had
         been asked to spy against Dr Salih but refused out of loyalty to Dr
         Salih and was consequently threatened by the  Zanyari.  Judge  Cope
         found that the appellant held a genuine and  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution from the PUK, KDP and the Zanyari if he  were  returned
         to the IKR. No issue has been raised  with  the  sustainability  of
         Judge Cope's primary factual findings in respect of the appellant's
         risk of persecution in the IKR. In accordance with paragraph 21  of
         the 'error of law' decision these factual findings have been  ring-
         fenced.

      6. Judge Cope then considered whether the internal flight  alternative
         was reasonably available to the appellant in  respect  of  Baghdad.
         The judge referred to AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT  00544
         (IAC) ("AA-UT"), as amended by the Court of Appeal decision  in  AA
         (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 ("AA-CA"), and AAH (Iraqi Kurds -
         internal relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC)  ("AAH").  The
         judge noted that the appellant  had  given  his  Iraqi  Nationality
         Identity Card (INIC) to an immigration officer in the UK. The judge
         found that the appellant could  use  the  INIC  card  to  obtain  a
         replacement passport  or  laissez-passer  in  order  to  travel  to
         Baghdad, and that he would  be  able  to  support  himself  through
         employment or otherwise obtain social assistance through the use of
         his INIC card.

      7. In considering  whether  it  would  be  reasonable  to  expect  the
         appellant to internally relocate to  Baghdad  Judge  Cope  accepted
         that the appellant did not have family in Baghdad and that  he  was
         from a minority community. Judge Cope also noted that the appellant
         spoke perfect Arabic and that he had an INIC card. Judge Cope found
         that "the most significant factor" when assessing the  availability
         of internal relocation was that the appellant "had  a  very  direct
         and personal link with Dr Salih who is now the president  of  Iraq"
         and that the appellant  would  have  access  to  a  high  level  of
         protection as he was "part of  the  inner  circle  of  the  current
         president of Iraq." Judge Cope  found,  based  on  the  appellant's
         closeness to Dr Salih, that Dr Salih would be able to  provide  the
         appellant  with  protection  and  would  assist  him  in  terms  of
         obtaining accommodation and financial support.

The 'error of law' decision

      8. In the 'error of law' decision I found that Judge Cope acted  in  a
         procedurally improper manner by failing to raise with the appellant
         his specific concerns in respect of the  availability  of  internal
         relocation  with  particular  reference  to  his  belief  that  the
         appellant would be able to make personal contact with the president
         of Iraq and  thereby  obtain  protection  and  assistance.  On  the
         particular facts of the case fairness required the appellant to  be
         given an opportunity to engage with those concerns.


      9. Whilst I accepted that Judge Cope may still have been  entitled  to
         reach the same conclusion even without consideration of any support
         that could be provided by Dr Salih, it was by no means certain that
         he would have done so. Although the appellant  had  access  to  his
         INIC card and could speak  fluent  Arabic,  he  had  no  family  in
         Baghdad and was a member of a minority community. Nor was there any
         reference in the Judge's decision to issues concerning  sponsorship
         in Baghdad or any assessment made in  respect  of  the  possibility
         that the appellant's  previous  involvement  with  an  intelligence
         agency may still expose him to a real risk of serious harm even  in
         Baghdad. A remote hearing was therefore  listed  to  determine  the
         issue of the availability of the internal  flight  alternative  and
         directions issued to that effect.

The hearing to remake the decision

     10. The appellant did not provide any further documentary evidence.  He
         relied on his statement dated 17 September 2019 and the  bundle  of
         documents served at the First-tier Tribunal hearing running to  342
         pages. The respondent relied on the Country Policy and  Information
         Note - 'Iraq: internal relocation, civil documentation and returns'
         (June 2020), version 11.0 ("the CPIN report"). Both  parties  cited
         and relied on SMO, KSP & IM  (Article  15(c);  identity  documents)
         Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 00400 (IAC) ("SMO").  The  appellant  gave  his
         oral evidence remotely via an interpreter. Although there were some
         initial difficulties with the  interpreter's  Internet  access  the
         majority of the interpretation was done  using  a  telephone  line.
         There were no issues raised by either party with the quality or the
         accuracy of the interpretation.


     11. Having already adopted his September 2019 statement for the  First-
         tier Tribunal hearing on 24 September 2019, the appellant was asked
         several questions in examination-in-chief.  I  summarise  his  oral
         evidence.

     12. The appellant last spoke to Dr Salih in 2016 by  telephone  via  Dr
         Salih's office secretary. The appellant had never held  Dr  Salih's
         personal telephone  number.  The  appellant  did  not  believe  the
         'office number' with which he previously contacted Dr  Salih  could
         now be used to contact him since Dr Salih was no longer in the  IKR
         and in light of Dr Salih's current position as President  of  Iraq.
         So far as the appellant was concerned there was no way he could now
         contact Dr Salih. The appellant's family were still  in  Iran  (the
         appellant and his family went  to  the  Kurdish  area  of  Iran  in
         January 2018 and, other than a short return to Iraq  in  2019,  the
         appellant's family have remained in Iran ever since) and he had  no
         contact with anyone who was capable of sponsoring him  to  live  in
         Baghdad.

     13. The appellant then underwent cross-examination, which I  summarise.
         The appellant did not try to contact Dr Salih.  The  appellant  did
         not know whether Dr Salih's previous office manager  and  secretary
         still held those positions. The appellant did  not  have  an  email
         address for Dr Salih, only a general office email address for  when
         Dr Salih worked in the IKR. The appellant did not believe Dr  Salih
         would be able to give him protection because he (Dr  Salih)  was  a
         "powerless individual". The appellant described how  militias  were
         "running the show."

     14.  The appellant has a sister in Denmark and a cousin in  Italy,  but
         they were refugees and were having trouble  supporting  themselves.
         They would be unable to remit any funds to the appellant should  be
         return to Baghdad. The appellant  claimed  he  had  a  serious  eye
         problem that prevented him from working. He also had  children  who
         could not speak Arabic and they would be in danger if they  had  to
         relocate to Baghdad as it was a dangerous place for children. In re-
         examination the appellant said he did not have an email address.

     15. In his submissions Mr Whitwell  adopted  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter and drew to my attention paragraph 204(d)(14)&(15) of  AA-UT
         which  contained  useful  guidance  on  the   issue   of   internal
         relocation. The appellant would be able to work as he had  an  INIC
         and could speak Arabic and he would  be  able  to  benefit  from  a
         returns  package  providing  him  some  financial  assistance   and
         potentially from his immediate  family  in  Iran  or  his  extended
         family in Europe. A 'support network' could  include  support  from
         other Kurds. Mr Whitwell also  invited  me  to  consider  the  CPIU
         report at 2.5.13 (where the  respondent  accepts  the  position  on
         internal relocation as set out in SMO) and 8.1.3  (indicating  that
         there are no  sponsorship  requirements  for  entry  into  Baghdad,
         although persons from formerly ISIS-held or conflict-affected areas
         require two sponsors from the neighbourhood in which they intend to
         reside). AA-UT, at paragraphs 198 to 203, listed organisations that
         could assist the appellant. The appellant had not tried to  contact
         Dr Salih and it was likely that the  appellant  would  be  able  to
         obtain protection from the Iraqi state.

     16. In her submissions Ms Brakaj drew my attention  to  paragraphs  415
         and 416 of SMO and submitted that, in order for it to be reasonable
         for the appellant to  relocate to Baghdad he had to have access  to
         'external support' and that no such 'external support was available
         to the appellant. Such support could not be offered by other  Kurds
         and there remained a danger that, if the appellant approached other
         Kurds for support, his identity and location would become known  to
         those he fears  will  persecute  him  in  the  IKR.  The  appellant
         reasonable believed he would be unable to  get  any  protection  or
         support from Dr Salih, and there was no  reason  for  Dr  Salih  to
         offer the appellant and protection or support. Dr Salih's  position
         had changed since the appellant knew him and the appellant now  had
         no way to contact him. The appellant was  never  a  close  personal
         friend of Dr Salih and, given that Iraq was in turmoil,  there  was
         no indication  that  Dr  Salih  would  be  willing  to  assist  the
         appellant, who was simply a former employee. The  appellant  ran  a
         real risk of his location  becoming  known  to  the  PUK  or  their
         security apparatus if he applied for a job as the  only  references
         that could be provided came from those organisations. The appellant
         had no experience of working in shops or manual labour.


     17. I reserved my decision.



Assessment of internal relocation

     18. Rule 339O(i) of the immigration rules provides:


             (i) The Secretary of State will not make:


                  (a) a grant of refugee status if in part of the country of
                  origin a person would not have  a  well  founded  fear  of
                  being  persecuted,  and  the  person  can  reasonably   be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country; or


                  (b) a grant of humanitarian protection if in part  of  the
                  country of return a person would not face a real  risk  of
                  suffering serious harm, and the person can  reasonably  be
                  expected to stay in that part of the country.


             (ii) In examining whether a part of the country of  origin  or
             country of return meets the requirements in (i) the  Secretary
             of State, when making a decision on whether to grant asylum or
             humanitarian protection,  will  have  regard  to  the  general
             circumstances prevailing in that part of the  country  and  to
             the personal circumstances of the person.


             (iii)  (i)  applies  notwithstanding  technical  obstacles  to
             return to the country of origin or country of return.


     19. There are two limbs to the assessment of internal  relocation;  the
         first is whether an applicant would have  a  well-founded  fear  of
         persecution or a real risk of suffering serious harm in  the  place
         of  proposed  relocation,  the  second  is  whether  it  would   be
         reasonable for the person to  relocate  to  that  place  -  see  AS
         (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG [2020] UKUT 00130 (IAC), at [23]).
         As stated in SSHD v SC [2018] WLR 4004, [2017]  EWCA  Civ  2112  at
         [39]:


             "The tribunal only reaches the [reasonableness] stage  of  the
             test if it is satisfied that the person would not  be  exposed
             to a real risk of serious harm."


     20. The ultimate question in respect of the 2nd limb is whether in such
         a case taking account of all relevant circumstances  pertaining  to
         the appellant and his country of origin, it is reasonable to expect
         the appellant to relocate or whether it would be  unduly  harsh  to
         expect him to do so (AH (Sudan) & Ors v SSHD [2007] EWCA  Civ  297;
         Januzi and others v SSHD [2006] 2 AC 426).

     21. The test is one of great generality (save only that it excludes any
         comparison of the conditions, including the degree of  respect  for
         human rights, between those obtaining in the safe haven  and  those
         of the country of refuge) and  it  requires  consideration  of  all
         matters relevant to the reasonableness of relocation,  none  having
         inherent priority over the others (AH (Sudan), para. 13).  One  way
         of approaching the assessment is to ask whether in the  safe  haven
         the applicant can lead a  relatively  normal  life  without  facing
         undue hardship in the context of the country concerned. This  is  a
         valuable way of approaching the reasonableness evaluation.  It  may
         be reasonable, and  not  unduly  harsh,  to  expect  a  refugee  to
         relocate even if conditions in the safe haven are, by the standards
         of the country of refuge, very bad. This does not however mean that
         it will be reasonable for a person to relocate  to  a  safe  haven,
         however bad the conditions they will face there, as  long  as  such
         conditions are normal in their country. Conditions  may  be  normal
         but nevertheless unduly harsh (this is the point emphasised by Lady
         Hale in AH (Sudan)).


     22. In the specific context of Iraq, the most recent  Country  Guidance
         (SMO) provides the following guidance in respect of  the  viability
         of  internal  relocation  to  Baghdad.  I  note  that  headnote  30
         indicates that the decision replaces all existing country  guidance
         on Iraq.

     23. The respondent has only identified Baghdad as a place  of  possible
         relocation and no  issue  was  raised  with  this  approach  by  Mr
         Whitwell. Headnote (19) of SMO reads:

             19. Relocation to  Baghdad.  Baghdad  is  generally  safe  for
             ordinary civilians but whether it is  safe  for  a  particular
             returnee is a question of fact in the individual  case.  There
             are no on-entry sponsorship requirements for Baghdad but there
             are  sponsorship  requirements  for  residency.  A  documented
             individual of working age is likely  to  be  able  to  satisfy
             those requirements. Relocation to  Baghdad  is  likely  to  be
             reasonable for Arab Shia and Sunni single, able-bodied men and
             married couples of working age without  children  and  without
             specific vulnerabilities.  Other  individuals  are  likely  to
             require external support, ie a support network of  members  of
             his or her family, extended family or tribe, who  are  willing
             and able to provide genuine support. Whether  such  a  support
             network is available is to be considered with reference to the
             collectivist nature of Iraqi society,  as  considered  in  AAH
             (Iraq).
     24. Headnote (19) reflects the Tribunal's assessment at paragraphs  410
         to 416. At paragraph 411 the Tribunal stated:


             "The safety in Baghdad City and the Baghdad Belts has improved
             immeasurably since the  previous  country  guidance  decisions
             were issued and we anticipate that it will often be  submitted
             by the respondent that an individual who is at risk in another
             part of Iraq can relocate to  the  capital  or  its  environs.
             Whether such relocation is safe is a fact-specific assessment;
             we do not consider there to be any general  risk  contravening
             the QD or the ECHR in this area. The presence of  any  of  the
             enhanced risk factors at [313]-[315] above will necessarily be
             relevant when considering the specific risk to  an  individual
             in  the  capital,  however.  As  we  have  stated  above,  the
             identification of those risk factors by  the  UNHCR  and  EASO
             serves to confirm  the  ongoing  application  of  the  country
             guidance in BA (Iraq)."


     25. Relevant 'enhanced risk  factors  at  paragraphs  313  to  315  (in
         respect of  humanitarian  protection,  but  equally  applicable  in
         respect of internal relocation) include members of an ethnic  group
         who are in a minority in the area, and women and  children  without
         genuine family support.


     26. Ms Bracaj did not suggest there that the appellant,  who  does  not
         hail from a previously ISIL held area or  a  conflict-ridden  area,
         and who holds an INIC card, would not feasibly be able to meet  any
         sponsorship requirements for settlement in Baghdad. She did  submit
         however that the appellant, who is not a Sunni or  Shia  Arab,  and
         who would ultimately wish to be reunited with  his  wife  and  four
         children, would need 'external support' in order for Baghdad to  be
         a reasonable internal  relocation  option.  This  submission  finds
         support in paragraph 416 of SMO. This states, in material part:

             "In respect of those who are not Arab Shi'ite and  Arab  Sunni
             single able-bodied men  or  married  couples  of  working  age
             without   children    and    without    identified    specific
             vulnerabilities, the respondent did not positively assert that
             relocation to Baghdad would be reasonable in  the  absence  of
             external support there. In the absence of any such submission,
             we endorse the appellants' submission, drawing as it  does  on
             the expertise of the UNHCR. It will remain  necessary  in  any
             case to  consider  an  individual's  ability  to  relocate  to
             Baghdad holistically, even where they fall into this  category
             or where they have viable support in the capital."

     27. The appellant is a 51 year old man  who  speaks  both  Kurdish  and
         Arabic and who has, or is able to  obtain,  an  INIC  (it  was  not
         suggested  by  Ms  Bracaj  that  the  appellant  would   face   any
         documentation problems). He claimed at  the  hearing  that  he  was
         unable to work because of problems with his eyes but this  was  not
         supported by any medical evidence, a point accepted by  Ms  Bracaj.
         The appellant's bundle does contain a letter, dated 27  June  2019,
         from a Consultant with the Newcastle Eye  Centre,  indicating  that
         the appellant had vitreoretinal and cataract surgery  on  his  left
         eye and that the right intraocular pressure was  elevated,  but  it
         does not suggest that the appellant's eye condition  prevented  him
         from working or would  do  so  in  the  future.  I  note  that  the
         appellant  also  suffers  from  diabetes  for  which  he   receives
         medication. The limited medical evidence before me does not support
         the appellant's claim that he is incapable of working.


     28. The appellant  is  however  Kurdish,  as  is  his  family  who  are
         currently residing illegally in Iran, and it was not disputed  that
         Kurds constitute a minority in Baghdad. Both AAH and SMO  refer  to
         the 'collectivist' nature of Iraqi society, and SMO gives  guidance
         that someone who is not an Arab Sunni or Shia is likely to  require
         external support to live in Baghdad,  i.e.  a  support  network  of
         members of their family, extended family, or tribe.  The  appellant
         has consistently maintained that he has no family  in  Baghdad  and
         this particular assertion was  not  disputed  by  Mr  Whitwell.  Mr
         Whitwell suggested that the appellant could access external support
         from his family in Iran, but the evidence before me  indicates  the
         appellant's wife and children  are  residing  there  illegally  and
         there was no suggestion that the appellant's wife  was  working  or
         otherwise capable of providing financial support to the  appellant.
         The appellant stated that his sibling and  cousin  in  Europe  were
         refugees and struggling themselves and were incapable of supporting
         him. This assertion is plausible  and  not  inconsistent  with  the
         totality of the evidence before me. I accept the appellant's claim,
         applying the lower standard of  proof,  that  he  could  garner  no
         financial or other practical support from his  extended  family  in
         Europe.


     29. Mr Whitwell contends that the appellant could approach other  Kurds
         in Baghdad who could provide external  support.  There  is  however
         very limited evidence in the background materials on the  size  and
         status of the Kurdish population of Baghdad, and there is little if
         any evidence suggesting that simply being a Kurd is in any way akin
         to being a member of  the  same  'tribe'  when  considered  in  the
         context of a support network capable of providing external support.
         This submission is not supported by the relevant CG decisions.  The
         option  of  approaching  other  Kurds,  either  for  financial   or
         accommodation support or  for  the  purposes  of  employment,  also
         raises a concern based on the acceptance that this appellant  holds
         a well-founded fear of  persecution  from  the  PUK,  its  security
         apparatus, and the KDP. Given  the  collectivist  nature  of  Iraqi
         society, there must remain a risk, at least on the  lower  standard
         of proof, that members of the Kurdish  population  of  Baghdad  may
         inform the PUK or the KDP of any approach made  by  the  appellant,
         which may lead to the appellant's location becoming  known  to  his
         persecutors. This is likely to  reasonably  inhibit  the  appellant
         from making any approach to the Kurdish community.


     30. Drawing these threads  together,  whilst  I  acknowledge  that  the
         appellant speaks Arabic and that he has an INIC card, he  would  be
         returned to Baghdad, a city in which he  has  never  lived  and  in
         which he has no friends or family or other network of support,  and
         in which he would be a member of  a  minority  group.  Even  taking
         account of the funds available from the  Voluntary  Return  Scheme,
         which may enable the appellant to survive for a few weeks,  in  the
         absence of any meaningful network of support, and bearing  in  mind
         the natural desire to be joined by his wife and four children, I am
         not  persuaded  that  his  ability  to   speak   Arabic   and   his
         documentation would, of themselves, render is relocation to Baghdad
         reasonable in light of the most recent CG decision.

     31. The issue remains whether the appellant could rely on Dr Salih  for
         both security and other assistance. I find it surprising  that  the
         appellant has not made any attempt to contact Dr Salih,  either  by
         writing to him or by seeking to contact him by telephone or through
         email. I note however that the appellant does not have  Dr  Salih's
         personal phone number or  email  address  (a  claim  that  was  not
         expressly  challenged  by  Mr  Whitwell  and  which  is  inherently
         plausible) and  that  Dr  Salih's  position  is  now  significantly
         different from that when  the  appellant  knew  him.  I  accept  Ms
         Bracaj's submissions,  support  as  they  are  by  the  appellant's
         answers in his interviews and in his statements and oral  evidence,
         that he is not a close personal friend of Dr Salih or  part  of  Dr
         Salih's 'inner circle' as described by Judge Cope. I find  credible
         the appellant's claim that he does not believe Dr  Salih  would  be
         willing to provide assistance to a former employee who he  has  not
         seen in several years. I additionally find credible the appellant's
         claim that he does not have any direct contact details for Dr Salih
         and his belief that, given  Dr  Salih's  current  position,  he  is
         unlikely to personally assist the  appellant.  Applying  the  lower
         standard of proof, I am satisfied that the appellant is unlikely to
         be able to make any meaningful contact with Dr Salih such  that  Dr
         Salih would be in a position to offer support or assistance to him.
         I consequently find, applying the  test  set  out  in  Januzzi  and
         affirmed in AH (Sudan), that it would  be  unreasonable  or  unduly
         harsh to expect the appellant to relocate to Baghdad.



Notice of Decision

The protection appeal is allowed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum                 6 January 2021

Signed                     Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
