
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07173/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th January 2019                   |On 01st March 2019                |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                    M E H
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Bahja, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co

For the Respondent:    Ms L Kenny, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia whose date of birth  is  recorded
    as 20th December 1984.  He appeals the decision of First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Zahed dated 23rd August 2018.

 2. This appeal comes before me with the permission of Upper Tribunal Judge
    Perkins who granted that permission on 12th December 2018.

 3. There are a number of grounds. It is not altogether clear which grounds
    were permitted to be argued and which were not. What is clear, however,
    is that permission was granted on the basis that there was said to have
    been no bundle of documents from the Appellant by  the  judge  when  in
    fact there was.  The paragraph in question is paragraph 8 in which  the
    judge said in terms, "The documents before me at the  hearing  comprise
    the Home Office bundle containing the  documents  required  under  Rule
    13(1) of  the  Procedure  Rules.  There  was  no  bundle  of  documents
    submitted by the Appellant".

 4. It is not entirely clear why there were no documents before the  judge.
    There is a large bundle of documents dated 27th June  2018  which  were
    sent to the Tribunal by recorded delivery.  I  checked  on  "Track  and
    Trace" in open court before the parties and found that the  items  were
    signed for at the Tribunal on 28th June 2018.

 5. It may be that the file was simply wrongly allocated or  filed  or  for
    whatever reason did not reach the judge, but the difficulty is that the
    Appellant has a right to know that the decision reached was based  upon
    all of the evidence. When the judge says that there was no bundle  when
    indeed there was, and it was a  bundle  of  some  substance,  then  the
    Appellant cannot be satisfied that he has been dealt with fairly.

 6. It is right to observe that much of the bundle contains material  which
    forms the Home Office bundle, but  there  is  other  material  evidence
    also. The bundle ran to over one hundred pages.

 7. In the circumstances the decision cannot stand.  I  set  it  aside.   I
    then have to decide whether to remit  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  or
    remake the decision.  Although Ms Kenny invited me to keep this  matter
    in the Upper Tribunal it seems to me that the decision  is  so  fatally
    flawed that the hearing will have to  start  again  with  no  preserved
    findings before a judge other than Judge Zahed.

 8. This matter should be listed at Taylor House.

 9. No interpreter is required.



Notice of Decision

The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed.  The matter is remitted to  the
First-tier Tribunal to be heard afresh.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 27 February 2019





Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker




































