
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07345/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 18th December 2018                        |On 29th March 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     UY
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. C Talaacchi, Counsel instructed by Buckingham
                    Legal Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr. E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT"), and no application is made before me, as this a
      protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
      and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him. This direction applies amongst others to all
      parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
      of court proceedings.


   2. The appellant is a Pakistani national.  He first arrived in the United
      Kingdom in September 2010 as a student. He returned to Pakistan for a
      short period in 2013 and returned to the UK lawfully, in September
      2013. At the time of his return to the United Kingdom, the appellant
      had the benefit of leave to remain until 27th December 2013.  In
      December 2013, he applied for further leave to remain as a student.
      That application was initially refused in February 2015, without a
      right of appeal. The respondent reconsidered that decision and on 9th
      June 2015, respondent again refused the application for leave to
      remain but this time, the decision attracted a right of appeal.  It
      would appear that the appeal was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal
      ("FtT"), but that decision was set aside by the Upper Tribunal.


   3. In any event, on 23rd January 2017 the appellant claimed asylum. The
      claim was refused by the respondent for the reasons set out a decision
      dated 21st July 2017.  The appellant appealed, and his appeal was
      dismissed for the reasons set out in a decision of FtT Judge Phull
      promulgated on 12th October 2017. The appellant was granted permission
      to appeal by Upper Tribunal Judge Plimmer on 29th January 2018.  The
      decision of FtT Judge Phull was set aside by Deputy Upper Tribunal
      Judge Doyle for the reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 30th
      of April 2018 and the matter was remitted to the FtT for hearing
      afresh. The appellant's appeal was heard by FtT Judge Young-Harry and
      the appeal was dismissed for reasons set out in a decision promulgated
      on 16th October 2018. It is that decision that is the subject of the
      appeal before me.


The decision of FtT Judge Young-Harry


   4. The FtT Judge refers at paragraphs [8] to 10] of the decision, to the
      evidence before her. A summary of the matters relied upon by the
      appellant is to be found at paragraphs [13] to [16] of the decision.
      The Judge's findings and conclusions are to be found in paragraphs
      [18] to [39] of the decision.  The Judge noted, at [18], that there
      are a number of matters which caused her to doubt aspects of the
      appellant's claim. At paragraphs [19] and [20], the Judge states:


             "19. I accept the appellant's evidence regarding his
             sexuality. I accept also, that it is likely he had a long-term
             relationship in Pakistan before he left. I do not believe that
             the appellant is bi-sexual, he did not seem to fully
             understand or grasp the difference; I find it is likely he is
             a homosexual male.


             20.  I found the appellant's two witnesses credible. Although
             there were some minor variations between their accounts, such
             as how long they had known each other and how often they
             communicate, I found them generally consistent. They both
             confirmed that the appellant is either gay or bisexual but
             that he certainly prefers men. They described the parties that
             they regularly hold and attend. They confirmed that they both
             see the appellant with men during the parties and have often
             seen him leaving with men."


   5.  However, the Judge rejected the appellant's claim that his ex-
      partner, ("AA") was arrested and the police discovered compromising
      photographs of the appellant, on his phone. The Judge also rejected
      the appellant's account that his home had been raided. The reasons for
      rejecting those aspects of the appellant's claim, are set out at
      paragraphs [22] to [25] of the decision. At paragraphs [25] to [28],
      the Judge states as follows:


             "25. ... I do not accept the appellant's far-fetched
             explanation regarding the police and members of the community
             seeing photographs on AA's phone. Neither do I accept that the
             appellant and AA would exchange such photographs and
             carelessly leave them on the phone, given the climate in
             Pakistan.


             26.  I therefore reject the appellant's evidence regarding
             AA's arrest, the authorities raid on his home, or that the
             authorities have any interest in him. I do not find the
             appellant will face any risk from the authorities on return.
             Neither do I accept that his family or the local community are
             currently aware of his sexuality, thus no risk will arise in
             this regard. I do not reach this conclusion in isolation
             rather, taken cumulatively, these matters lead me to doubt his
             account.


             27.  Based on the appellant's evidence, I find he has chosen
             to live discreetly while in the UK. The appellant described
             only attending private intimate parties with friends. He has
             not had a committed open relationship in the UK but rather,
             from his description, only discreet encounters.


             28.  I do not find the appellant has provided any evidence to
             show that he has lived an openly gay life in the UK or has
             openly expressed his sexuality in any way, despite bringing
             free to do so. I find his behaviour on return is likely to
             mirror his behaviour in the UK."


   6. The FtT Judge referred to the decision in HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010]
      UKSC 31, and having accepted that the appellant is gay, went on to
      consider whether the appellant would be at risk upon return. The Judge
      accepted, at [31], that those who choose to live openly in Pakistan,
      face persecution.  At paragraphs [31] to [32], the Judge states as
      follows:


             "31. I am satisfied, based on the country evidence, that those
             who choose to live openly in Pakistan, face persecution.  I
             find, given the appellant has thus far chosen to live
             discreetly in the UK, despite being free to live openly and
             the fact that he lived in a similar way when he was in
             Pakistan, I find the appellant will choose to live discreetly
             on return.


             32.  He has shown no desire to live an openly gay life. I find
             his behaviour thus far does not support the suggestion that he
             would wish to live openly on return. In line with Amare [2005]
             EWCA Civ 1600, my finding that the appellant is likely to
             conduct himself discreetly or return, is based on his past
             behaviour. Accordingly, I find the appellant has not shown
             that he is entitled to international protection."


The appeal before me


   7. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Buchanan on 12th
      November 2018. The matter comes before me to consider whether the
      decision of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law,
      and if so, to remake the decision.


   8. The appellant makes three broad criticisms as to the findings reached
      by the Judge and I shall deal with each of them in turn.  As Brooke LJ
      observed in the course of his decision in R (Iran) v The Secretary of
      State for the Home Department [2005] EWCA Civ 982, "unjustified
      complaints" as to an alleged failure to give adequate reasons are all
      too frequent.  The obligation on a Tribunal is to give reasons in
      sufficient detail to show the principles on which the Tribunal has
      acted and the reasons that have led to the decision.  Such reasons
      need not be elaborate, and do not need to address every argument or
      every factor which weighed in the decision.  If a Tribunal has not
      expressly addressed an argument, but if there are grounds on which the
      argument could properly have been rejected, it should be assumed that
      the Tribunal acted on such grounds.  It is sufficient that the
      critical reasons to the decision are recorded.


   9. The appellant criticises the decision to reject the appellant's claim
      that his ex-partner was arrested and that the police discovered
      compromising photographs of the appellant on his phone.


  10. It is claimed that the discrepancy identified by the judge at
      paragraph [22] of her decision, is not adequately reason. It is said
      that the Judge fails to give clear reasons as to why the appellant's
      fear of the police, expressed during the screening interview, could
      not properly have arisen following the conversation between the
      appellant and his brother when the appellant intended to return. That
      fear was exacerbated, it is claimed, when the appellant subsequently
      found out that the police had raided his house.  I have carefully read
      the screening interview, completed on 23rd January 2017, that is
      referred to by the Judge at paragraph [22] of the decision.  The
      appellant was asked, at Q4.1, to briefly explain all the reasons why
      he cannot return to Pakistan.  He stated that he is bisexual and that
      his family had found out after January 2016. He claimed his life was
      in danger ".. From the police and the community.". He claimed that his
      family in Lahore, had been told by someone about his sexuality.  The
      appellant claimed, at paragraph [37] of his witness statement, that it
      was when he spoke to his brother the last time (on 17th January 2017
      according to the interview record) that his brother had stated that
      the appellant was gay and the whole world knows what he and AA did.
      The appellant claims in his witness statement that as soon as he heard
      AA's name, he hung up.  The appellants account of events is that a
      friend had travelled to Pakistan and that he had not known of AA's
      arrest or the police interest in him, until May 2017.  It was in my
      judgement open to the Judge, on the evidence, to be concerned that the
      appellant had in January 2017, claimed that his life was in danger
      from the police, when he did not know of any police interest in him
      until some months later.


  11. The appellant also criticises the Judge's consideration of the claim
      regarding the photographs found by the police.  The appellant claims
      that he provided a clear and coherent account with regards to his
      understanding of how those photographs were found. At paragraph [39]
      of his witness statement, the appellant claimed that his friend had
      travelled to Pakistan and the appellant had asked his friend to let
      him know of the situation in Pakistan. The appellant states:


             ".. He is from my home area and told me that the whole
             community know I have been with men and that my family have
             been disreputed because of me. He told me that my ex-boyfriend
             (AA) I was in jail, as he was caught with his new partner that
             I was next if I came back as the police found pictures that me
             and AA had taken in his house. I remember that I sent pictures
             to AA and he had kept them but I did not know he kept them
             this long. ("SZ") also told me that he came to know that the
             police had raided my house but could not say when. My friend
             told me that the matter was serious and he would not be
             involving himself in this as he too may get into some
             trouble."


  12. At paragraph [41] of his witness statement the appellant explains that
      his friend has refused to help him further. The appellant claims that
      when the appeal was listed for hearing, he had begged his friend to
      come and give evidence, but was told that he cannot, because if people
      in Pakistan or the authorities come to know that he has helped the
      appellant, he and his own family would suffer problems.


  13. It is clear in my judgement that at paragraphs [23] to [25] of her
      decision the Judge considered in the account advanced by the
      appellant. The Judge rejected that account for the reasons that are
      set out at paragraph [25] of the decision and in my judgement it was
      open to her to do so. In my judgement, the findings reached by the
      Judge were neither irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury
      sense, or  findings that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.  The
      assessment of such matters is always a highly fact sensitive task.
      The FtT Judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole.  In
      assessing the credibility of the claim advanced by the appellant, the
      Judge was required to consider a number of factors.  They include,
      whether the account given by the appellant was of sufficient detail,
      whether the account is internally consistent and consistent with any
      relevant specific and general country information, and whether the
      account is plausible.  She clearly did so.  The findings, in my
      judgement, arise from a combination of factors including a
      consideration of evidence that lacked detail or sufficient
      explanation, and matters that appeared to the Judge, to be
      implausible.


  14. The appellant also criticises the findings of the Judge that the
      appellant has thus far chosen to live discreetly in the United
      Kingdom, and will choose to live discreetly on return to Pakistan.  It
      was the Judge's consideration of this aspect of the appellant's claim
      that was the focus of the submissions made by Mr Talaacchi before me.
      He submits that the Judge had found the two witnesses called by the
      appellant, to be credible. He submits that the conclusions reached by
      the Judge at paragraphs [27] and [28] of the decision are against the
      weight of the evidence. He refers me to the matters set out at
      paragraphs [34] and [35] of the appellant's witness statement in which
      the appellant claims that he has lived openly in the UK as a bisexual
      man, although he has not had any relationships. His evidence is that
      he has had casual encounters with men throughout the time that he has
      been in the United Kingdom.  At paragraph [61] of his witness
      statement the appellant confirms that he is open about his sexuality
      in the United Kingdom, whereas he was not open about that in Pakistan.
      He submits that the only proper inference to be drawn from that
      evidence, is that the appellant would have to live discreetly in
      Pakistan because he is unable to live openly.  Mr Talaacchi submits
      that the Judge failed to give adequate weight to the evidence of the
      appellant and his witnesses in this respect. He claims that the Judge
      erred, at paragraph [31] of the decision, in finding that the
      appellant would choose to live discreetly upon return to Pakistan. He
      submits it would be wrong to expect the appellant to conceal his
      sexuality in all the circumstances.


  15. I have carefully considered the matters set out in the witness
      statement of the appellant and the witness statements made by the two
      witnesses called in support of the appeal.  Although it is right to
      say that at paragraph [34] of his witness statement, the appellant
      confirms that he has lived openly in the UK as a bisexual man, he
      confirms that he has not had any relationships, but has had casual
      encounters with men throughout the time that he has been in the UK.
      The appellant simply states that he does not have evidence of the
      encounters because he knew that he had to go back to Pakistan. He does
      not in fact deal with the situation on return.  Mr Talaacchi submits
      that an inference can be drawn from what is said by the appellant at
      paragraph [61] of his witness statement. I disagree. The appellant
      accepts that he was not open about his sexuality in Pakistan. There
      was no evidence before the Judge he will conduct himself differently,
      upon return to Pakistan now. For obvious reasons neither of the two
      witnesses, could give any evidence as to how the appellant would
      conduct himself upon return.  Neither sought to do so.   The fact that
      the two witnesses were found to be credible by the FtT Judge, adds
      nothing.  They do not, and could not, give evidence as to the way in
      which the appellant will conduct himself upon return.


  16. I remind myself of the test set out by Lord Hope in his judgement in
      HJ (Iran) -v- SSHD [2010] UKSC 31.  Such appeals involve what is
      essentially an individual and fact-specific inquiry.  At paragraph
      [35], Lord Hope set out the test in the following way:


         "35. This brings me to the test that should be adopted by the fact-
         finding tribunals in this country. As Lord Walker points out in
         para 98, this involves what is essentially an individual and fact-
         specific inquiry. Lord Rodger has described the approach in para
         82, but I would like to set it out in my own words. It is necessary
         to proceed in stages.


            (a) The first stage, of course, is to consider whether the
            applicant is indeed gay. Unless he can establish that he is of
            that orientation he will not be entitled to be treated as a
            member of the particular social group. But I would regard this
            part of the test as having been satisfied if the applicant's
            case is that he is at risk of persecution because he is
            suspected of being gay, if his past history shows that this is
            in fact the case.


            (b) The next stage is to examine a group of questions which are
            directed to what his situation will be on return. This part of
            the inquiry is directed to what will happen in the future. The
            Home Office's Country of Origin report will provide the
            background. There will be little difficulty in holding that in
            countries such as Iran and Cameroon gays or persons who are
            believed to be gay are persecuted and that persecution is
            something that may reasonably be feared. The question is how
            each applicant, looked at individually, will conduct himself if
            returned and how others will react to what he does. Those
            others will include everyone with whom he will come in contact,
            in private as well as in public. The way he conducts himself
            may vary from one situation to another, with varying degrees of
            risk. But he cannot and must not be expected to conceal aspects
            of his sexual orientation which he is unwilling to conceal,
            even from those whom he knows may disapprove of it. If he fears
            persecution as a result and that fear is well-founded, he will
            be entitled to asylum however unreasonable his refusal to
            resort to concealment may be. The question what is reasonably
            tolerable has no part in this inquiry.


            (c) On the other hand, the fact that the applicant will not be
            able to do in the country of his nationality everything that he
            can do openly in the country whose protection he seeks is not
            the test. As I said earlier (see para 15), the Convention was
            not directed to reforming the level of rights in the country of
            origin. So it would be wrong to approach the issue on the basis
            that the purpose of the Convention is to guarantee to an
            applicant who is gay that he can live as freely and as openly
            as a gay person as he would be able to do if he were not
            returned. It does not guarantee to everyone the human rights
            standards that are applied by the receiving country within its
            own territory. The focus throughout must be on what will happen
            in the country of origin.


            (d) The next stage, if it is found that the applicant will in
            fact conceal aspects of his sexual orientation if returned, is
            to consider why he will do so. If this will simply be in
            response to social pressures or for cultural or religious
            reasons of his own choosing and not because of a fear of
            persecution, his claim for asylum must be rejected. But if the
            reason why he will resort to concealment is that he genuinely
            fears that otherwise he will be persecuted, it will be
            necessary to consider whether that fear is well founded.


            (e) This is the final and conclusive question: does he have a
            well-founded fear that he will be persecuted? If he has, the
            causative condition that Lord Bingham referred to in Januzi -v-
            SSHD [2006] 2 AC 426, para 5 will have been established. The
            applicant will be entitled to asylum.


  17. The FtT Judge found that the appellant is a homosexual male.  The
      first stage of the test set out in HJ (Iran) is satisfied by the
      appellant.  The next stage is to examine what the appellant's
      situation will be on return. The question is how the appellant looked
      at individually, will conduct himself if returned and how others will
      react to what he does. The appellant cannot and must not be expected
      to conceal aspects of his sexuality which he is unwilling to conceal,
      even from those whom he knows may disapprove of it. As Lord Hope
      emphasised in HJ (Iran), the fact that the appellant will not be able
      to do in Pakistan, everything that he can do openly in the UK is not
      the test.


  18. The FtT Judge rejected the appellants account of the arrest of his ex-
      partner AA and the account of the appellant that the police had
      discovered compromising photographs of the appellant.  The Judge also
      rejected the appellant's account that his home had been raided.  The
      Judge did not accept, at paragraph [26], that the appellant's family
      or the local community is aware of his sexuality.  Although the
      appellant claimed in his witness statement that she has lived openly
      in the UK as a bisexual man, and has had casual encounters, the
      appellant accepts that he has had no relationships and that he did not
      keep evidence of the encounters, because he knew he had to go back to
      Pakistan. In reaching her decision, the Judge was entitled to consider
      the appellant's past behaviour, particularly insofar as his
      relationship in Pakistan was concerned. The Judge accepted that it is
      likely that the appellant had a long-term relationship in Pakistan
      before he left.  On the appellant's own account of events, he
      conducted himself discreetly for the duration of that long-term
      relationship. The Judge states,  at [32] that ".. My finding it that
      the appellant is likely to conduct himself discreetly on return, is
      based on his past behaviour.".   The Judge's findings at paragraphs
      [31] and [32] of the decision must properly be read together with what
      is said at paragraph [27].


  19. Adopting the test set out in HJ (Iran), the next stage, if it had been
      found that the applicant will in fact conceal his sexuality if
      returned, is to consider why he will do so.  In order to reach this
      stage, there must be a prior finding that the appellant will in fact
      conceal aspects of his sexuality if returned to Pakistan.  The Judge
      did not find that the appellant will conceal aspects of his sexuality.
       Carefully read, the Judge found that the appellant had been able to
      have a long term relationship  previously, and would be able to
      continue doing so, upon return.


  20. Having carefully considered the findings made by the Judge against the
      test set out in HJ (Iran), I reject the claim that the Judge failed to
      properly consider the issues in accordance with the decision of the
      Supreme Court in HJ (Iran).   On the evidence, in my judgment, it was
      open to the Judge to find that the appellant was not prevented from
      living as a bisexual male, undetected for many years without any
      problems.  There was no evidence of the appellant drawing attention to
      himself and he was able to enter into a relationship that endured for
      some years.  There is no evidence that he will conduct himself any
      differently now, if returned.


  21. On appeal, the Upper Tribunal should not overturn a judgment at first
      instance, unless it really cannot understand the original judge's
      thought process when he or she was making material findings. In my
      judgement, the Judge identified and resolved key conflicts in the
      evidence, and gave a brief explanation of the conclusions on the
      central issue on which the appeal was determined. The findings made by
      the Judge were findings that were properly open to the Judge on the
      evidence before her.  The findings cannot be said to be perverse,
      irrational or findings that were not supported by the evidence.  The
      appeal was dismissed after the Judge had carefully considered the
      facts and circumstances of the claim and all the evidence before her.


  22. In my judgment, the appellant is unable to establish that there was a
      material error of law in the decision of the FtT and it follows that
      the appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision


  23. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
      Judge stands.


  24. No aanonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As this
      is a protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made.
      Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant
      is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him or any member of his family. This direction
      applies amongst others to all parties. Failure to comply with this
      direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


      Signed                                 Date         30th January 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD


  25. I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


      Signed                                 Date         30th January 2019


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

