
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07096/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22 November 2018                           |On 8 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        THE HONOURABLE LORD MATTHEWS
                  SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                     MSA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza, solicitor, JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Wilding, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant was born on 3 April 1993 and is a national of Bangladesh.
     He entered the United Kingdom on 25 February 2010 with leave as a
    visitor valid for six months.  On 12 January 2017 he claimed asylum on
    the basis that as a gay man he feared persecution if he ever returned
    to Bangladesh.  He had a screening interview on 28 January 2017 and a
    substantive asylum interview on 5 July 2017.  The claim was refused by
    the respondent on 13 July 2017.  It was accepted by the respondent that
    he was a gay man and that he had demonstrated a genuine subjective fear
    on return to Bangladesh.  However, it was not accepted that his fear
    was objectively well-founded.  It was accepted that sexual activity
    between men, whether consensual or not, was illegal under Section 377
    of the Bangladesh Penal Code but it was maintained that the authorities
    did not enforce that legislation fully.  It was accepted that the LGBT
    community might face harassment by the authorities but for various
    reasons set out in the refusal letter it was not accepted that the
    treatment of gay men amounted to persecution under the Refugee
    Convention or that there was a real risk of serious harm in terms of
    paragraph 339C of the Immigration Rules or Article 3 of the ECHR.
    Neither was there any breach of Article 8.

 2. The appellant appealed under Section 82(1) of the Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The appeal was heard on 25 August 2017 by FtTJ P-J S White, whose
    decision, refusing the appeal, was promulgated on 20 October 2017.  The
    FtTJ set out the legal framework in paragraphs 3 and 4 of the
    determination and no issue is taken with that.  On the asylum claim it
    is for the appellant to prove that there is a real risk that he will
    suffer persecution for one of the five reasons identified in the
    Refugee Convention, now incorporated into the EU Qualification
    Directive, which in turn has been implemented by appropriate changes to
    the Immigration Rules, HC 395 (as amended), which came into force on 9
    October 2006.  This makes provision for protection in qualifying cases:
    The Refugee or Person in Need of International Protection
    (Qualification) Regulations 2006 S.I. No. 2525.  The FtTJ pointed out
    that consideration had to be given to the question whether, if not
    entitled to asylum, he was entitled to humanitarian protection, under
    paragraph 339C of HC 395, by virtue of a real risk of suffering serious
    harm, as therein defined.  Insofar as the appellant relied on rights
    under Article 3 of the Human Rights Convention, he had to show a real
    risk that he would suffer inhuman and degrading treatment.  In the
    claim under Article 8, he had to show that the decision interfered with
    his protected family or private life.  Article 8 being a qualified
    right, it was open to the respondent to show that any interference was
    justified.

 4. The burden of proof rests on the appellant.  The standard of proof in
    all the claims advanced is the lower standard of a real risk, save for
    the claim under Article 8, where it is the balance of probabilities.
    The evidence had to be considered in the round and the relevant date
    was the date of the hearing.  The FtTJ reminded himself of the need for
    anxious scrutiny of the evidence and of the advice of UNHCR that asylum
    claimants be given the benefit of the doubt where their claim was
    otherwise plausible.  Even if the judge were dubious of some aspects of
    the evidence, the core of the account might still be true.

 5. Having considered the evidence and submissions, the judge made a number
    of findings of fact both in relation to the appellant himself and in
    relation to the situation in Bangladesh.  Following that, the judge
    dismissed the appeal on asylum grounds, humanitarian protection grounds
    and human rights grounds.

 6. The appellant appealed to the Upper Tribunal and in a determination
    promulgated on 15 May 2018, Upper Tribunal Judge King TD found that
    there was an error of law in the FtTJ's analysis of the background
    material.  The determination was set aside but only in that respect.
    The findings of fact in relation to the appellant himself were not set
    aside.  He determined that the background material should be considered
    by the Upper Tribunal in a hearing convened for that purpose and to
    consider the question as to whether there existed within Bangladesh as
    a whole or Bangladesh in particular areas where an openly gay man could
    pursue his homosexual lifestyle without undue risk to himself.  Various
    passages from reports had been cited both in the refusal letter and
    before the FtTJ but not in any detail.  Judge King indicated that it
    was for both parties to present the reports and in the skeleton
    arguments to highlight with particular care those passages which were
    relied upon either to establish that there were safe areas or to
    establish the contrary, as the case might be.

 7. With that background, the case ultimately came before us on 22 November
    2018.

 8. Mr Reza submitted a bundle of reports and a skeleton argument
    highlighting those parts which he said were relevant.  Unfortunately,
    the respondent submitted no skeleton argument.  Mr Wilding, whom we do
    not blame for this situation, said that this was due to a lack of
    resources.  Furthermore, the appellant's evidence only came in two days
    before the hearing.  We found this situation unfortunate, to say the
    least.  A lack of resources seems to us to be a poor excuse for not
    complying with the directions issued on 18 October 2018.  A skeleton
    argument, in terms of those directions, was to be submitted no later
    than Friday, 2 November 2018.  While the appellant had not produced a
    skeleton until very late in the day, that did not seem to us to absolve
    the respondent from the duty to comply with the directions and our
    consideration of this case was hampered, albeit Mr Wilding's
    submissions were of considerable assistance.

 9. We asked Mr Wilding at the outset what the respondent's position was.
    He told us that in accordance with the latest Home Office Country
    Policy and Information Note (version 3.0 - November 2017) the
    assessment was on a case by case basis.  Societal discrimination per se
    did not amount to persecution.  There was a lack of consistent evidence
    as to how gay men were treated.  Mr Wilding said that he could not
    readily identify whether the appellant had a well-founded fear of
    persecution in his home area but perhaps the Tribunal did not think it
    mattered.  He was not sure if his case was that he was at risk from his
    family or not.  His skeleton argument appeared to suggest that the
    conditions generally amounted to persecution and that the State was not
    able or willing to offer protection.  There was no finding that he was
    at risk from his family.

10. We did not hear any evidence about the appellant's particular
    situation, that not being the focus of the appeal before us.  In these
    circumstances, the FtTJ's findings as to the appellant's personal
    circumstances still stand.  The relevant circumstances seem to us to be
    as follows.

11. There was no dispute about the appellant's identity and nationality.
    While there is no finding of fact about this, the evidence demonstrated
    that he came from Sylhet, where his family still live.  That not having
    been disputed, we proceeded on the basis that it is true.  At the age
    of 14 he realised that he was homosexual.  Nothing particularly turns
    on this, it being accepted that he is gay.  There was evidence that he
    went to gay clubs and bars but the FtTJ found that insofar as he had
    been open about his sexuality, this was a recent development, beginning
    two to three months before he made his asylum claim and that he
    remained guarded with at least some people, including his own
    relatives.  There were letters from friends, and one from a cousin, to
    the effect that they knew him to be homosexual and in some cases that
    they had seen him at gay clubs and/or events, which suggested at least
    a degree of openness on his part.  The FtTJ found that that was of
    limited assistance in deciding whether he would live openly on return
    to Bangladesh.  However, under reference to HJ (Iran) and Another v
    SSHD [2010] UKSC 31, the FtTJ noted that the reason for discretion in
    Bangladesh will be important.

12. The respondent submitted that the appellant would not live openly in
    Bangladesh but that would not be the end of the matter even if that
    were the case.  If even part of the reason for discretion was a fear of
    persecution he would be entitled to refugee status.  The FtTJ noted
    that it was not put to the appellant that he would live discreetly and
    would do so for reasons other than persecution and that so far as he
    admitted not telling everyone of his sexuality, the reason assigned was
    fear of harm, rather than stigma.  The judge noted that the refusal
    letter accepted that he had a genuine subjective fear, which further
    suggested that if he were to live discreetly, at least part of the
    reason would be fear of persecution.  In the light of that, while the
    judge thought it far from clear how openly he presently lived, or how
    openly he would live in Bangladesh, as a gay man, he was satisfied that
    a suggestion that he would be discreet was no answer to his claim
    because such discretion would be in part from fear of persecution.  It
    is not entirely clear whether the FtTJ found that he was in fear of his
    family.  The finding that he remained guarded with at least some
    people, including his own relatives, is of limited assistance in that
    regard.

13. Nonetheless, we proceeded on the basis that he is gay and that he would
    either wish to live openly or would refrain to do so at least in part
    because of his fear of persecution.  As the FtTJ noted, the real issue
    is whether that fear of persecution is objectively well-founded.

The Submissions

14. Mr Reza submitted that the respondent and the First-tier Tribunal for
    that matter had relied on the Country Policy and Information Note of
    December 2016, which had indicated that there was a considerable degree
    of social stigma for LGBT people in Bangladesh.  However, there was
    evidence to suggest that tolerance may be improving and there was in
    general no risk of persecution.  In any event, the appellant could
    relocate.  However, in assessing the extent of his ability to live
    freely and openly gay in Bangladesh, thehexpert evidence had to be
    considered.  Things had moved on since December 2016.  Two other
    Country Policy and Information Notes had been produced, one in
    September and one in November 2017.  The previous two reports had
    indicated that gay people were at risk of discrimination but not
    persecution but the latest report represented a significant change.
    The latest policy summary could be found at paragraph 3.1.1 to 3.1.8 in
    the following terms:

"3.1.1   Male same-sex sexual acts are criminalised in Bangladesh under
Section 377 of the Penal Code and punishable by life imprisonment.  However
there have only ever been two arrests under the provision and no
convictions.  Sex between women is not criminalised and transgender persons
(hijras) are legally recognised.  There are, however, reports that Section
377, together with other legal instruments, have sometimes been used by the
police to arbitrarily arrest, harass and intimidate LGBT persons.  There
have also been reports police use physical and sexual violence against LGBT
persons.

3.1.2    However, in general, the available evidence does not establish
that LGBT persons are systematically targeted and subject to treatment
amounting to persecution or serious harm by the state.

3.1.3    Reports indicate that LGBT persons are reluctant to be open about
their sexual identity due to social stigma, pressures and norms, and to
avoid a level of discrimination and violence by non-state actors, including
family members and Islamic extremists, arising from this.  Similarly, the
LGBT 'community' is closed and private.

3.1.4    Women are less able than men to withstand family pressure to marry
and, for example, may be more restricted in their movements.  Decision
makers must consider all of the person's circumstances.

3.1.5    In general, an LGBT person who does not conceal their sexual
orientation or gender identity may be at risk of treatment, which by its
nature and repetition amounts to persecution or serious harm.  The nature
and degree of treatment may vary according to geography and socio-economic
status.  Gay rights activists and bloggers may be at greater risk due to
their profile.  Each case must be considered on its facts and merits.

3.1.6    In general, the state appears able but unwilling to offer
effective protection.  However, each will need to be considered on its
facts.

3.1.7    Internal relocation may be reasonable depending on the person's
individual circumstances, for example: where they have chosen to live
discreetly due to social or religious pressures.  However, internal
relocation will not be an option if it depends on the person concealing
their sexual orientation and/or gender identity in the proposed new
location for fear of persecution.

3.1.8    Where a claim is refused, it is unlikely to be certifiable as
'clearly unfounded'."

15. This was not the same as the conclusion in the previous reports.  Mr
    Reza submitted, however, that even in those reports the sources
    contradicted the conclusions. We do not need to decide whether that
    particular submission was well founded.

16. As far as the December 2016 report was concerned, paragraph 4.4.2 was
    to the effect that there were no laws in Bangladesh prohibiting
    discrimination on the basis of sexual orientation or identity.  There
    was no legal recognition of same sex civil unions or marriages and same
    sex couples could not adopt children.

17. At 4.4.3 it was indicated that nearly 90% of the population was Muslim
    and sexual activity of any nature outside of a heterosexual marriage
    was prohibited under Sharia law.

18. At 4.5.1 reference was made to a Fact-Finding Mission undertaken in
    April 2015 by the French Office for Protection of Refugees and
    Stateless Persons which noted that Article 86 of the Dhaka Metropolitan
    Police Ordinance 18, entitled "Penalty for being found under suspicious
    circumstances between sunset and sunrise", could be used against LGBT
    individuals, in particular its subparagraph (b): "Having without any
    satisfactory excuse his face covered or otherwise disguised".  Men
    wearing makeup and women's clothes or meeting in small groups during
    the hours stipulated in the ordinance may be arrested.

19. Article 54 of the Code of Penal Procedure of 1898, which allows the
    police to arrest a person against whom a complaint has been made
    without a warrant, had been used against LGBT individuals.

20. At paragraph 4.5.3 it was noted that the Global Human Rights
    Development reported in 2015 that Section 377 of the Penal Code was
    used in conjunction with Sections 54 and 55 of the Code of Criminal
    Procedure, which allowed law enforcement agencies to arrest without a
    warrant, to harass the LGBT community.  Sections 54 and 55 were
    enforced as a so-called "preventative measure".  Any police officer in
    charge could arrest individuals whom he or she had a probable cause or
    reasonable suspicion would commit a "cognisable offence".

21. At paragraph 5.2.2 it was noted that the BSWS (Bandhu Social Welfare
    Society) had reported that the law was used by social institutions
    including families to harass LGBT persons and compel them into
    heterosexual marriages.  At paragraph 5.2.3 the late gay rights
    activist Xulhaz Mannan was quoted by the Kaleidoscope Trust as
    commenting that even in some more conservative regions homosexual acts
    between teenage boys were seen as the safer way of exploring sexuality
    and that as long as they got married in their adulthood no one cared
    much.  However, it was a closet and the moment someone decided to leave
    that they would be ostracised by family, friends and society.  Other
    material was quoted to the effect that homosexuality deviated from the
    cultural norm in Bangladesh and that coming out could have a wide range
    of consequences.  Some parents in Bangladesh considered homosexuality
    to be a mental illness and as a morally depraved Western phenomenon
    that needed to be fended off.  However, mainly due to new media, times
    were changing.  The gay rights publication LGBT Weekly noted in April
    2014 that "any discussion around sex and sexuality is taboo".  A
    similar comment was made by the Dhaka Tribune in December 2014.

22. At paragraph 5.3.4 the Refugee Coordinator of Amnesty International in
    Toronto indicated in March 2010 that it was generally unsafe for gay
    men in Bangladesh to publicly reveal their sexual orientation and they
    frequently married persons of the opposite gender to give the
    appearance of heterosexuality.  At paragraph 6.1.1 it was noted that in
    September 2014 the Bangladesh Permanent Representative to the UN told
    the Dhaka Tribune that the government opposed the International
    Conference on Population and Development's recommendations for LGBT
    rights.  The government of Bangladesh (paragraph 6.1.2) rejected a
    recommendation to abolish Section 377 of the Penal Code at the 24th
    Regular Session of the UN Human Rights Council's Universal Periodic
    Review.

23. At paragraph 6.1.6 it was noted that following the murders of two gay
    rights activists (Xulhaz Mannan and Mahbub Tonoy) in Dhaka on 25 April
    2016, a representative of Bangladesh's first LGBT magazine told The
    Telegraph that "LGBT activists did not trust the police" and that most
    LGBT activists had now gone into hiding.  The Telegraph also reported
    (paragraph 6.1.7) that the murdered activists were too scared to report
    the death threats they had received to the police for fear of
    retribution.

24. At paragraph 6.1.8 Reuters reported that the Home Minister, Asaduzzaman
    Khan, said no one involved in the killings would be spared but also
    urged people to respect religious sensitivities and indicated that
    Xulhaz used to work to protect the rights of gay people, which was not
    in line with their society.

25. In paragraph 6.2.2 it was noted that the U.S. Department of State 2015
    Report indicated that police used the law as a pretext to bully LGBT
    individuals, particularly those seen as effeminate men.  Some groups
    also reported harassment under a suspicious behaviour provision of the
    police code.  According to "views adopted" by the UN Human Rights
    Committee in 2013:

"Although the law that criminalises homosexual relationships is not
systematically applied it reinforces a general climate of homophobia and
impunity for those who persecute LGBT individuals.  Moreover, the law is
applied in an unofficial manner without recorded prosecutions by state and
non-state agents."

26. Mr Reza then referred to the September 2017 report, which concluded
    that some LGBT persons had reportedly faced harassment by law
    enforcement officers but these were not sufficiently serious by their
    nature and repetition as to amount to persecution or serious harm.  It
    went on that in general LGBT persons were not open due to social
    pressures and norms, and to avoid a level of discrimination arising
    from this.  But, even when taken cumulatively, it was not sufficiently
    serious by its nature and repetition as to reach the high threshold of
    persecution or serious harm.

27. However, he submitted that the contents of the report challenged that
    conclusion.  Reference was made to paragraphs 2.3.8, 2.3.10, 2.3.11,
    2.3.12, 2.4.3, 2.5.6 and 4.1.2.  These were to the effect that
    Bangladesh was a conservative society in which homophobic attitudes
    persisted.  LGBT persons faced discrimination as well as family and
    societal pressure to conform to Bangladeshi and Muslim social and
    heterosexual norms, including marriage.  There had been some reports of
    violent behaviour towards LGBT persons and rights activists by non-
    state actors.  Among the main perpetrators were "mastans" (local thugs)
    and Islamist groups, although harassment and discrimination were more
    likely experiences than violence.  Various sources maintained that LGBT
    persons were, in general, reluctant to be open about their sexuality,
    although persons from a higher socio-economic background might "come
    out" to their family or friends.  Reasons for not being open might
    include conforming to societal norms and fear of discrimination and/or
    violence.  There was an indication that the rise in social media had
    led to an increase in hate speech against LGBT people.  Whilst there
    were support groups for them, some had reduced their activities
    following the murder of the two gay rights activists in 2016.  Some
    sources indicated that many LGBT persons who experienced societal ill-
    treatment did not report the incidents to the police due to a fear of
    having to reveal their sexual orientation.  LGBT persons from
    influential families might be able to access protection, although we
    note that there is no suggestion that the appellant in this case came
    from an influential family.  Internal relocation would not be an option
    if it depended on the person concealing their sexual orientation and/or
    gender identity in the proposed new location for fear of persecution.
    There were no laws in Bangladesh prohibiting discrimination on the
    basis of sexual orientation or gender identity.  There was no legal
    recognition of same sex civil unions or marriages and same sex couples
    could not adopt children.

28. Mr Reza went on to submit that LGBT people were more likely to be
    charged with other offences, and not necessarily under 377 of the Penal
    Code.  In this regard he quoted from paragraphs 4.6.1, 4.6.3, 5.1.2 and
    5.1.3 of the September 2017 report.

29. This referred again to the use of Article 86 of the Dhaka Metropolitan
    Police Ordinance regarding the penalty for being found under suspicious
    circumstances between sunset and sunrise.  It referred again to the
    Global Human Rights Development report in 2015 of the use of Sections
    54 and 55 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, along with Section 377 of
    the Penal Code.  At 5.1.2 (which is in similar terms to paragraph 6.2.2
    of the latest Country Policy and Information Note from November 2017)
    it was noted that according to views adopted by the UN Human Rights
    Committee in 2013:

"Although the law that criminalises homosexual relationships is not
systematically applied it reinforces a general climate of homophobia and
impunity for those who persecute LGBT individuals.  Moreover, the law is
applied in an unofficial manner without recorded prosecutions by state and
non-state agents.  According to a U.S. State Department 2016 Report,
lesbian, gay, bisexual, transgender and intersex (LGBTI) groups reported
that police used the law as a pretext to bully LGBTI individuals, including
those considered effeminate regardless of their sexual orientation, as well
as to limit registration of LGBTI organisations.  Some groups also reported
harassment under a suspicious behaviour provision of the police code.
During a Home Office Fact-Finding Mission ("FFM") to Bangladesh in May
2017, two sources noted that people were unlikely to be charged under
Section 377 but that other laws, such as drug laws, were used against LGBT
people."

30. Police brutality and torture was noted in the report at paragraph
    6.1.1.  Human Rights Watch stated in a press release of 26 April 2016
    that in 2013 the country's National Human Rights Commission called on
    the government to protect sexual and gender minorities from
    discrimination.  In a 2015 manual on sexual and gender minorities the
    commission acknowledged that police physically and sexually assaulted
    LGBT people and also arbitrarily arrested them based on their
    appearance.  At paragraph 6.4.3 it was noted that according to Western
    officials consulted during the Home Office Fact-Finding Mission in May
    2017, the murders of the two activists had not yet been solved and no
    arrests had been made.  The New York Times reported in June 2017 that
    one arrest had been made but there was no further progress in the case,
    a year after the murders.

31. At paragraph 6.4.4 it was noted that the Australian government's
    Department of Foreign Affairs and Trade Country Information Report
    noted in July 2016 that many gay men, including LGBTI activists and non-
    activists, had reportedly received threats of violence and had been
    unwilling or unable to approach police for support.  During the Fact-
    Finding Mission in May 2017, several sources suggested that LGBT people
    would not feel that they could approach the police for protection.  The
    Boys of Bangladesh said that there might be some exceptions to this,
    for instance someone from an influential family.  However, members of
    the press noted that the police were obliged to take on a case,
    irrespective of the sexuality of the reporter of the crime and the
    Bangladesh Legal Aid and Services Trust (BLAST) noted that there was
    "very little research on these issues".

32. We have already considered certain statements by government officials
    but the following reference was made to this at paragraph 6.5.3 of the
    report, referring to a report by the International Lesbian, Gay,
    Bisexual, Trans and Intersex Association (ILGA) in 2017 which stated
    the following:

"While referencing family values at its second cycle UPR in April 2013, the
Bangladeshi Minister for Foreign Affairs concurred with the newly found
position of the National Human Rights Commission that LGBT people should be
protected from violence and discrimination in law.  However, throughout
2016 the levels of violence and threat from religious radicals that LGBT
people have been exposed to have exponentially risen, and the state has not
offered protection.  As such, many have been forced to leave their homes
and flee the country for fear of their lives."

33. At paragraph 6.5.4 that report is noted as pointing out that Bangladesh
    accepted a recommendation to carry out sensitisation training with
    public officials but this issue was not picked up and there was no
    evidence that such sensitisation had significantly occurred.

34. Mr Reza, in his skeleton, drew attention to paragraph 7.2.2 of the
    September 2017 report, which points to the effect that the BSWS (Bandhu
    Social Welfare Society) reported that the law was used by social
    institutions including families to harass LGBT persons and compel them
    into heterosexual marriages.

35. At paragraph 7.3.4 the Refugee Coordinator of Amnesty International in
    Toronto was noted in 2010 as indicating that it was generally unsafe
    for gay men in Bangladesh to publicly reveal their sexual orientation,
    and they frequently married persons of the opposite gender to give the
    appearance of heterosexuality.  At paragraph 7.3.5 it was noted that
    DFAT noted in its July 2016 report that "the level and frequency of
    harassment (of LGBT persons) depends largely on an individual's socio-
    economic status and their geographic location", while adding "...
    credible sources have told DFAT that lesbian, gay, bisexual,
    transgender ... and intersex (LGBTI) persons are not able to be open
    about their sexual orientation or gender identity, regardless of their
    socio-economic status or geographic location."  Several sources
    consulted during the Home Office FFM to Bangladesh in May 2017
    maintained that LGB people were unable to be open about their
    sexuality.  An official at the National Human Rights Commission (NHRC)
    said that some people may be able to "come out" to close family and
    friends, particularly in upper middle class families ...  Boys of
    Bangladesh noted that the rise in social media, and an unfriendly
    media, had led to an increase in hatred against LGBT people.

36. Reference was made to paragraphs 8.1.1, 8.1.4 and 8.2.1 of the
    September 2017 report.  That recorded that the USSD 2015 Report stated
    that attacks on LGBTI persons occurred occasionally, but these offenses
    were difficult to document because the victims desired confidentiality.
     It noted that LGBT persons regularly received threatening messages via
    telephone, text, and social media.  Freedom House, in its 2017 report,
    noted that societal discrimination against LGBT persons remained the
    norm.

37. It was noted at paragraph 8.1.4 that according to the USSD 2015 Report,
    strong social stigma based on sexual orientation was common and
    prevented open discussion of the subject but said that some public
    events, such as a Rainbow-themed march during the capital's main
    Bengali New Year's celebration, elicited little reaction from
    mainstream society.  At paragraph 8.2.1 it was noted that the
    Immigration and Refugee Board of Canada, in a research response of
    2010, referred to the records of the Bandhu Social Welfare Society as
    showing that "physical assault or beating was the primary form of
    violence experienced by MSM (men who have sex with men).  The main
    perpetrators of violence were local thugs or 'mastans'".

38. The report also noted at 8.5.1 that ILGA noted in its 2017 report that
    in February 2015 Avijit Roy, the author of Bangladesh's first
    scientific book on same sex sexual identity, was savagely murdered on
    the streets of Dhaka, seemingly by religious fundamentalists.

39. Reference was made again to the murder of the two gay rights activists
    on 25 April 2016.  They were killed in a machete attack by a gang of
    assailants posing as delivery men.  Al-Qaeda claimed responsibility.
    It was claimed that they were killed for being pioneers of practising
    and promoting homosexuality in Bangladesh.

40. Paragraph 8.5.4 noted that following the murders, Reuters interviewed
    eight members of Bangladesh's LGBT community and found that out of fear
    of further attacks some people had scrubbed Facebook pictures that
    hinted at same sex relationships or de-activated profiles altogether.
    Several had gone into hiding in safe houses in Dhaka arranged by local
    and foreign friends, while others fled to the countryside, considering
    it safer than the teeming capital.

41. The USSD Report of 2016 observes that following the murder of the two
    activists, many members of LGBTI communities reduced their activities
    and sought refuge both inside and outside of the country, resulting in
    severely weakened advocacy and support networks for LGBTI persons.   It
    was noted at 8.7.3 that the OFPRA FFM Report of 2015 observed that
    there were no purely social meeting places such as "gay friendly" or
    specifically LGBTI restaurants or bars in the capital.  They usually
    met at private parties.  The National Human Rights Commission and an
    official at the British High Commission in Dhaka, who were consulted
    during the Home Office FFM to Bangladesh in May 2017, noted that the
    LGBT community was closed and private.  Paragraph 8.7.4 noted that
    several sources consulted during the FFM agreed that gay rights
    activists and bloggers were more at risk than "ordinary" LGBT people.
    Members of the press judged that Sylhet was riskier than Dhaka.  The
    Boys of Bangladesh claimed that within the last year more LGBT people
    had left Bangladesh because of the attack against gay activists in
    2016.

42. Mr Reza submitted that the new policy note, published in November 2017,
    in effect was not new but merely recognised the existing situation.  He
    submitted that it was in recognition of the Fact-Finding Mission in May
    but that was referred to, as we understand it, in the September report,
    so that part of his submission cannot be right.  Nonetheless, Mr
    Wilding very kindly was able to find the report of the Fact-Finding
    Mission and provided a copy of it to us.

43. Mr Reza quoted extensively from the latest report in his skeleton
    argument.  We have already referred to parts of this.  Mr Reza
    submitted that this policy note for the first time accepted that gay
    people were at risk of persecution in Bangladesh and it was an
    admission for the first time that the State was able but not willing to
    offer effective protection.  We will not repeat quotes from the report
    which echo material in previous reports, such as the prohibition
    against same sex unions, same sex adoption, the use of Article 86 of
    the Dhaka Metropolitan Police Ordinance, and the use of Articles 54 and
    55 of the Code of Criminal Procedure in conjunction with Section 377 of
    the Penal Code.

44. The views of the UN Human Rights Committee in 2013 were repeated as
    were the references in the USSD 2016 Report to LGBT groups reporting
    bullying tactics by the police.  The FFM noted that people were
    unlikely to be charged under Section 377 but that drug laws were likely
    to be used against them.

45. At paragraph 6.1.1 it was noted in the report that Human Rights Watch
    stated in a press release of 26 April 2016 that in 2013 the country's
    National Human Rights Commission called on the government to protect
    sexual and gender minorities from discrimination.  In a 2015 manual on
    sexual and gender minorities, the commission acknowledged that police
    physically and sexually assaulted LGBT people and also arbitrarily
    arrested them based on their appearance.

46. Paragraph 6.3.2 noted that in July 2016 Australia's Department for
    Foreign Affairs and Trade (DFAT) gave its assessment on LGBT persons in
    Bangladesh, stating that:

"... LGBTI individuals - particularly gay men - face a high risk of
official discrimination because of their sexual orientation or gender
identity, which may include being harassed, extorted, or denied police
protection.  Even if legal punishments and prosecutions are rare, the
illegality of homosexual acts under the Criminal Code can be used as a
means of harassment."

47. At 6.3.3 it was noted that during the Home Office FFM to Bangladesh in
    May 2017, Boys of Bangladesh referred to "extreme cases" of hijras
    being beaten by the police.  When asked how a gay man or lesbian would
    be treated by the police, an official at the National Human Rights
    Commission (NHRC) stated that if an LGBT person had to report a crime,
    they would not identify themselves as LGBT to the police.  However, if
    they were identified, the NHRC official thought they might face
    custodial torture.  An official from the British High Commission in
    Dhaka felt that it was difficult to know if LGBT people were treated
    worse than anyone else because "everyone has a rough time with the
    police".

48. At paragraph 6.3.4 it was noted that Amnesty International stated in
    August 2017 that harassment of LGBTI people by security forces was
    common in Bangladesh and many LGBTI people had told Amnesty
    International that they were extremely hesitant to approach the police.
     Far from being offered protection, those who had reported abuses said
    that they were often harassed by police, told to be "less provocative"
    and even threatened with arrests and criminal charges for "unnatural
    offences" under Section 377 of the Penal Code.

49. Reference was made, again, at 6.4.1 about the LGBT community's reaction
    to the murders of two activists in April 2016.  Most LGBT activists had
    gone into hiding, had stopped chatting on social media, had switched
    off their phones and changed the places where they stayed.  They were
    just doing this to survive.

50. Mr Reza referred to a number of other passages which faithfully
    repeated what had been said in earlier reports and went on to consider
    paragraph 8.1.2.  This reflects information in the same paragraph in
    the earlier reports and is to the following effect:

"Participants in a study based on 50 interviews with individuals from the
LGBT community, jointly conducted by GHRD and Boys of Bangladesh (a support
group for the gay community) between November 2013 and May 2014, said that
when they were subjected to violence based on their sexual orientation they
did not report the incidents to the police due to a fear of having to
reveal their sexual orientation.  ...  According to the survey of 751 self-
identified LGB persons in 2014, of the 25.8% who stated they faced
discrimination, 'a higher percentage' said they either had no knowledge of
or no access to legal support."

51. Mr Reza did not quote the immediately succeeding paragraph, 8.1.3,
    which appears to be the same as in the September 2017 report, to the
    following effect:

"In December 2014 the Dhaka Tribune reported on a survey conducted by Boys
of Bangladesh and Roopban (a gay community magazine) among 751 self-
identified LGB persons, as part of a Needs Assessment survey.  The survey
showed that 59% of respondents never faced discrimination but 25.8% did
face discrimination, while more than 50% said they lived in constant fear
of their sexual orientation being discovered.  According to the Tribune
there was speculation that respondents were largely from the middle class.
Polled individuals came from eight major cities across the country,
including 250 from Dhaka.  The average age of those surveyed was 25."

52. This latter paragraph is referred to in the determination of the First-
    tier Tribunal at paragraph 23.  Upper Tribunal Judge King specifically
    referred to this in his determination of 15 May 2018.  The FtT's
    determination did not refer to the percentage (25.8%, not 28%, as UT
    Judge King indicated) who said that they did experience discrimination.
     It was not entirely clear, according to UT Judge King, how many of
    those who did experience discrimination were openly gay and what
    proportion of those who had not experienced discrimination were living
    discreetly.  Unfortunately, the Home Office report does not provide any
    further breakdown of the figures and the interaction between them is
    not entirely clear.

53. Mr Reza referred to paragraph 8.1.5, which indicated that in April 2016
    Human Rights Watch reported having interviewed LGBT people in
    Bangladesh "in recent months" and found that they faced threats of
    violence, particularly after homophobic public comments by Islamic
    leaders.  Activists working on gender and sexuality said that, to
    ensure their personal safety, they concealed their identities and
    constrained their work.  Those who were exposed in the media and public
    spaces felt particularly vulnerable.  In recent years, LGBT people in
    Bangladesh had been targeted with extremist rhetoric.  For example, in
    November 2015, when activists began publishing a cartoon series
    featuring a lesbian character, religious groups issued hateful anti-
    LGBT statements, calling on the government to prosecute LGBT people
    under Section 377 and Sharia law.

54. At paragraph 8.1.6 it was noted that a source consulted during the Home
    Office FFM opined that journalists who published information on LGBT or
    secular issues received threats from Islamist groups and added that the
    government did not recognise LGBT issues.

55. At paragraph 8.2.1 it was noted that the Immigration and Refugee Board
    of Canada, in a research response of 2010, referred to the records of
    the Bandhu Social Welfare Society as showing that "physical assault or
    beating was the primary form of violence experienced by MSM [men who
    have sex with men].  The main perpetrators of violence were local thugs
    or 'mastans'."

56. Mr Reza went on to quote from paragraphs 8.2.2 to 8.2.4.  The BSWS, in
    its 2010 annual report, claimed that social attitudes towards feminised
    males left them as prior victims of abuse and harassment leading to
    physical, psychological, social, economical and emotional problems
    which further increased vulnerability and social exclusion.  Their 2013
    report observed that the:

"... non-recognition of full civil and political rights of LGBT in
Bangladesh is worsened by this homophobia, stigma and social
discrimination.  These things, together with illegality (Section 377)
further result in social exclusion and create psychical, social,
psychological, legal harassment and mental disorders".

57. In July 2016 Australia's Department for Foreign Affairs and Trade
    stated that LGBTI individuals, particularly gay men, faced a high risk
    of societal discrimination in Bangladesh because widespread traditional
    views about sexuality and gender continued to restrict their
    participation in the community and workforce.  Visible gay men faced a
    high risk of violence, including being killed.

58. Reference was made again to the murder of Avijit Roy in February 2015
    and the two gay rights activists Xulhaz Mannan and Mahbub Tonoy on 25
    April 2016, as well as the consequences thereof.

59. Mr Reza submitted that the respondent's guidance supported the
    appellant's case that as a practising homosexual he was likely to face
    treatment amounting to persecution and harassment.

60. The report of the FFM refers to Section 377 of the Penal Code.  It also
    refers to the recent arrest of 27 or 28 men after a raid on a private
    gathering of gay men in Dhaka.  The men were charged with narcotics
    offences.  The Boys of Bangladesh referred to the arrests of four
    people prior to a Gay Pride rally but they were later released.  Two
    sources noted that men who had sex with men were tolerated if they
    married and bore children.  They were seen as more acceptable than men
    and women who committed adultery.  Sources noted that the LGBT
    community was closed and private.  There was no Gay Pride but there was
    online activism, particularly in the last five to six years, and there
    were LGBT groups, mostly based in Dhaka, such as Bandhu.  Several
    sources agreed that gay rights activists and bloggers were "more at
    risk" than "ordinary" LGBT people.  Members of the press judged that
    Sylhet was riskier than Dhaka.  BLAST noted that there were instances
    of known LGBT activists being murdered in their own homes by
    extremists, such as Xulhaz Mannan.  His murder was thought to be
    atypical because he was a prominent activist.  However, Boys of
    Bangladesh claimed that within the last year more LGBT people had left
    Bangladesh because of the attack against gay activists in 2016.  It was
    difficult to know if LGBT people were being treated worse than anyone
    else because everyone has a rough time with the police.  The rise in
    social media and an unfriendly media had led to an increase in hatred
    against LGBT people, according to the Boys of Bangladesh.  There was
    also discrimination against LGBT people, such as in healthcare, which
    was worse in urban areas.  It was claimed that it was a common
    experience for families to suggest psychiatric treatment to those who
    came out.  Several sources suggested that LGBT people would not feel
    they could approach the police for protection.  There might be some
    exceptions to this according to BOB such as someone from an influential
    family.

61. Mr Reza referred to a recent report from the Australian Department of
    Foreign Affairs and Trade, dated 2 February 2018.  Paragraphs 3.92 to
    3.99 are in the following terms:

"3.92    Sexual Orientation and Gender Identity Article 377 of the Penal
Code ('Of Unnatural Offences') criminalises homosexual acts, defined as
'carnal intercourse against the order of nature', and provides for a
maximum penalty of life imprisonment.  While actual prosecutions are rare,
human rights groups report that police have used Article 377 to harass
LGBTI individuals, including men considered effeminate regardless of their
sexual orientation.  This harassment includes using the Article as leverage
to extort bribes from individuals under threat of arrest, and as a means to
limit registration of LGBTI organisations.  The level and frequency of
harassment depends largely on an individual's socio-economic status and
geographic location.

3.93 Male homosexuality remains a strong social taboo, while there is a
general lack of societal awareness of lesbians.  The overwhelming majority
of gay and lesbian people in Bangladesh prefer to keep their sexual
orientation a private matter.  There is considerable familial and societal
pressure on both gay men and lesbians to enter into heterosexual marriages.
 DFAT assesses it would be extremely difficult in practice to live in a
publicly acknowledged homosexual relationship.

3.94 Until recently, there had been some evidence to suggest that official
and societal attitudes towards LGBTI rights and issues were improving.
Local NGOS reported they had been able to campaign for LGBTI rights through
cultural activities in an increasingly open manner since 2007.  The
government acknowledged the existence of the LGB population in its April
2013 Universal Periodic Review, having stated in its 2009 review that there
were no LGB individuals in the country.  A  'Rainbow Rally' LGBTI rights
parade held during the Bengali New Year in April 2015 was both high profile
and well attended.

3.95 Events since 2016 have suggested that this trend is reversing.
Organisers planning a follow-up event to the 'Rainbow Rally in April 2016
received a number of death threats, and cancelled the event after police
refused to guarantee protection and instead arrested four of their number.
In the same month, Islamist militants murdered LGBTI activist Xulhaz
Munnan, the founder of Bangladesh's only LGBTI magazine, in his apartment,
along with a friend.  Officials commenting on the murders of the two men
blamed the murders on Munnan's activism: the Minister for Home Affairs
declared that Munnan was 'writing in favour of unnatural sex, which is
tantamount to a criminal offence'.  The murders remain unsolved.  Following
the two murders, several gay men - both activists and non-activists -
reported receiving threats of violence.  LGBTI activists subsequently
cancelled a number of advocacy events and constrained their work, some in
the LGBTI community removed Facebook pictures hinting at same-sex
relationships or deactivated their profiles altogether, and many went into
hiding.  This has resulted in considerably weakened advocacy and support
networks for LGBTI persons.

3.96 While DFAT is unaware of any further murders or violent crimes
committed against LGBTI individuals, rights activists have reported that
the government has generally remained unsympathetic on the issue.  Although
the murders of Munnan and his friend were two of the most high-profile
murder cases in Bangladesh, only two newspapers mentioned the issue on the
first anniversary of their deaths.  One republished an Amnesty
International Report, while the other reported that no government agencies,
law enforcement or investigation officers had contacted Munnan's family in
the year since his murder.  An editor of a leading English language
newspaper reportedly told activists that they had received official
instruction not to publish articles on homosexuality.

3.97 In May 2017, the Rapid Action Battalion arrested 27 LGBTI youths at a
party in Keranganj on the outskirts of Dhaka - Bangladesh's largest
coordinated arrest of LGBTI individuals in recent history.  While a RAB
representative confirmed that those arrested included 'homosexuals from 20
districts' and images of the arrestees appeared on television and in
newspapers identifying them as gay men, those arrested were charged with
narcotics offences rather than under Article 377.  Activists have suggested
that arresting and charging the group on the grounds of drug possession
rather than homosexuality - and using the RAB rather than regular police to
do so - was an attempt by authorities to send a message to the LGBTI
community that their activities were being monitored, while avoiding
international pressure

3.98 DFAT is aware of proposals to establish a position for an LGBTI
representative in the National Human Rights Commission, which may provide
greater opportunities for advocacy of LGBTI rights and provide a clearer
avenue for effective recourse against those responsible for violating them.
 It is unclear how far the proposal has progressed or the timeline for when
such a position might be established.

3.99 DFAT assesses that LGBTI individuals face a moderate risk of official
discrimination in that they are unlikely to be able to access state
protection in the event of threats or attacks against them.  Although
prosecutions or legal prosecutions are rare, the existence of Article 377
can be used as a means of harassment or extortion.  DFAT assesses that
people perceived to be LGBTI individuals face a high risk of physical
violence."

62. Mr Reza submitted that until recently it was thought that the situation
    of the LGBT community was improving but recent incidents showed that
    the trend was reversing.  He referred to a detailed research report on
    the LGBTI community in Bangladesh by Global Human Rights Defence.  It
    was known as The Invisible Minority: The Situation of LGBT Community in
    Bangladesh.  In the executive summary the following was stated:

"The situation of the LGBT community in Bangladesh is of paramount concern.
 Bangladesh still criminalises same-sex relations under Section 377 of the
Penal Code, a particular provision that the government refuses to repeal.
The government's negative stance on LGBT rights, combined with Bangladeshi
society's cultural and religious beliefs contribute to the strictly binary
conceptualisation of sexual orientation and gender identity.  The LGBT
community is currently severely disenfranchised, facing discrimination,
violence, and social exclusion."

63. Reference was made by Mr Reza to concerns expressed by the UK
    government, as reported in the Pink News on 30 May 2017.  This referred
    to the murder of the journalist, to which reference has already been
    made.  The FCO Minister Hugo Swire is reported as having raised
    concerns about human rights and violence against LGBT people with the
    Bangladeshi High Commissioner, adding that it had been raised with the
    Prime Minister of Bangladesh on a previous occasion.

64. Mr Reza referred again to the murder of the two gay activists in Dhaka.
     No prosecution had followed, yet the respondent suggested the
    appellant could relocate to Dhaka.  Most incidents had taken place in
    Dhaka.  Many gay people had fled the country and some had committed
    suicide.  He quoted from an article entitled "Bangladeshi repression
    leaves LGBT community reeling" dated 21 May 2017, which referred to the
    multiple arrests of gay individuals, who were charged with drugs
    offences.  That report in turn quoted a gay rights activist, the
    founder of a small LGBT rights group called Vivid Rainbow.  He said
    that the motivation behind the arrests was that the politicians wanted
    to please the majority Muslim fundamentalists to get more votes.  He
    also went on to say that the government was applying Section 377,
    Section 57 and the blasphemy law of the Bangladesh Penal Code to
    silence free thinkers and LGBT people.  He was also quoted as saying:

"Many LGBT people already fled to abroad as refugees and many of them have
already committed suicide.  But nobody is caring about human rights.  I am
also thinking [about whether to keep living] as nobody is saving us from
this homophobic living hell."

65. He added that the same person had been quoted as saying that in the
    past year at least fourteen LGBT Bangladeshis that he knew had
    committed suicide.  Many others had tried to commit suicide but failed.
     Many others had cut off their genitalia and joined the hijra
    community, a group of "third gender" trans people who were widely
    recognised in Bengali society.

66. On 25 May 2017 the Dhaka Tribune published a report on the arrests.  In
    the course of that report a Bangladeshi LGBT rights organisation was
    quoted as saying in 2015 that "visibility can be life-threatening".  It
    was said that even discreet activism can attract unwanted attention,
    which was made even riskier as the authorities have repeatedly failed
    to stand up for freedom of expression.  The arrests were also
    criticised in the Washington Post.

67. The Bangladesh government's position on homosexuality was clearly
    stated by their Home Minister, Mr Khan Kamal, during a visit by the US
    Assistant Secretary of State on 5 May 2016.  The minister explained
    that homosexuality was a criminal offence and that Bangladeshi society,
    law and religion did not support homosexuality in any way.  The
    government had consistently rejected UNHCR's recommendations to abolish
    Section 377.

68. Such was the hatred of homosexuals among the Bengali community that
    even in London there was an incident of Bengalis attacking a gay
    couple, as reported in the Gay Star News on 24 June 2014.

69. Reference was made to two articles, one entitled "Nowhere to turn for
    Bangladeshi's LGBT" and the other entitled "Raped and abused, this 23
    year old gay refugee from Bangladesh on the run in Nepal shares his
    story".  The first of these contained harrowing details about a 22 year
    old gay activist who had recently fled Bangladesh for Germany after
    repeated attacks.  After his father found out that he was gay he took
    him to a doctor for medicine, which produced severe side effects.  He
    was later taken to India for hormone replacement therapy.  Along with
    some friends he formed a counselling group for homosexuals in 2008 and
    they used to meet once a week in a secret place.  They organised a
    'Rainbow Rally in the city in 2009 (the city being Comilla) but the
    rally was attacked and some of his fellow activists were injured.  He
    was later attacked himself and a group of Islamists tried to cut off
    his fingers.  He was abducted and raped in 2010.  Police officers
    rescued him after a few days but did not file any case.  They suggested
    instead that he leave the country.  His college stripped him of his
    rights to study there, citing his activism.  He said that he had been
    sued 25 times in the past few years for being gay.  Even some parents
    of his close friends went to court saying that he was teaching their
    children homosexuality.  He was attacked in 2014, leaving him with
    severe damage in his right ear.  He had been imprisoned on a couple of
    occasions.

70. The other article related to a 23 year old who came from South-Central
    Bangladesh.  He was rejected by his parents and left home at 18 for
    Dhaka.  He got involved with a local LGBT organisation but fled when he
    began to receive threats from Muslim extremists over social media.  He
    said that he was assaulted by police officers in a park in 2013.  They
    put cigarettes out on him.  This was on the basis that they said he was
    gay or from the transgender community.  They explained that the park at
    night was a cruising site for sex selling.  The police officers raped
    him.

71. Mr Reza referred to a report by Dr Inge Amundsen, who he said was a
    recognised country expert on Bangladesh.  This report is referred to in
    the determination of the FtTJ.  The FtTJ approached the report with
    some caution but accepted that Dr Amundsen was entitled to be regarded
    as an expert on Bangladesh.  Dr Amundsen's credentials are set out at
    paragraph 154 of the appellant's bundle (page 10 of the report).  We
    need not repeat what is said there.  Mr Wilding also challenged his
    expertise, as we shall show in due course, but we are satisfied with
    what appears from his credentials that he is entitled to be regarded as
    an expert on human rights in Bangladesh, albeit with no specific
    expertise or background in LGBT issues.

72. Dr Amundsen pointed out that homosexual activity is illegal.  Social
    stigma, communal rejection, shame and assaults by religious groups made
    it impossible to live as an openly gay person in Bangladesh.  He
    indicated that gay people were harassed and persecuted by law
    enforcement agencies, even when the law was not directly enforced.
    There were only two court convictions for breaking the specific law.
    He referred to the arrests of 27 men, the arrests of four activists
    taking part in a traditional procession to celebrate the Bengali New
    Year, the arrests of three young gay men in Sylhet in August 2012 and
    the arrests of a lesbian couple who were arrested in Dhaka for marrying
    each other and threatened with life imprisonment.  This appears to be
    in 2013.  He referred to a researcher, Kyle Knight, of Human Rights
    Watch LGBT Rights Programme, who said that the police and the Rapid
    Action Battalion had raided meetings, arrested men and paraded them in
    front of the public and media while saying they were gay, thus abusing
    their authority to humiliate gay men.  He indicated that it had been
    argued that state protection for homosexuals who were victims of
    violence or subject to threats was unlikely and that in fact such a
    request could be seen as a confession to a criminal offence.  He
    referred to the murder of Mannan and Tonoy and a claim by their friends
    that they never sought police protection because they feared the
    backlash.  Homosexuals were regularly receiving threats to their life
    by mobile phone and social media.  One source claimed that at least
    fourteen human rights defenders, secular writers and activists were
    murdered in Bangladesh between February 2013 and June 2016.  Local
    media reported at least 34 attacks of this type in 2015 and early 2016
    which took 35 lives and injured 129 people.  It is not clear, though,
    how many of these were "ordinary" gay people.

73. With more particular relevance to the appellant, he said that Sylhet
    was known to be a socially and religiously conservative part of
    Bangladesh, noted for its piety and conservative attitudes towards
    family life.  It was likely that the appellant as an openly gay person
    would not be accepted by his family and it was possible that he would
    be harassed and assaulted if he returned to his family there.  However,
    there were few cases reported in Bangladesh and Sylhet on the murder of
    a returned gay man by family members.  In fact, no directly comparable
    cases were found.  Most murders committed by family members were of
    women, based on the suspicion of adultery and/or indecent behaviour.
    The expert considered that the risk of him being harassed and injured
    by his father and/or other family members if he returned to Sylhet was
    real.  It was also opined that his fear of the public, the police and
    Islamic organisations was well-founded.  Strong social stigma based on
    sexual orientation was common in Bangladesh, where society largely saw
    it as a sin.  The police were harassing and the Islamist organisations
    were harassing and even murdering gay people.  The expert considered
    that the risk of his being harassed and persecuted by the police and
    harassed, persecuted, injured and even killed by Islamist organisations
    or their supporters was real.  This was said to amount to persecution
    within the meaning of the Refugee Convention and to be well above the
    minimum level of severity to engage Article 3 of the ECHR.  These
    conclusions are, of course, a matter for us.

74. As far as relocation was concerned, Dr Amundsen said that it was
    correct that in Dhaka the appellant should not fear his family.  The
    distance from Sylhet to Dhaka was about five and a half hours' drive
    and Dhaka was a chaotic city of almost 9,000,000 people with ample
    opportunity to hide.  However, his fear of persecution by the police
    and Islamist organisations in Dhaka was well-founded.  Most of the
    reported cases of police harassment as well as most of the reported
    cases of murder of gay people by Islamists had taken place in Dhaka.
    He could not live in Dhaka as an openly gay person and he could not
    expect any support from his family or from the gay community in Dhaka.
    It had collapsed.  The situation had turned for the worse over the last
    few months (looked at from the perspective of 20 August 2017).  There
    were no longer a few associations supporting or advocating for LGBT
    persons.  An increased number of gay Bangladeshis had retreated into
    the closet and fled abroad.

75. Dr Amundsen referred to the Country Policy and Information Note of
    December 2016.  He said that the situation on the ground had changed
    noticeably since that was researched and written.  State protection of
    human rights in Bangladesh was faulty.  The authorities continued to
    criminalise the LGBTI community and they did not trust either the
    formal court system or traditional mediation mechanisms.  The 'Rainbow
    Rally which took place in Dhaka in April 2014 and was repeated in April
    2015 could not be held in 2016 or 2017 due to threats and opposition
    from Islamist groups.  It was not correct to say that tolerance of LGBT
    persons was improving.  The Islamist groups had successfully created an
    environment of fear in the country, silencing people and leading to an
    increasing number of gay Bangladeshis to retreat into the closet and
    flee abroad.  It was not correct to say that there were non-
    governmental organisations in Bangladesh who advocated for LGBT rights
    and the LGBT community and which might be able to assist.  The
    LGBTI/gay community in Dhaka had collapsed.

76. The cited two arrests had now increased to at least 30.  Although the
    law which criminalised homosexual relationships was not systematically
    applied it reinforced a general climate of homophobia and impunity for
    those who persecuted LGBT individuals.  Moreover, the law was applied
    in an unofficial manner without recorded prosecutions by State and non-
    State agents.  Reportedly, the level of violence had increased, the
    hacking to death of LGBT activists was "serious harm" and police
    arrests had recently been made.

77. In a recent article (23 March 2018) entitled "The ruins of Bangladesh's
    LGBT community" Dr Amundsen wrote that:

"... what was once a fledgling lesbian, gay, bisexual and transgender
community in the Bangladeshi capital of Dhaka is now destroyed.  In 2014
and 2015 the Bangladeshi gay scene was cautiously becoming more open.
'Rainbow Rally' pride parades were held and a gay magazine called Roopbaan
was in print.  But the LGBT community has since been scared back from the
streets, and to be openly gay in Bangladesh is now life threatening."

78. Reference was also made to an article entitled "Homosexuality in
    Bangladesh" by a human rights and immigration lawyer, Daniel Cohn,
    dated 10 July 2018.  It does not really add anything and, unlike Dr
    Amundsen's report, does not quote any sources.  We do not consider that
    any weight can be attached to it.

79. Mr Reza submitted that despite calls from various international
    agencies Bangladesh did not repeal Section 377 of the Penal Code. It
    created a climate of homophobia and the authorities made use of other
    laws to persecute and harass members of the LGBT community.  The
    prospect of recognition of LGBT rights in Bangladesh was a far cry.
    There had been a significant rise in Islamic militancy in the country.
    Dr Amundsen's article referred to that.  No progress had been made in
    the investigation of the murder of the two gay rights activists.  Many
    frontline LGBT leaders, volunteers or people associated with the gay
    magazine Roopban or the Boys of Bangladesh had been forced to leave the
    country.  In light of the objective evidence and the country situation
    it was submitted that the appellant, as a practising gay person, was
    very likely to face treatment amounting to persecution and ill-
    treatment.  If he had to live discreetly in order to avoid persecution
    his situation would be covered by HJ (Iran) and the case of LC
    (Albania) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 351.

80. In conclusion, it was submitted that the appeal should be allowed both
    under the Refugee Convention and the Human Rights Convention.  The
    respondent's position had changed.  The expert evidence was to the
    effect that he would have a problem in his own area of Sylhet.  He
    would also have a problem in Dhaka.  He came from a very conservative
    and religious part of the country and would not have the support of his
    family.  The background evidence supported his subjective fear of
    persecution.

81. Mr Wilding submitted that the only legal issue was whether the societal
    discrimination went beyond that into persecution.  The test of
    persecution was set out in Article 9 of the Qualification Directive.
    It was in the following terms:

"1.  In order to be regarded as an act of persecution within the meaning of
Article 1(A) of the Geneva Convention, and act must:

(a)  be sufficiently serious by its nature or repetition as to constitute a
severe violation of basic human rights, in particular the rights from which
derogation cannot be made under Article 15(2) of the [ECHR]; or

(b)  be an accumulation of various measures, including violations of human
rights which is sufficiently severe as to affect an individual in a similar
manner as mentioned in (a).

2.   Acts of persecution as qualified in paragraph 1 can, inter alia, take
the form of:

(a)  acts of physical or mental violence, including acts of sexual
violence;

(b)  legal, administrative, police, and/or judicial measures which are in
themselves discriminatory or which are implemented in a discriminatory
manner;

(c)  prosecution or punishment, which is disproportionate or
discriminatory;

(d)  denial of judicial redress resulting in a disproportionate or
discriminatory punishment;

(e)  prosecution or punishment for refusal to perform military service in a
conflict, where performing military service would include crimes or acts
falling under the exclusion clauses as set out in Article 12(2);

(f)  acts of a gender-specific or child-specific nature."

82. Mr Wilding submitted that the respondent's policy position had not
    particularly changed.  Paragraph 3.1.5 of the Country Policy and
    Information Note was clear.  The background material was patchy about
    actual incidents of undoubted persecution.  All of the reports
    discussed the same key events, which were best summarised at page 247
    of the appellant's bundle.  It boiled down to the murders of Avijit
    Roy, Xulhaz Mannan and Mahbub Tonoy in the first place.  In the second
    place, there was the cancellation of the Gay Pride event in April 2016.
     Mr Reza had submitted that it was cancelled because the police said it
    could not protect those who would take part but there was no evidence
    that the cancellation was due to the authorities' intolerance or
    ambivalence.  They did not want a security threat from an Islamist
    group.  See paragraph 8.6.1 of the Country Policy and Information Note.
     Four people were arrested but only because they had attempted to hold
    the rally after permission for it had been denied.  The only other
    specific incident was the arrest in 2016 of 27 or so gay men on drugs
    charges.

83. Applying the test in the Qualification Directive, the societal
    discrimination referred to did not generally amount to persecution.
    Nothing on the facts gave the appellant a particular profile.  He was
    not a gay rights or human rights activist or, for example, a high
    profile gay sportsman.

84. Dr Amundsen's report was particularly unimpressive.  His credentials
    were set out at page 154 but it was not clear why he was an expert in
    this.  He did not add anything to the background material.  Nothing on
    pages 145 to 147 (Dr Amundsen's pages 1 to 3) told us anything we did
    not already know.  There was no argument that the existence of Section
    377 was of itself persecution.  He referred to two matters in 2012 and
    2013.  Three young gay men were arrested in Sylhet in August 2012 but
    we did not know if they were arrested for being gay or if it was for
    something else.  The lesbian couple were said to have been threatened
    with life imprisonment in 2013 but there was no information about what
    actually happened.  The reference on page 5 of the report to the long
    list of secularists, free thinkers and atheists who had been terrorised
    and killed by fundamentalists was irrelevant.  The expert then dealt
    with this particular case and equiparated the appellant to an activist.

85. On page 9 the expert said that there were reasons to doubt the overall
    conclusion in the Country Information and Policy Note that "evidence of
    violence by non-state actors against LGBT people is limited, with
    harassment and discrimination more likely experiences" and that "the
    treatment of LGBT persons in Bangladesh does not amount to serious harm
    or persecution, even when taken cumulatively".  The expert's own
    conclusion was only vaguely justified.  The country information report
    referred to the police arrests and the deaths of activists.  Murder was
    undoubtedly serious harm but it did not mean that there was any
    persecution.  The expert really endorsed the Secretary of State's
    position that violence was limited.  There were sporadic outbursts of
    violence by particular individuals and no more than that.

86. As paragraph 8.7.4 of the Country Policy and Information Note noted,
    several sources consulted during the FFM agreed that gay rights
    activists and bloggers were more at risk than "ordinary" LGBT people.

87. There was nothing in the previous reports in 2016 and 2017 which
    warranted separate consideration.  The September document was almost
    the same as the November one.

88. In reply, Mr Reza submitted that Dr Amundsen was a well-known expert on
    Bangladesh and anyone could check his details.  Although the death
    penalty was not in force in Bangladesh, the government had voted to
    retain it at the UN, in order to help countries like Iran.  The
    government was trying to appease Islamists.  There was a difference
    between the September and November reports in that the conclusions were
    completely different.  The conclusion that the State was able but
    unwilling to help was an important change.  While Section 377 was
    rarely used, the respondent's own guidance was that other laws were
    used.  Paragraph 5.1.2 referred to the USSD 2016 Report to the effect
    that the police used the law as a pretext to bully LGBTI individuals.
    Paragraph 8.7.4 showed that members of the press judged that Sylhet was
    riskier than Dhaka.

89. There was evidence that violence had increased.  Reference was made to
    paragraph 6.5.3, which noted the ILGA report of 2017 as stating the
    following:

"While referencing family values at its second cycle UPR in April 2013, the
Bangladeshi Minister for Foreign Affairs concurred with the newly found
position of the National Human Rights Commission that LGBT people should be
protected from violence and discrimination in law.  However, throughout
2016 the levels of violence and threat from religious radicals that LGBT
people have been exposed to have exponentially risen, and the state has not
offered protection.  As such, many have been forced to leave their homes
and flee the country for fear if their lives."

90. It was clear that members of the LGBT community, whether or not
    activists, faced a risk of conduct which would amount to persecution
    and ill-treatment.

91. Following these submissions, we reserved our decision, which we now
    give.

Findings and Reasons

92. We have taken account of all of the background material, even though it
    is not specifically mentioned in this determination.

93. The appellant is undoubtedly a gay man who comes from Sylhet, a
    conservative part of Bangladesh.  The attitude towards homosexuality in
    Bangladesh has been amply demonstrated.  It deems it a criminal offence
    and the government has shown no willingness to repeal Section 377 of
    the Penal Code.  For many of the Islamic community it is regarded as a
    sin.  It is obvious that homosexuals face discrimination and there is
    no anti-discrimination law covering them.  The murders of three
    prominent activists have been well-documented as is the fact that no
    prosecutions have followed.  It is fair to say that the public
    announcements of government representatives have been ambivalent in
    addressing the murders and the nature of the activities of the victims.

94. We proceed upon the view that homophobic attitudes persist in
    Bangladesh.  As is set out at paragraph 2.3.10 of the November 2017
    report, Bangladesh is a conservative society in which homophobic
    attitudes persist.  LGBT persons face societal discrimination as well
    as family and societal pressure to conform to cultural and religious
    norms, including marriage.  Strong social stigma about sexual
    orientation prevent discussion of LGBT rights.  As is said at paragraph
    2.3.12, there have been some reports of violent behaviour towards LGBT
    persons who are open about their sexual orientation or gender identity
    by non-state actors.  As is said at 2.3.14, there is an indication that
    the rise in social media has led to an increase in hate speech against
    LGBT people.

95. Paragraph 2.3.16 notes that in general, LGBT persons are not open due
    to social stigma, pressures and norms, and to avoid a level of
    discrimination and violence arising from this.  LGBT persons who openly
    express their sexual orientation or gender identity are likely to be
    socially excluded, receive threats of violence and, in some cases
    (particularly gay men), may be attacked by non-State actors.
    Widespread stigma and discrimination is also likely to restrict their
    participation in the community and the workforce and access to
    healthcare.  The nature and degree of treatment may vary according to
    geography and socio-economic status.

96. Paragraph 2.3.17 says the following:

"Therefore, in general, an LGBT person who does not conceal their sexual
orientation or gender identity may be at risk of treatment, which by its
nature and repetition amounts to persecution or serious harm ...  LGBT
rights activists and bloggers may be at greater risk due to their profile
...  However, each case must be considered on its facts with the onus on
the person to demonstrate why their particular circumstances would put them
at real risk from non-state actors."

97. Paragraph 2.4.3 and 2.4.4 are in the following terms:

"2.4.3   Some sources indicate that many LGBT persons who experience
societal ill-treatment do not report the incidents to the police due to a
fear of having to reveal their sexual orientation.  LGBT persons from
influential families may be able to access protection ...

2.4.4    State authorities have been responsible for arbitrary arrests,
detentions, harassment and discrimination towards LGBT persons with reports
of the police physically and sexually assaulting them.  There is some
evidence of the authorities taking appropriate action.  For example, the
police are reported to have investigated the murder of two gay rights
activists in 2016, and one arrest was made."

98. 2.4.5 says the following:

"In general, the state appears able but unwilling to offer effective
protection and the person will not be able to avail themselves of the
protection of the authorities.  However, each will need to be considered on
its facts."

99. In relation to internal relocation, the report at paragraph 2.5.3 says
    the following:

"It would not, in general, be unreasonable for a gay man, who has chosen to
live discreetly due to social or religious pressures, to relocate
internally within Bangladesh.  However, internal relocation will not be an
option if it depends on the person concealing their sexual orientation
and/or gender identity in the proposed new location for fear of
persecution."

100. What is the particular situation of the appellant?  The First-tier
    Tribunal, in an assessment which is not challenged, while not finding
    specifically that the appellant would live openly as a gay man in
    Bangladesh, finds nonetheless that if he did not do so it would be due
    at least partly to a fear of persecution.  He is part of a relevant
    social group which exists in Bangladesh.  He has a subjective fear of
    persecution.  The issue for us is whether that subjective fear is
    objectively well-founded, in other words, has he shown that there is a
    risk of persecution.

101. He comes from Sylhet.  A number of references in the background
    reports are to the effect that Sylhet is riskier than Dhaka.  The
    extent to which the appellant is afraid of his family is not clear.  Dr
    Amundsen opines that the risk of the appellant being harassed and
    injured by his father and/or other family members if he returns to
    Sylhet is real.  This conclusion does not seem to us to be fully
    justified by the material which preceded it.  That was to the effect
    that Sylhet was known to be a socially and religiously conservative
    part of Bangladesh, noted for its piety and conservative attitudes
    towards family life.  It has many madrasas (Qur'anic schools) and a
    custom for arranged and sometimes forced marriages.  The report goes
    on: "Thus, it is very likely that Mr A, as an openly gay person, will
    not be accepted by his family.  It is also possible that he will be
    harassed and assaulted if he returns to his family in Sylhet."

102. Given the nature of Sylhet, we consider however that there is force in
    the reference to its being possible that he will be harassed and
    assaulted if he returns to his family in Sylhet but it is not clear to
    us why his family should be involved in this.  Nonetheless, given the
    preponderance of the information with which we are provided, it does
    seem to us that there is a risk of the appellant being subjected to
    violence in Sylhet, whether or not by his family, and whether or not he
    is an activist.  We consider Article 9 of the Qualification Directive.
    We consider that there is a real risk of repeated physical violence
    which would amount to persecution.  It can never be guaranteed that
    such violence will occur but in our judgment, there is a real risk of
    it in his home territory, such that his subjective fear of persecution
    is, we determine, well-founded.

103. We find that that risk of persecution would be from non-State actors,
    rather than from the State itself, primarily because of the lack of
    direct evidence before us of the actions of the State in Syhlet and
    only general evidence before us from the latest Country Policy and
    Information Note that there is no evidence of LGBT persons being
    systematically targeted and subject to treatment amounting to
    persecution or serious harm by the State itself.  The appellant has
    made no specific case before us on the evidence of being specifically
    at risk from the State in his home area.

104. Having concluded that the appellant would be at risk in his home area
    from non-State actors, the next questions are whether there would be a
    sufficiency of protection for him and/or an option of internal
    relocation.  The latest Country Policy and Information Note concludes
    that the State appears able but unwilling to offer effective protection
    to a person at risk from non-State actors on the basis of their
    sexuality and Mr Wilding did not seek to persuade us that there would
    be any effective State protection for the appellant, or anyone else in
    his position.

105. As to internal relocation, we reach the same conclusion that there is
    a real risk of persecution in relation to Dhaka (no other possible
    locations for internal relocation have been proposed by the respondent
    and we have not therefore considered any other locations).  We agree
    with Mr Wilding that certain specific acts of violence have been
    repeatedly referred to in the background material and we are conscious
    of the danger of placing too much emphasis on them because they appear
    time and again and because most of those instances relate to high
    profile victims who were bloggers and/or activists, which this
    appellant is not.

106. We agree with Mr Wilding that the references in Dr Amundsen's report
    to incidents in 2012 and 2013 are of no assistance. There was some
    further information about the 2013 matter in the appellant's bundle but
    it was inspecific. We also agree that the murders of the three
    activists cannot be regarded as typical.  We bear in mind that there is
    no suggestion that the appellant will be an activist.  Nonetheless,
    there is no suggestion that he is from an influential family.  We find
    the recent article by Dr Amundsen to be persuasive in relation to the
    current situation in Dhaka.  The preponderance of evidence is that LGBT
    activists have been dissuaded from advocacy and indeed from using
    social media.  This is indicative of the relevant circumstances in
    Dhaka.  The information suggests that although Section 377 is not used,
    other laws have been employed to arrest members of the LGBT community
    and, on occasions, violence, including sexual violence, has been used
    against them.

107. We note that paragraph 399 of the Australian DFAT Report of 2 February
    2018 assesses that people perceived to be LGBTI individuals face a high
    risk of physical violence.  That report indicated that the trend of
    improving societal attitudes towards LGBTI ways and issues, which had
    been improving, was reversing.

108. We note the article by Colin Stewart on page 157 of the bundle.  We
    have already referred to the quotations of the LGBT activist about
    people he knew committing suicide.  We cannot place a great deal of
    weight on this document but it is at least consistent with the general
    tenor of the other background information.

109. Our impression from the background material is that not only is there
    significant and widespread societal discrimination, but that the level
    of violence towards homosexual men, even known activists, has increased
    and that the risk of persecution and serious harm is made out.

110. In addition to the above, we find the greatest support for our
    conclusions from the evidence submitted by the respondent himself
    contained in the latest Country Policy Information Note, which on a
    plain reading, concludes to the lower standard applicable in asylum
    claims, that there is a real risk of persecution.  In paragraph 3.1.5,
    as already quoted above, it states "In general, an LGBT person who does
    not conceal their sexual orientation or gender identity may be at risk
    of treatment, which by its nature and repetition amounts to persecution
    or serious harm."  Although it goes on to say that the nature and
    degree of treatment may vary according to geography and socio-economic
    status, with gay-rights activists and bloggers potentially at greater
    risk due to their profile and that each case must be considered on the
    facts and merits, there is nothing in the evidence before us to detract
    from the general position of risk.  There is for example no indication,
    save as recorded above the limited evidence that the position in Syhlet
    is worse than in Dhaka, of any particular difference based on
    geography, nor that there would not for example be any real risk in
    Dhaka.  There was limited evidence before us that the position may be
    better for those who come from a wealthy and/or into influential
    family, but otherwise nothing to detract from the general position.

111. Although the Appellant is not an activist and blogger, nor is there
    any indication that he would commence such activities on return to
    Bangladesh, he also does not have a high socio/economic status nor does
    he come from a wealthy or influential family such that may assist him
    or reduce the risk of persecution or serious harm.  We find nothing
    about his circumstances that would place him in anything other than the
    general category of the person who does not conceal his sexual
    orientation and may be at risk of treatment, which by its nature and
    repetition amounts to persecution or serious harm, both in his home
    area and in Dhaka.

112. Even if we are wrong that it would not be safe for the appellant to
    internally relocate to Dhaka, we are quite satisfied that it would be
    unreasonable to require that the appellant relocate to Dhaka.  This is
    for the reasons already set out above and because if he moves to Dhaka
    he will not have any family at all.  He will be a lone individual with
    no support network.  As a single gay man with no family and no support
    network it seems to us that there is a risk that the appellant would be
    vulnerable and face very significant difficulties in being able to
    integrate and sustain himself given the high levels of societal
    discrimination against LGBT persons and the general position in Dhaka.

113. In conclusion and for the reasons set out above, the appellant's
    appeal is allowed on asylum grounds as he has established to the lower
    standard that he is at real risk of persecution on return to Bangladesh
    because of his sexual orientation, that there is no sufficiency of
    protection from the authorities for him and it would be unsafe and/or
    unreasonable for him to internally relocate to Dhaka.  For the same
    reasons we would also allow the appeal on humanitarian protection
    grounds and on human rights grounds.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

The appeal is allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the appellant is
granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
indirectly identify him or any member of his family.  This direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   [pic]    Date 4th January 2019

On behalf of:
LORD MATTHEWS
Sitting as an Upper Tribunal Judge
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)

