
                                    [pic]

|Upper Tribunal                       |Appeal Numbers: PA/07050/2019        |
|(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)     |PA/07428/2019                        |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House (via Skype)     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22 March 2021                     |                 On 13 April 2021    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BLUNDELL


                                   Between

                                ER (ZIMBABWE)
                               EIR (ZIMBABWE)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the First Appellant:        In person
For the Second Appellant:  Mr S Winter, instructed by Katani & Co
For the Respondent:        Ms S Cunha, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellants are Zimbabwean nationals who were born on 17 August 1973
    and 16 October 1999.  The first appellant is the father of  the  second
    appellant.  They appeal against a decision which was issued  by  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Farrelly  on  9  December  2019,  dismissing  their
    appeals  against  the  respondent's  refusal  of   their   claims   for
    international protection.



Background

 2. There is a full account of both appellants' claims at [9]-[15] and [21]-
    [23] of the decision under appeal.  It suffices for present purposes to
    give a rather shorter precis.


 3. The appellants are from Harare.  The first appellant states that he has
    been fairly prominent in the Movement  for  Democratic  Change  ("MDC")
    since its formation in 1999.  He claims to have suffered  violence  and
    harassment at the hands of the ruling Zanu PF Party  for  more  than  a
    decade.  Two incidents in 2012  finally  persuaded  him  to  leave  the
    country.  The first, in June 2012, involved a burglary  at  the  family
    home during which the family dog was killed and blood  smeared  on  his
    son's pillow.  In the second, in October 2012, the home was entered  by
    armed men who beat and humiliated the whole family but particularly the
    first appellant.

 4. These incidents caused the first appellant to arrange a placement at  a
    university in South Africa and the whole family left for  that  country
    in 2012.  In January 2014, the first appellant was  able  to  secure  a
    post-graduate placement in the UK and he and his wife  came  here  with
    their two younger children.  The second  appellant  remained  in  South
    Africa to complete the school year but he joined the remainder  of  the
    family in July 2014.  The first appellant held  entry  clearance  as  a
    Tier 4 student.  The remainder of  the  family,  including  the  second
    appellant, held entry clearance as his dependents.  The entry clearance
    conferred leave to enter until 30 April 2018.

 5. The first appellant was refused further  leave  to  remain  in  January
    2019.  It appears that the second appellant was named  as  a  dependent
    upon that claim.  On 6 March 2019,  they  both  claimed  asylum.   They
    underwent screening interviews and submitted outlines of  their  asylum
    claims and then, on 3 June 2019, each appellant underwent a substantive
    asylum interview.  Each gave  a  detailed  account  of  the  events  in
    Zimbabwe.  Each appellant also detailed the sur place activities  which
    they had undertaken in the UK.

 6. The respondent did not accept that the appellants would be at  risk  on
    return to Zimbabwe and refused their applications.  I need not set  out
    the basis upon which she reached  those  conclusions.   The  appellants
    appealed against her decisions to the First-tier Tribunal.

The Appeals to the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellants were both  initially  represented  by  Katani  &  Co  of
    Glasgow.   As  the  judge  noted,  that  firm  completed  most  of  the
    preparation for  the  hearing  for  both  appellants.   A  conflict  of
    interest arose in the first appellant's case, however, and Katani &  Co
    ceased to act for him.  At the hearing before the judge, he was content
    to proceed as a self-representing litigant and the judge was  satisfied
    that it was appropriate to proceed in that way.  The judge  heard  oral
    evidence from the two appellants and  submissions  from  the  advocates
    before reserving his decision.

 8. The judge set out the history of the claims and the evidence before him
    in admirable detail.  Having done so, he turned to  his  assessment  of
    the claims at [34].  At [39]-[42], the judge noted that there were  two
    possible reasons for the timing of  the  first  appellant's  protection
    claim: either it was a fabrication  designed  to  secure  the  family's
    continuing stay in the UK or it was a claim brought by a  man  who  had
    previously been in receipt of leave as a student and had been  studying
    the situation in Zimbabwe, assessing  whether  to  claim  international
    protection.

 9.  At  [43],  the  judge  turned  to  consider  the   point   which   had
    understandably been  at  the  forefront  of  the  Presenting  Officer's
    submissions, which was that  the  first  appellant's  passport  bore  a
    number of stamps to show that he had returned to Zimbabwe  after  2012.
    The first appellant had denied that but the judge did  not  accept  his
    explanation for the stamps, which he considered  to  be  'rambling  and
    evasive': [46].  There were some documents adduced in  support  of  the
    claim, including a letter from the MDC, which the judge accepted to  be
    genuine, but he concluded that they did not 'significantly enhance  the
    first appellant's appeal because of the lack of detail  about  what  he
    did.': [49].

10. At [52]-[54], the judge expressed various concerns about the sur  place
    activity.  There was little evidence of  the  first  appellant's  early
    involvement; the second appellant's  photographs  outside  the  Embassy
    appeared to be staged; the second appellant was unable to  be  specific
    about the influence of his website.

11. The judge noted that there was an expert report from a Dr Cameron,  who
    the judge considered to be  an  expert  on  Zimbabwe:  [55].   She  was
    unaware of the stamps in the first  appellant's  passport:  [56].   The
    judge accepted her opinion that the supporting evidence  from  the  MDC
    was genuine.  The judge set out other conclusions reached by the expert
    at [59]-[62], at the end of which he accepted her view that  the  claim
    was 'plausible and consistent with country conditions': [62].  At [63],
    he noted that a claim which was plausible was not necessarily true.  At
    [64], the judge considered what the expert said  about  the  sur  place
    claim but he considered it likely that the intelligence services  would
    be 'seeking out the most prominent activists  and  not  the  occasional
    attender at routine events.'  At [66], however, he noted  the  expert's
    view that  'someone  with  a  low  political  profile  is  at  risk  of
    persecution'.

12. From [68] of his decision, the judge expressed the conclusions  he  had
    reached on the evidence as a whole.  He considered  that  there  was  a
    possibility that the first appellant was a member of the MDC but it was
    not established that he was 'active in any way' because his  focus  was
    upon his 'education, career and his family':  [69].   His  account  was
    inconsistent with the absence of difficulties  'save  for  two  claimed
    occasions highlighted', as Harare is a Zanu PF  stronghold:  [70].   In
    reaching that conclusion, the judge was 'influenced'  by  his  concerns
    over the appellant returning to Zimbabwe, as evidenced by the stamps in
    his passport.  He did not accept his account of the  two  incidents  in
    2012: [71].

13. The judge did not accept that  the  first  appellant  was  in  any  way
    prominent in the  MDC,  noting  that  there  was  no  evidence  of  his
    involvement in the movement in South Africa or in the early part of his
    stay in the UK: [72].  His involvement in the UK  was  more  consistent
    with an attempt to create a claim: [73].   The  authorities  would  not
    consider the first appellant to be of interest and  the  family   could
    relocate to Bulawayo: [73] and [75].  The appellants did not have 'such
    strong views that they would require concealment': [74].    In  respect
    of the second appellant, the judge concluded as follows:

    [76] Regarding the second appellant, in line with my  views  about  his
    father's claim I reject his suggestion he encountered  difficulties  in
    2012.  I am of the view that he sought to create a profile for  himself
    by occasionally attending demonstrations and by establishing a  website
    in support of the MDC aims.  If  this  is  opportunistic,  I  am  still
    required to consider whether this will nevertheless place him at  risk.
    It is my conclusion that it would not.  This is because there has  been
    an absence of evidence that his website has such a  following  that  he
    would be seen by the authorities as a source of threat.

14. The remainder of the judge's decision concerns the non-protection limbs
    of the appeal and need not be further described.

The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

15. Permission to appeal was initially refused by Judge Loke.  The  renewed
    grounds presented by the first appellant are lengthy  and  well-written
    but, as might be expected of a non-lawyer,  do  not  seek  to  identify
    legal errors in the judge's decision.  For  the  second  appellant,  Ms
    Winter advances four grounds which might be summarised in the following
    way:

      i) In rejecting the events in 2012, the judge had reached inconsistent
         and inadequately reasoned findings;


     ii) In concluding that the second appellant's sur place activity  would
         not give rise to risk, the  judge  had  reached  unclear  findings,
         particularly  as  regards  whether  the  appellants'  activity  was
         opportunistic or not;


    iii) In concluding that the appellants did not have  such  strong  views
         that they would require concealment, the judge misdirected  himself
         in law and overlooked material evidence; and


     iv) The judge had given insufficient reasons for finding that he should
         not depart from the country guidance as regards the ability of  the
         appellants to relocate to Bulawayo.

16. Judge Rintoul granted permission as he  considered  the  second  ground
    arguable, although he  did  not  refuse  permission  on  the  remaining
    grounds.  On 17 November 2021, Judge Rintoul clarified that  his  grant
    of permission referred to both appellants, and that  he  considered  it
    just about arguable that the judge had erred in  his  consideration  of
    the expert report.


17. The respondent responded to the notice of appeal, opposing  the  appeal
    and submitting that the judge had given a comprehensive and sustainable
    decision.

Submissions

18. Mr Winter adopted the grounds of appeal and  submitted  that  [74]  and
    [76] were the key paragraphs in  the  judge's  decision.   The  judge's
    reasoning at [76] contradicted his findings earlier in the decision  as
    regards the plausibility of the appellants'  account.   The  judge  had
    given inadequate reasons for rejecting the credibility of  the  account
    when it was recalled that  he  had  previously  accepted  that  it  was
    plausible when set against the background material.


19. By his second ground, Mr Winter submitted that no real reasons had been
    given for finding that the appellants' attendance at anti-regime events
    in the UK was opportunistic.  It was not even clear whether  the  judge
    had decided that they had acted opportunistically.  Nor were there  any
    reasons given for  the  apparent  finding  that  the  photographs  were
    staged.  If that observation had been properly made, the photographs to
    which it applied had not been properly identified.  In any event, there
    was a paucity  of  reasons  for  rejecting  this  limb  of  the  second
    appellant's claim.

20. As regards the judge's evaluation of risk  to  the  appellant,  he  had
    failed to consider the expert evidence properly or at  all.   The  real
    question in relation to  the  sur  place  activities  was  whether  the
    authorities in Zimbabwe would draw any distinction between those  whose
    activities were opportunistic and  those  who  were  committed  to  the
    cause.  The judge had failed to consider that point, and had failed  to
    consider it in light of the expert report.  Equally, in relation to the
    fourth ground and internal relocation, the judge had given insufficient
    reasons for concluding that the appellants could relocate to  Bulawayo.



21. The first appellant did not wish to add much to what had been  said  by
    Mr Winter on his son's behalf.  They had left the country due to  their
    opposition activity but their sur place activity stood alone.  They had
    been involved with the groups known as Zimbos Arise and Zimvigil, which
    would add to their risk profile on return.

22. Ms Cunha relied on the response to the grounds of appeal drafted by her
    colleague, Mr  Melvin.   In  her  submission,  the  judge  had  reached
    sustainable conclusions in relation to the appellants' credibility  and
    the risk to them on return.  It had been open to the judge to  conclude
    that the photos of the second appellant were staged.  The  findings  in
    relation to the sur place activity as a whole were staged and could not
    properly be said to be contradictory.  The  judge  had  considered  the
    expert report at [33]-[35] and had clearly borne it in  mind.   It  was
    open to the judge to conclude that he should  continue  to  follow  the
    country guidance notwithstanding that expert evidence, however.

23. Ms Cunha accepted that there was no express finding as to  whether  the
    first appellant's brother had been  killed.   The  respondent  did  not
    accept that there  was  any  contradiction  in  the  judge's  findings,
    however.  The fact that the appellants account was  plausible  did  not
    mean that it was true, or any more likely to  be  so.   The  judge  had
    scrutinised the sur place activity  with  some  care  and  had  reached
    findings which were open to him on the evidence.  The  judge  had  been
    entitled to attach significance to the fact that the evidence from  the
    MDC (etc) was silent on the actual activities of the first appellant in
    the UK.  The expert had  based  her  assessment  of  the  risk  to  the
    appellants on a wholesale acceptance of their accounts but that was not
    the judge's conclusion.

24. Mr Winter responded, submitting that the absence of a finding about the
    first appellant's brother's death was important.  The  significance  of
    the expert report was that the expert had assessed the plausibility  of
    the appellants' claim, which  should  be  borne  in  mind  in  deciding
    whether the claim was credible.  The judge had failed entirely to weigh
    the expert evidence in assessing the truthfulness  of  the  claim.   Ms
    Cunha had concentrated her submissions on the first appellant but there
    were major difficulties with the judge's assessment in relation to  the
    second.

25. The first appellant also responded,  noting  that  he  would  not  have
    manufactured the death of his  brother.   He  did  not  presently  have
    access to the death certificate. The stamps in  his  passport  did  not
    involve any physical movement across  the  border  and  had  just  been
    placed there to confuse the authorities.  He had not  visited  Zimbabwe
    since 2012.  Zanu PF was in the middle of an extermination campaign.

26. I reserved my decision at the end of the submissions.

Analysis

27. CM (Zimbabwe) (EM country guidance; disclosure) Zimbabwe CG [2013] UKUT
    59 (IAC) is the extant country guidance decision on  Zimbabwe.   Whilst
    the decision was issued on 1 February 2013, it was heard at  the  start
    of October 2012 and was necessarily based on evidence which focused  on
    the position at that time.  Given that the appellant is not  a  teacher
    and that he originates from Harare,  the  relevant  paragraphs  in  the
    headnote to CM (Zimbabwe) were the following:


         (1)  As a general matter, there is significantly  less  politically
         motivated  violence  in  Zimbabwe,  compared  with  the   situation
         considered by the AIT in RN.  In particular, the evidence does  not
         show that, as a general matter,  the  return  of  a  failed  asylum
         seeker from the United Kingdom, having no significant MDC  profile,
         would result in that  person  facing  a  real  risk  of  having  to
         demonstrate loyalty to the ZANU-PF.


         (...)


         (5) A returnee to  Harare  will  in  general  face  no  significant
         difficulties, if going to a  low-density  or  medium-density  area.
         Whilst the socio-economic situation in high-density areas  is  more
         challenging, in general a person without ZANU-PF  connections  will
         not face significant problems there (including a  "loyalty  test"),
         unless he or she has a significant MDC profile, which  might  cause
         him or her to feature on a list of those targeted  for  harassment,
         or would otherwise engage in political activities likely to attract
         the adverse attention of ZANU-PF, or would be reasonably likely  to
         engage in such activities, but for a fear of thereby coming to  the
         adverse attention of ZANU-PF.

         (6)  A returnee to Bulawayo will in general not suffer the  adverse
         attention of ZANU-PF, including the security forces, even if he  or
         she has a significant MDC profile.


28. The judge did not cite these paragraphs in his decision.   He  was  not
    required to do so.  It is clear from  [66]  of  his  decision  and  his
    subsequent focus on the level of the first appellant's profile that  he
    was aware of the country guidance and that he sought to apply it.


29. The first obvious difficulty with the judge's decision is his treatment
    of the suggestion in the expert report that he should depart  from  the
    country guidance and should hold, in the  words  of  the  expert,  that
    'paragraph 3(1) of the country guidance case law of  CM  is  no  longer
    reflective  of  the  current  political  and  social  situation  within
    Zimbabwe': [123] of Dr Cameron's report refers.  She expressed the same
    opinion in respect of paragraphs 3(5) and 3(6) of the country  guidance
    at [124] and [125] of her report.

30. The judge was provided with a copy of the Court of Appeal's decision in
    SG (Iraq) [2012] EWCA Civ 940; [2013] 1 WLR 41.   It  was  plainly  the
    appellants' submission, based upon Dr Cameron's report, that there were
    what Stanley Burnton LJ described at [47] of  that  decision  as  "very
    strong grounds supported by cogent evidence"  for  departing  from  the
    country guidance which had been issued some six and a half years before
    the judge came to consider these appeals.

31. The appellants' expert is Dr Hazel Cameron, who has since 2011  been  a
    full time lecturer in International Relations at the University  of  St
    Andrews.  She was formerly a  director  of  the  Centre  of  Peace  and
    Conflict Studies.  She has worked in  Africa  in  the  past.   She  has
    regularly been instructed to provide expert  evidence  in  Rwandan  and
    Zimbabwean cases.  She was previously instructed by the Home Office  in
    a Rwandan extradition case.  Her work on Zimbabwe has been published in
    journals including Genocide Studies International.   She  is  eminently
    well qualified to provide expert evidence on Zimbabwe.  In fairness  to
    the judge, he did not suggest otherwise and concluded,  at  [55],  that
    she 'can be considered as an expert on Zimbabwe'.

32. Dr Cameron's report is lengthy and carefully  reasoned,  running  to  a
    total of 39 pages, excluding her CV.   The  length  of  the  report  is
    reflected in the judge's consideration of it, which covers [55]-[67] of
    his decision.  Oddly, despite the  detailed  summary  of  Dr  Cameron's
    report, the judge made no reference to her opinion that paragraphs 3(1)
    and 3(5) of EM (Zimbabwe) should no longer be followed because they are
    no longer reflective of the situation on the ground  in  Zimbabwe.   At
    [66] of his  decision,  the  judge  noted  Dr  Cameron's  opinion  that
    'someone with a low political profile is at risk of persecution' but he
    did not register the invitation to depart from the country guidance  in
    that respect.

33. At [75], there is a reference  to  the  expert's  suggestion  that  the
    country guidance should not be followed.  The terms of  that  paragraph
    show that the judge was confining his analysis to paragraph 3(6) of the
    guidance, which relates to the possibility of return to Bulawayo:

         Whilst country conditions have changed following the  emergence  of
         the army as a political force and the death of President  Mugabe  I
         am not prepared to hold  that  the  country  guidance  decision  no
         longer applies in his situation.  Consequently, there continues the
         option of relocation to Bulawayo.

34. I accept the submission that this conclusion was inadequately  reasoned
    when set against the expert evidence produced by the appellants,  which
    provided detailed reasons for concluding that EM (Zimbabwe)  should  no
    longer be followed insofar as it concluded that Bulawayo was likely  to
    be a safe haven, even for those with a significant MDC profile.


35. More fundamentally, however, the judge also erred in failing to  engage
    with the expert's opinion that he should depart from EM  (Zimbabwe)  as
    regards the level of opposition activity (or the absence of loyalty  to
    Zanu PF) which was necessary to expose  an  individual  to  a  risk  of
    persecution on return to Zimbabwe.  That was  a  submission  which  was
    supported by relevant authority and by a detailed expert  report.   The
    judge erred in failing to come  to  grips  with  that  submission.   As
    contended in grounds three and four, therefore, I find that  the  judge
    erred in his assessment of the risk to the appellants  upon  return  to
    Zimbabwe. That assessment was inadequate as a matter of law because the
    judge failed to consider whether Dr  Cameron's  report  and  the  other
    material before him  justified  departure  from  the  country  guidance
    decision.

36. My analysis of the grounds began with the third and  fourth  because  I
    consider many of the points  made  in  the  first  two  grounds  to  be
    misconceived.  On any proper analysis of the judge's decision, there is
    no inconsistency in his findings, nor  is  there  any  opacity  in  his
    rejection of the events which are said to have taken place in  Zimbabwe
    in 2012.

37. The judge was plainly aware of Dr Cameron's  opinion  that  the  events
    were plausible but he felt able, on the lower standard, to  reject  the
    appellants' account of those events for a host of reasons, uppermost of
    which was the first appellant's ability to return to Zimbabwe after the
    events of  2012.   Nothing  more  was  required  of  the  judge  and  I
    specifically reject Mr Winter's submission that the judge was  required
    to weigh the expert's opinion on the plausibility  of  the  appellants'
    account as a factor which militated positively in favour  of  accepting
    the account.  To borrow from what was said by Underhill LJ at [103]  of
    MN [2020] EWCA Civ  1746,  the  expert's  opinion  did  not  positively
    support the appellant's  claim  in  this  regard;  it  was  essentially
    neutral in the analysis required of the appellants'  credibility.   Nor
    is there any lack of clarity in the judge's findings about  the  events
    in 2012; that he was unable to accept that those events took  place  is
    clear from [71] of his decision and the reasoning  which  precedes  the
    conclusion expressed at the end of that paragraph.

38. Were it just for those criticisms of the judge's decision, therefore, I
    would have found that he erred in law in failing  to  consider  the  SG
    (Iraq) submission properly  or  at  all,  and  would  have  remade  the
    decision, without a further hearing and  on  the  basis  of  the  FtT's
    findings of fact.

39. I am not able to proceed in that way because of one of the other points
    made in ground two.  It is  said  in  that  paragraph  that  the  judge
    reached unclear findings  in  relation  to  the  appellants'  political
    activity.  The particular target of the ground is the judge's [76],  in
    which he evaluated the risk to the second appellant 'if' his activities
    in the UK were opportunistic.

40. On analysis, however,  there  is  an  overall  absence  of  clarity  or
    particularity  in  the  judge's  findings  in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant's political activity in  Zimbabwe  and  the  UK.   The  first
    appellant had given a detailed account of his involvement with the  MDC
    over the years.  He  stated  in  his  witness  statement  that  he  had
    supported the party financially; that  he  had  attended  meetings  and
    rallies; and that he had also taken others  to  rallies  in  his  large
    vehicle.   The judge described these aspects of his claim at  [11]-[13]
    of his decision.

41. In his findings, at [68] et seq, the judge clearly  accepted  that  the
    first appellant had some role in the MDC.  Although the finding at [69]
    ('There is the possibility he was a member of the MDC")  is  opaque  at
    best, it seems that the judge accepted that the appellant  obtained  an
    MDC card in Zimbabwe - [47]-[50] - and that he  was  a  member  of  the
    party.  (I interpose that it  is  not  particularly  easy  to  see  why
    someone would obtain an MDC membership card in Zimbabwe,  years  before
    claiming asylum in the UK, unless it was out of loyalty to the  party.)
    The judge dismissed the appeal not because he rejected  everything  the
    first appellant had  said  about  his  relationship  with  the  MDC  in
    Zimbabwe, therefore, but because he considered the first appellant  not
    to have been 'active' or 'very active' and that there was  an  'absence
    of a profile'.

42. By making these findings, the judge was of course evaluating  the  risk
    to the first appellant in light of the country  guidance,  which  shows
    that only those of greater prominence would be at risk on return.  What
    the judge failed to do, however, was to set  out  with  any  degree  of
    clarity or particularity  what  it  was  he  accepted  that  the  first
    appellant had done for the MDC in Zimbabwe.  If he was  merely  someone
    who, for whatever reason, decided to obtain an MDC card whilst  he  was
    living in Harare, and all else he said was a falsehood, the  conclusion
    that he would not be at risk on return is readily comprehensible.   If,
    on the other hand, he obtained  that  card  and  participated  in  some
    activity for the MDC in the past, it would have required an analysis of
    that activity in order to decide that the appellants would  not  be  at
    risk on return as a result of the first  appellant's  activity.   Other
    than the labels that the appellant was not 'active' or  'very  active',
    however, the judge gave no clear indication of what it was he  accepted
    about the first appellant's MDC activity  in  Zimbabwe.   It  would  be
    wrong to assume - given that lack of clarity - that  the  judge  simply
    rejected all of the first appellant's account with the exception of his
    MDC membership, since it was for the judge to state with  particularity
    what evidence he accepted and  what  he  rejected.   Even  reading  the
    judge's decision as a whole I am unable to discern any such finding.

43. I do not consider the judge's decision  to  be  sustainable  for  these
    reasons.  He failed to engage with the submission that he should depart
    substantially from the country guidance and he failed to set  out  with
    clarity what  he  accepted  and  rejected  in  relation  to  the  first
    appellant's activity in Zimbabwe.  These errors infect the entirety  of
    the judge's analysis of both appeals and it would  not  be  appropriate
    (in light of AB (Iraq) [2020] UKUT 268 (IAC)) to  attempt  to  preserve
    only certain aspects of the judge's analysis.   There must be  a  fresh
    analysis of the claims made by both appellants, with fresh findings  of
    fact and a proper consideration of whether there is a proper basis  for
    departing from the extant country guidance.  Given the  scope  of  that
    enquiry, it should take place in the FtT.

44. At the remitted hearing,  the  first  appellant  will  have  a  further
    opportunity to address what is, on any view, a pressing difficulty with
    his credibility.  The presence of stamps in his passport which seem  to
    show that he returned to Zimbabwe after 2012 does tend to suggest  that
    he was not in fear  of  return  to  that  country.   Since  the  second
    appellant's claim rests on his father's profile as well as his own  sur
    place activities, this is a point which potentially has a clear  impact
    in both appeals.  The second appellant's representatives may  therefore
    consider it appropriate to have Dr Cameron express an  opinion  on  the
    first appellant's explanation for those stamps or, at the  very  least,
    to produce some background material about it.  The absence of any  such
    material might legitimately lead the next  judge  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference.

45.  The  remitted  hearing  will  also  provide  the  respondent  with  an
    opportunity to clarify a point which caused me some  concern,  although
    it played no material part in the decision I have reached.   These  are
    two protection claims, brought by  two  separate  adults,  and  it  was
    necessary and appropriate for there to be two separate refusal letters.
     It is an unusual feature of these refusal letters, however,  that  the
    authors reached inconsistent findings on a central issue.   The  author
    of the first appellant's letter rejected his account of  MDC  activity.
    The author of the second appellant's letter,  however,  "accepted  that
    you have a fear of the  Zanu-PF  party  in  Zimbabwe  because  of  your
    father's involvement with the MDC party."  Unless that  concession  has
    been withdrawn (and I can see no indication that it has been), it might
    well be thought to be of significance at the next hearing.  It will  be
    for the respondent to consider what steps, if any, she wishes  to  take
    in light of  what  I  have  said  in  this  paragraph.   Obviously  any
    alteration of her position should be notified to the  second  appellant
    in good time.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT involved the making of  errors  on  points  of  law.
The decision of the FtT is hereby set aside and the appeals are remitted  to
the FtT to be heard afresh by a judge other than Judge Farrelly.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court  proceedings.   I
continue this direction in force due  to  the  protection  issues  in  these
appeals.



                                                                M.J.Blundell

                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                              Immigration and Asylum Chamber
                                                          Date 29 March 2021
