
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07457/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 January 2020                    |On 27 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE I A LEWIS


                                   Between

                                    Z. H.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Howard of Fountain Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    McIntosh made pursuant to a hearing on 26 October 2018.

2.   The final decision of Judge McIntosh was not promulgated until  9  July
    2019.  As noted in the grant of permission to appeal,  and  as  I  have
    been able to identify on the court file, this  delay  appears  to  have
    arisen in substantial part because of  a  requirement  that  the  Judge
    amend the decision originally drafted and signed on 19 November 2018 to
    address the issue of anonymity.  It is unclear why  the  delay  was  so
    substantial.  Be that as it may  it  does  seem  that  the  Judge  gave
    consideration to, and determined, the substantive issues in the  appeal
    relatively shortly after the hearing itself. In such circumstances I am
    not persuaded that the delay in  final  promulgation  has  in  any  way
    affected the reliability of the decision.

3.   The Appellant's appeal before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  against  a
    refusal of asylum dated  5  June  2018.   The  Appellant's  immigration
    history is summarised at paragraphs 6-10 of the Decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  In essence he entered the United Kingdom  in  September
    2006 and thereafter became an overstayer.  He made an  application  for
    leave to remain in April 2017 which was refused on  14  December  2017.
    It was not until  he  was  facing  removal  in  January  2018  that  he
    intimated that he wished to claim asylum.  His asylum claim  was  based
    on his involvement with the Bangladesh National Party  ('BNP')  and  an
    expressed fear of members of the opposing Awami League.

4.   In support of his application, and in due  course  in  support  of  his
    appeal, in addition to his own  testimony  and  the  written  and  oral
    testimony of others the Appellant relied  upon  documentary  materials.
    Those documents appear to have been provided to the Secretary of  State
    and the  Tribunal  in  a  piecemeal  fashion.   Certain  documents  are
    incorporated  in  the  Respondent's  bundle  in  accordance  with   the
    materials provided prior to the Secretary of State's decision.  Further
    documents on the court file were seemingly submitted with the Notice of
    Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.  The latter documents  include  what
    are  purported  to  be  original   First   Information   Reports   (and
    translations) relating to incidents alleged to have taken place in 2013
    and 2016.

5.   The Appellant's application for asylum was refused for reasons set  out
    in a 'reasons for refusal' letter ('RFRL')  dated  5  June  2018.   His
    appeal to the IAC was dismissed for the reasons set out in the decision
    of Judge McIntosh.

6.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to  the  Upper  Tribunal
    which in the first instance was refused on 14 August 2019 by First-tier
    Tribunal Judge O'Garro, but  subsequently  granted  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Keith on 6 September 2019.

7.   The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge is  in  very  substantial
    part a rehearsal of the Appellant's case and  supporting  evidence:  at
    paragraphs 17- 48 the Judge sets out, essentially by way  of  reporting
    rather than with any critical or other analysis,  the  essence  of  the
    Appellant's case and the nature of the evidence  in  support.   Amongst
    other things the Judge refers to the Appellant  having  provided  First
    Information Reports: paragraph 34 in part is in these terms:

         "False charges had been made against him, the  first  being  on  25
         October 2013 and a later charge, which is dated  16  October  2016.
         The first allegation concerned an offence of  vandalism  for  which
         the appellant stated he had been found guilty  in  his  absence  in
         2017 and had been given a sentence of one year's imprisonment and 1
         lakh fine.  The Appellant states in relation to the latter  charge,
         this was an offence of fighting with the  President  of  the  Awami
         League on 16 October 2016.  The Appellant submitted  the  documents
         of the charges said to have been filed against him  in  Bangladesh.
         The Appellant explained that these documents had been sent  to  him
         by his brother who remained in Bangladesh with his mother."

8.   Paragraphs 49-57 of the Decision set out the submissions  made  on  the
    Appellant's behalf.  (There were  no  submissions  at  the  hearing  on
    behalf of the Respondent, no representative having appeared before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.)  It is not until after paragraph 57 that the sub-
    heading 'Decision with Reasons' appears; and even then it is not  until
    paragraph 62 that anything by way of analysis or  fact-finding  is  set
    out.

9.   At paragraphs 62 and  63  the  Judge  considers  the  Appellant's  role
    within the BNP and appears to reach a conclusion which accepts that the
    Appellant had an association with the party but  at  a  relatively  low
    level: paragraph 63 concludes "I find on the evidence of the  appellant
    that his role would not have been significant or  high  profile  within
    the party".  Necessarily such a finding is not adversely  determinative
    of the Appellant's case.

10.  Paragraph 64, which has been the focus of criticism in the  grounds  of
    appeal, is in these terms:

         "The Appellant's description of his attack as  being  motivated  by
         the fact that he was a member of the  BNP,  whilst  his  attackers,
         were members of the Awami  League  who  were  known  to  him.   The
         Appellant does not explain why although his attackers were known to
         him, he failed to identify them individually and failed to see  the
         attack upon him as a personal attack as opposed to  his  membership
         with the BNP.  I  find  that  the  account  given  in  the  witness
         statement  does  not   satisfactorily   explain   the   Appellant's
         description of not being individually targeted but being one  of  a
         group, when no-one else was attacked during  the  incident  and  he
         accepts that no-one else was present."

11.  In granting permission to appeal Upper Tribunal Judge  Keith  made  the
    following observation:

         "The FTT's explanation for what she concluded about the appellant's
         knowledge of the identities of his assailants and their reason  for
         attacking him at 64 of the decision  is  arguably  unclear  to  the
         extent that the reasoning is arguably defective."

12.  I find that the reasoning is defective.  I  am  unable  to  follow  the
    reasoning.  I understand the context: the Appellant  was  set  upon  by
    members of the Awami League when he was on his own.  I  also  see  that
    that the Judge is attempting to wrestle with  the  concept  of  whether
    this was an assault on the Appellant as an individual  (i.e.  personal)
    or  arising  from  his  political  involvement  (i.e.  belonging  to  a
    political grouping).  I am unable to understand from paragraph 64 -  or
    otherwise from the Decision - why  the  Judge  seemingly  rejected  the
    possibility that the attack was politically motivated.  The  mere  fact
    that the Appellant was alone is not sustainably reason enough.  Nor  in
    this context does the Judge appear to have factored in or addressed  in
    his reasoning the nature of the comments and observations the Appellant
    claims to have made which triggered the assault.

13.  The only other aspect of the Appellant's  narrative  account  on  which
    the Judge appears to have made any clear finding is  in  respect  of  a
    newspaper report that the Appellant had provided detailing claims  that
    his family were being harassed: see paragraph 65.

14.  Accordingly, the overall conclusion stated and restated  at  paragraphs
    66 and 67 - that the Appellant had failed to demonstrate he was at risk
    and thereby entitled to protection - appears to be founded on  no  more
    than  an  unsustainably  reasoned  consideration  of  the  motives   of
    attackers,  and  the  rejection  of  newspaper   evidence   of   family
    harassment.

15.  Perhaps more troubling than the  observations  and  comments  above  in
    respect of the inadequate reasoning at  paragraph  64  is  the  Judge's
    observation at paragraph 68. Having again stated a  conclusion  to  the
    effect that the Appellant was not entitled to protection the Judge then
    says this halfway through paragraph 68:

         "I do not  accept  the  documentary  evidence  or  other  suggested
         supporting  evidence  that  the  appellant  would  attract  adverse
         attention upon return to Bangladesh.  I do not find  the  appellant
         to be a credible witness in relation to the  role  he  suggests  he
         played in the BNP in Bangladesh.  I therefore find no  evidence  to
         support a need for international protection."

16.  This brief, and  seemingly  passing,  reference  -  sandwiched  between
    restatements of  a  failure  to  establish  a  need  for  international
    protection - is the only reference under the 'Decision and Reasons' sub-
    heading to any documentary materials other than the  newspaper  report,
    relied upon by the Appellant.  The reader is  left  completely  in  the
    dark as to whether or not the  Judge  accepted  the  First  Information
    Reports but concluded that they did not give rise to a risk, or did not
    accept them as being reliable evidence of the truth of their  contents.
    If the latter, the reader is left with no clear indication  as  to  why
    the Judge rejected such reports.   The  reasoning  is  inadequate.   Mr
    Mills acknowledges as much and does not seek to  resist  the  challenge
    raised by the Appellant in light of such circumstances.

17.  I conclude that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  was  in
    error of law and requires to be set aside.  It is appropriate that  the
    Appellant have a further opportunity to put his case  in  its  entirety
    with all issues  at  large  before  a  different  Judge  at  First-tier
    Tribunal level.

18.   I  should  additionally  make  an  observation  in  respect   of   the
    documentary materials that were before the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    and are on file.  As noted above some materials  appear  to  have  been
    submitted for  the  first  time  with  the  Notice  of  Appeal.   Those
    materials necessarily were not in  the  Respondent's  bundle,  and  for
    reasons that are unclear did not find their way  into  the  Appellant's
    appeal bundle subsequently filed with the  Tribunal.   In  consequence,
    whilst such documents are on the court file the Secretary of State does
    not have those documents. (The matter was seemingly not remedied before
    the First-tier Tribunal, there having been no Presenting Officer at the
    hearing.)  More surprisingly the Appellant's own representative  before
    me  did  not  presently  have  copies  of  such  documents.    In   the
    circumstances arrangements will need now to be made for copies  of  the
    documents to be retained on the court file, and the originals  returned
    to the Appellant's representative for incorporation into a consolidated
    appeal bundle which should then be filed and served on the Tribunal and
    the Secretary of State in the usual way.

19.  Otherwise for relisting this appeal, standard directions will  suffice.
     An interpreter in the Bengali language will be required. The  case  is
    to be relisted before any First-tier Tribunal Judge  other  than  Judge
    McIntosh.



Notice of Decision

20.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained a material  error  of
law and is set aside.

21.  The decision in the appeal  is  to  be  remade  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal by any Judge other than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  McIntosh
    with all issues at large.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



The above represents a corrected transcript of ex tempore reasons  given  at
the conclusion of the hearing.


Signed:  Date: 21 January 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge I A Lewis
