
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07693/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On June 27, 2018                             |on October 19, 2018           |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                            MR HUSSAIN JAMAL AMIN
                        (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Patel, Counsel, instructed by Bolton CAB
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I do not make an anonymity order.

 2. The appellant is an Iraqi national.   He  entered  the  United  Kingdom
    clandestinely on August 28, 2015 and claimed asylum the same  day.  The
    respondent  refused  his  protection  claim  on  July  31,  2017  under
    paragraphs 336 and 339F HC 395.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on August 11, 2017 under Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Hudson (hereinafter called
    "the Judge") on September 11, 2017 and in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    September 17, 2017 the Judge refused the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on October 11, 2017. Permission to
    appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds on  January  17,  2018
    who found it arguable the Judge erred (a) by failing  to  consider  the
    risk to him at the date of return in light of the fact he did not  have
    a CSID; (b) by failing to establish with certainty the appellant's home
    area and whether it was in a contested area and (c) failed to  set  out
    why the Tribunal should depart from AA Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544.

 5. At an earlier hearing on March 26, 2018 Ms Aboni  (Senior  Home  Office
    Representative) accepted that it was arguable the Judge had erred:

      a) By failing to establish how the appellant could be returned to  his
         home area bearing in mind he came from a contested area; and

      b) By failing to explain why the decision  of  AA  could  be  departed
         from.

 6. Thereafter,  I  took  submissions  from  the  two  representatives  and
    concluded as follows:

      a) The Judge's finding that the appellant had not been trafficked  was
         well reasoned.

      b) The Court of Appeal in AA (Iraq) v SSHD and SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
         944 revised the Country Guidance. Regardless of the feasibility  of
         the appellant's return, the Court stated that it would be necessary
         to decide whether he had a CSID, or would be able  to  obtain  one,
         reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A CSID is generally required
         in order for an Iraqi  to  access  financial  assistance  from  the
         authorities; employment; education; housing; and medical treatment.
         Whilst it may be possible  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  such  a
         document before he left  the  United  Kingdom  the  Judge  did  not
         consider the feasibility of this in her decision.

 7. As the appellant had been unrepresented at the original hearing,  which
    took place on September 11, 2017, I  agreed  to  adjourn  the  case  to
    enable both parties to lodge further objective evidence  regarding  the
    general situation in Iraq, and in particular the Nineveh province,  and
    how the appellant would obtain his CSID.

 8. The appellant's representatives filed an updated bundle which  included
    a statement from  the  appellant  dated  April  30,  2018  and  country
    evidence covering the period November 2017 to April 2018. There was  no
    additional evidence submitted  by  the  respondent  save  both  parties
    relied on the country guidance decision of  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds-internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC).

 9. In his recent statement, the appellant stated:

      a) He would be unable to obtain a replacement CSID as he would have to
         go to his home area to obtain it. He lived in Shangal which is near
         Mosul.

      b) He felt unable to settle in the IKR because he stated  he  did  not
         have a sponsor, friends or relatives living in the area.

      c) Even if he were given entry to the IKR he did not believe he  would
         be able to support himself or obtain employment.

    SUBMISSIONS

10. Mr Tan submitted that as the appellant spoke some Arabic and had family
    living in Iraq it would be possible for him to be returned to  Baghdad,
    in line with the Home Office return policy. The Judge had rejected  his
    account of what had happened to his family and he  submitted  that  the
    appellant had options to obtain his CSID. His  account  of  having  his
    documents taken by the agent had been rejected and therefore his family
    would be able to obtain documents for him. Alternatively, he could  try
    and obtain replacement documents in the  United  Kingdom  or  he  could
    appoint an attorney to obtain them for him in Iraq as there was a civil
    registry for his home area in Baghdad. Mr Tan  submitted  that  if  the
    Tribunal was satisfied he could obtain a CSID then he would be able  to
    return to Baghdad and from there he would be able to travel to the IKR.
    As a Kurd he would not be removed.

11. Ms Patel reminded the Tribunal that the  credibility  findings  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal had been preserved and  importantly  the  appellant
    did not come from the IKR but originated from Mosul which remained part
    of a contested area.  She  submitted  that  the  appellant  had  always
    claimed he did not have his CSID as the agent had taken it from him and
    he had always maintained that his family were no longer in Iraq. Whilst
    the Tribunal had rejected his claim that his father had been killed she
    submitted that obtaining a replacement would not  be  easy  as  it  was
    likely all records had been destroyed in his home area which would make
    the obtaining of a CSID virtually impossible. Even if he  could  return
    to Baghdad there was no guarantee he would be able to obtain  his  CSID
    within a reasonable period of time. She further submitted that he would
    be unable to travel between Baghdad and the IKR  without  documentation
    because he would  be  at  risk  as  he  would  travel  through  various
    checkpoints. Without a passport or CSID he would also be unable to fly.
    Even if he was admitted to the IKR  she  submitted  that  he  would  be
    treated with suspicion because he had come from an ISIL controlled area
    and he would have difficulties  obtaining  work  bearing  in  mind  his
    previous experience was that of a  shepherd.  Any  suggestion  that  he
    could remain in Baghdad failed to take into account he had  no  family,
    no sponsor, he came from a minority community and he  did  not  have  a
    CSID that would enable him to obtain  employment.  She  invited  me  to
    allow the appeal.

    FINDINGS

12. When this matter was dealt with in the First-tier Tribunal  the  appeal
    was dismissed and for the reasons set out above I am required to remake
    the protection decision although I  indicated  I  would  approach  this
    issue by preserving the previous credibility findings and having regard
    to the latest country guidance decision.

13. The Judge made the following findings:

      a) The appellant was found to be of Kurdish ethnicity  but  the  Judge
         rejected his claim to be Yezidi.

      b) The appellant gave inconsistent evidence  about  what  happened  in
         Iraq and  in  particular  gave  inconsistent  evidence  about  what
         happened to his father. The Judge was not satisfied the appellant's
         father had been killed as described and he rejected the appellant's
         claim to have no connections in the country.

      c) The appellant provided an  inconsistent  timeline  to  explain  his
         journey from Iraq.

      d) The appellant spoke both Kurdish Sorani and Arabic.

      e) The appellant had some level of education and had previously worked
         in the farming industry.

      f) As a Kurd he would be entitled to enter the IKR.

14. When this matter came before me in June I adjourned the case  primarily
    because the country guidance decision of AAH was due to be handed down.
    The Tribunal issued the following guidance:

          1. Whilst it remains possible for an Iraqi national returnee  (P)
             to obtain a new CSID whether P is able to  do  so,  or  do  so
             within a reasonable time frame, will depend on the  individual
             circumstances.


             Factors to be considered include:


               i)  Whether  P  has  any  other  form  of  documentation,  or
                  information about the location of his entry in  the  civil
                  register. An INC, passport, birth/marriage certificates or
                  an expired CSID would all be  of  substantial  assistance.
                  For  someone  in  possession  of  one  or  more  of  these
                  documents the process should be straightforward. A laissez-
                  passer should not be counted for these purposes: these can
                  be issued without any other form of  ID  being  available,
                  are not of any assistance in 'tracing back' to the  family
                  record and are confiscated upon arrival at Baghdad;


              ii) The location of the relevant civil registry office. If  it
                  is in an area held, or  formerly  held,  by  ISIL,  is  it
                  operational?


             iii) Are there male  family  members  who  would  be  able  and
                  willing to attend the civil registry with P?  Because  the
                  registration system is patrilineal it will be relevant  to
                  consider whether  the  relative  is  from  the  mother  or
                  father's side. A maternal uncle in possession of his  CSID
                  would be able to assist in locating the original place  of
                  registration of the individual's mother,  and  from  there
                  the trail would need to be followed to the place that  her
                  records were transferred upon marriage. It  must  also  be
                  borne in mind that a significant number of  IDPs  in  Iraq
                  are themselves undocumented; if that is  the  case  it  is
                  unlikely that  they  could  be  of  assistance.   A  woman
                  without a male relative to  assist  with  the  process  of
                  redocumentation would face very significant  obstacles  in
                  that officials may refuse to deal with her case at all.


             Section E of Country Guidance annexed to the Court of Appeal's
             decision in AA (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2017] Imm AR 1440; [2017] EWCA Civ 944 is replaced
             with the following guidance:


          2. There are currently no  international  flights  to  the  Iraqi
             Kurdish Region (IKR). All returns from the United Kingdom  are
             to Baghdad.


          3. For an Iraqi  national  returnee  (P)  of  Kurdish  origin  in
             possession of a valid CSID or Iraqi passport, the journey from
             Baghdad to the IKR, whether by air or land, is affordable  and
             practical and can be made without a real risk of  P  suffering
             persecution, serious harm, Article 3 ill treatment  nor  would
             any difficulties on the journey make relocation unduly harsh.


          4. P is unable to board a domestic flight between Baghdad and the
             IKR without either a CSID or a valid passport.


          5. P will face considerable  difficulty  in  making  the  journey
             between Baghdad and the IKR by land without a  CSID  or  valid
             passport. There are numerous checkpoints en  route,  including
             two checkpoints in the immediate vicinity of the airport.   If
             P has neither a CSID nor a valid passport there is a real risk
             of P being detained at a checkpoint until  such  time  as  the
             security personnel are able to verify P's identity.  It is not
             reasonable to require P to travel between Baghdad and  IKR  by
             land absent the ability of P  to  verify  his  identity  at  a
             checkpoint. This normally requires the attendance  of  a  male
             family member and production of P's identity documents but may
             also be achieved by calling upon "connections"  higher  up  in
             the chain of command.


          6. Once at the IKR border (land  or  air)  P  would  normally  be
             granted entry to the territory. Subject to security screening,
             and registering presence with the local mukhtar,  P  would  be
             permitted to enter and reside in the IKR with no further legal
             impediments  or  requirements.   There   is   no   sponsorship
             requirement for Kurds.


          7. Whether P would be at particular risk of ill-treatment  during
             the security screening process must be assessed on a  case-by-
             case basis. Additional factors that may increase risk include:
             (i) coming from a family with a known association  with  ISIL,
             (ii) coming from an area associated with ISIL and (iii)  being
             a single male of fighting age. P  is  likely  to  be  able  to
             evidence the fact of recent arrival from the UK,  which  would
             dispel any suggestion of having  arrived  directly  from  ISIL
             territory.


          8. If P has family members living in the IKR cultural norms would
             require that family to accommodate P. In such circumstances  P
             would, in general, have sufficient assistance from the  family
             so as to lead a 'relatively normal life', which would  not  be
             unduly harsh. It is nevertheless important for decision-makers
             to determine  the  extent  of  any  assistance  likely  to  be
             provided by P's family on a case by case basis.


          9. For those without the assistance of  family  in  the  IKR  the
             accommodation options are limited:


               i) Absent special circumstances it is not  reasonably  likely
                  that P will be able to gain access to one of  the  refugee
                  camps in  the  IKR;  these  camps  are  already  extremely
                  overcrowded and are closed to newcomers. 64% of  IDPs  are
                  accommodated in private settings with  the  vast  majority
                  living with family members;


              ii) If P cannot live with a family  member,  apartments  in  a
                  modern block in a new neighbourhood are available for rent
                  at a cost of between $300 and $400 per month;


             iii) P could resort to a 'critical shelter arrangement', living
                  in  an  unfinished  or  abandoned   structure,   makeshift
                  shelter, tent, mosque, church or squatting in a government
                  building.  It would  be  unduly  harsh  to  require  P  to
                  relocate to the IKR if P will live in a  critical  housing
                  shelter without access to basic necessities such as  food,
                  clean water and clothing;


              iv) In considering whether P would be  able  to  access  basic
                  necessities, account must be taken of the fact that failed
                  asylum seekers are entitled to apply for a grant under the
                  Voluntary Returns Scheme, which could  give  P  access  to
                  �1500. Consideration should also be given to whether P can
                  obtain financial support from other sources  such  as  (a)
                  employment, (b) remittances from relatives abroad, (c) the
                  availability of ad hoc charity or by being able to  access
                  PDS rations.


         10. Whether P is able to secure employment must be assessed  on  a
             case-by-case basis taking the following matters into account:


               i) Gender. Lone women are very unlikely to be able to  secure
                  legitimate employment;


              ii) The unemployment rate for Iraqi IDPs living in the IKR  is
                  70%;


             iii) P cannot work without a CSID;


              iv) Patronage and nepotism continue to be important factors in
                  securing employment. A returnee with family connections to
                  the region will have a significant advantage  in  that  he
                  would ordinarily be able to call upon  those  contacts  to
                  make introductions to prospective employers and  to  vouch
                  for him;


               v) Skills, education and experience. Unskilled workers are at
                  the  greatest  disadvantage,  with  the  decline  in   the
                  construction industry reducing  the  number  of  labouring
                  jobs available;


              vi) If P is from an area with a marked association with  ISIL,
                  that may deter prospective employers.


15. There is no dispute between the  representatives  that  this  appellant
    came from  an  area  that  is  described  as  a  contested  area.  Some
    Presenting Officers argue that Mosul is no longer in a  contested  area
    but Mr Tan took the pragmatic  approach  that  there  was  insufficient
    evidence to depart from existing country guidance.

16. I have therefore approached this appeal on the basis the appellant came
    from a contested area and would be unsafe to require him to  return  to
    that area.

17. I raised with Mr  Tan  where  this  appellant  would  be  returned.  He
    submitted that unless he voluntarily returned under his own  steam  any
    forcible return would be to Baghdad.

18. This appellant no longer has his CSID and whilst he clearly had one  in
    the past it is  clear  from  the  decision  in  AAH  that  obtaining  a
    replacement is not straightforward. The Tribunal  accepted  that  civil
    registries in the contested areas have been left  in  utter  chaos  and
    there is  evidence  that  many  documents  have  been  either  lost  or
    destroyed.

19. Both Mr Tan and Ms Patel agreed that unless the appellant had a CSID he
    would be in difficulties. The options available to this  appellant  are
    to (a) try and obtain a CSID in London or (b) obtain a CSID in Baghdad.



20. The Tribunal recorded the issues facing applicants seeking CSID in both
    London and Baghdad:

         "26. If applying through a consulate abroad  the  requirements  are
         different. Having contacted the consulate in London, and checked on
         the website of the Iraqi embassy in Sweden, Dr  Fatah  states  that
         the  authorities  will  require  the  applicant  to  first  make  a
         statement explaining why he needs a CSID and  attach  this  to  his
         application form, which must  countersigned  by  the  head  of  the
         applicant's family and stamped by the consulate or embassy; he must
         then produce his Iraqi passport and proof of status in the  country
         where he is applying, the name of a representative (proxy) in Iraq,
         an additional form completed by the head of the applicant's  family
         verifying that the contents of his application form were true, four
         colour copies of his INC, and 10 colour  photographs.     Crucially
         the applicant must be able to produce something which can establish
         the location of his family's details in the  civil  register.  This
         should be a CSID, an INC or birth certificate. If none of these are
         available to the applicant he must supply the identity documents of
         his parents. This evidence again  accords  with  that  of  Landinfo
         (December 2017) who conclude that it can  be  difficult  to  obtain
         replacement ID documents from an embassy abroad for the  individual
         who is unable to verify his or her identity.


         27.  If you are in Iraq, and have all of the required documents, in
         normal circumstances the process is straightforward and  quick  and
         should take no more than three days. Dr Fatah's  own  daughter  was
         born in the United Kingdom and he managed to obtain her a  CSID  in
         one day from the office in Sulaymaniyah, upon payment  of  a  small
         fee.    Dr Fatah was less optimistic about the  efficiency  of  the
         process if in the United Kingdom. He has regular dealings with  the
         consulate in London and he is not impressed.  He  said  that  staff
         there are generally very unhelpful.


         28.  If some of the documents were missing it might generally  take
         you up to a month to collate and replace them  all.   In  his  live
         evidence, when pressed by Mr Singh, Dr Fatah acknowledged  that  it
         may be possible, when dealing with some officials, to obtain a CSID
         even if one does not have all of the  documents  listed  above.  He
         conceded that an official might  be  'persuaded'  to  overlook  the
         official requirements,  and  that  there  may  be  some  degree  of
         flexibility about the process in  some  governates.  He  maintained
         however that it would normally be the  case  that  these  documents
         would be required. The key piece of information that the individual
         would however have to have would be his family's  volume  and  page
         reference  number  in  the  civil  register.  Without   that,   the
         individual "is in trouble".   He could only obtain a  new  CSID  if
         the Registrar was prepared to trawl  through  volume  after  volume
         looking for the family record. In his evidence before the  Tribunal
         in AA (Iraq) Dr Fatah wondered if such an official would be willing
         to undertake such a task, or could be "made willing". The  Tribunal
         concluded that this was not likely. The only  way  that  a  totally
         undocumented Iraqi could realistically hope to obtain  a  new  CSID
         would be the attendance at the civil  registry  of  a  male  family
         member prepared to vouch for him or her. The production of  a  CSID
         from, for instance, an uncle, would enable the Registrar  to  trace
         back through the record to find the  individual's  father,  and  in
         turn him.


         29.  As to whether one would need to attend the office of the civil
         registrar in person, Dr Fatah reiterated the evidence he gave in AA
         (Iraq). One could delegate  the  task  to  a  relative  or  trusted
         friend, assuming of  course  that  he  was  in  possession  of  the
         relevant documents and/or information.    Alternatively,  Dr  Fatah
         agreed that it was theoretically possible that one could  engage  a
         lawyer and grant him or her power of  attorney.    He  had  however
         never known  of  anyone  who  had  actually  done  that,  but  like
         everything else in Iraq, it depended on whether  you  had  contacts
         whom you could trust. Dr Fatah was asked about the  possibility  of
         attending alternative offices,  such  as  the  Central  Archive  in
         Baghdad, discussed at paragraphs 180 to  187  of  AA  (Iraq).    He
         maintained the evidence that he gave in that  case:  he  has  never
         heard of anyone obtaining a CSID from the Central Archive.  In  his
         main report Dr Fatah cites the research of  NGO  'Ceasefire  Centre
         for Civilian Rights' to the effect that IDPs attempting to  recover
         lost  documents  are  being  met  with  indifference,   corruption,
         incompetence and even sarcasm by the authorities.


         30.  Dr Fatah explained that this complex bureaucracy  has  existed
         in Iraq for many years. The family registration  books,  and  their
         contents reflected on the CSID, are the foundation of  the  state's
         control.   Iraq  is  presently  facing  significant  challenges  in
         maintaining the system in the north of the country, however.  Under
         ISIL control all recording of official events was banned, and  some
         civil register offices, such as that  in  Mosul,  were  damaged  or
         destroyed. The effect is that there is now a huge backlog  for  the
         bureaucrats to catch up on. Between 2014  and  2017  no  marriages,
         births or deaths were recorded. Catching up will be a mammoth task.
          In Mosul alone there are 1.5 million Iraqis who  will  need  their
         records updated. In addition to recording the names  of  those  who
         have died in the conflict  there  will  be  tens  of  thousands  of
         children whose births have not been registered,  or  who  were  not
         entered into the record before ISIL took power. Their families  are
         now desperate to have their  existence  recorded,  because  without
         that, they  cannot  obtain  CSID  cards;  without  CSID  cards  the
         children are not entitled to PDS  cards;  without  PDS  cards  they
         cannot receive food rations.   In addition many people  lost  their
         documents during the conflict when homes  were  destroyed  or  when
         fighting broke out, causing people to flee at short notice  without
         them.   In light of this, the problems of one  individual  returnee
         are likely to be  given  short  shrift.  No  procedures  have  been
         implemented to assist the re-documentation of returnees and in  the
         view of Dr Fatah this is because their issues are considered to  be
         trivial compared to the position of IDPs  already  on  the  ground.
         These returnees are  a  "totally  insignificant  problem"  for  the
         authorities, whose efforts are further hampered by  the  fact  that
         many of the more experienced civil servants, whose skills could  be
         helpful at this point,  were  sacked  in  the  "de-Ba'athification"
         programme.   The likelihood of  persuading  an  official  to  spend
         precious time trying to  find  an  individual's  records  are  even
         further diminished."


21. Taking into account the above information the conclusion appears to  be
    that obtaining a CSID in the United Kingdom will be extremely difficult
    given the fact the appellant has no documentation whatsoever. Whilst Dr
    Fatah accepted some  officials  may  turn  a  blind  eye  the  Tribunal
    appeared to accept that without certain information it  would  be  nigh
    impossible for the appellant to obtain the document in London.  I  take
    into account the fact the First-tier Tribunal were unimpressed with the
    appellant's account of what happened to his CSID but I  am  faced  with
    the fact that he no longer has it and has no obvious means to obtain it
    despite the Tribunal's rejection that this father had  been  killed  as
    alleged.

22. The second option is  for  the  appellant  to  obtain  a  CSID  from  a
    designated Registry. The designated registry for people displaced  from
    Mosul appears to be in Baghdad. The evidence about obtaining  documents
    in Baghdad also raised concerns. The appellant comes from  a  contested
    area and according to  the  evidence  presented  to  the  Tribunal  the
    chances of the appellant being able to obtain the information from  the
    former Registry in Mosul are slim. He would have to be able to  produce
    evidence from a family member at the very least to obtain his CSID  and
    whilst in theory this may be possible it  seems  highly  unlikely  that
    such a document would be obtained within a reasonable period of time.

23. The appellant has no family in Baghdad and bearing  in  mind  where  he
    lived before he came to the United Kingdom it seems highly  speculative
    to suggest that he would have access to any family in Baghdad.  Without
    a CSID he would be unable to leave Baghdad and he would  be  unable  to
    obtain any employment.

24. Whilst the appellant is a Kurd he is not someone  who  originates  from
    the IKR. He would be unable to fly to  the  IKR  because  the  Tribunal
    accepted that without such a document a flight would not  be  possible.
    There is the alternative of travelling to the IKR  overland  but  there
    would be problems for this appellant because he would  have  to  travel
    through a number of checkpoints and without a CSID he would again  face
    significant problems as detailed in AAH.

25. Mr Tan accepted that if this appellant could not obtain a CSID then  he
    would succeed in his appeal under article 15(c)  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.

26. The respondent cannot guarantee  safe  passage  to  the  IKR  for  this
    appellant and even if he was able to travel to the IKR  and  avoid  the
    problems considered by the Upper Tribunal the chances of him  obtaining
    employment within a reasonable period of time are slim as his only work
    experience  was  that  of  a  shepherd.  There  are  high   levels   of
    unemployment in the IKR and whilst he may not be forcibly  removed  due
    to his ethnicity I accept that he would experience problems in the IKR.



27. I make it clear that if he had been able to  overcome  all  the  issues
    relating to his CSID then it may well be article  15(c)  would  not  be
    engaged but based on the problems highlighted in  AAH  I  am  satisfied
    that this appellant will not be able to travel to the  IKR  because  he
    will not be able to secure a CSID within a reasonable period of time.

28. The only alternative would be for him to remain in Baghdad but  due  to
    the problems highlighted by Ms Patel in her submissions I find he would
    be at risk of serious harm if he remained in Baghdad.

29. In reaching this decision I have had regard to the  preserved  findings
    but given the current circumstances in Iraq for displaced persons I  am
    satisfied that return would breach the appellant's rights under article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.







    DECISION

30. I have already set aside the Judge's decision and  after  reconsidering
    all the evidence about the general situation in Iraq for those  persons
    who have no connection to the IKR I allow  this  appeal  under  article
    15(c) of the Qualification Directive.


Signed                              Date     06/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis




FEE AWARD
TO THE RESPONDENT

I do not make a fee award as no fee was payable.


Signed                              Date     06/10/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
