
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07845/2017

                                                               PA/07834/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 22nd January 2018                 |On 19th March 2018                   |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                    [J K]
                                    [C A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     No appearance
For the respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellants are nationals of Ghana, born respectively on [ ]  1972
       and [ ] 1996. The  first  appellant  is  the  mother  of  the  second
       appellant. They were issued with visit visas valid from 24 March 2009
       until 25 March 2010. They overstayed. In 2012 they made  unsuccessful
       applications for leave to remain. They continued  to  overstay  until
       they were encountered on 17 April 2015.  They  then  made  a  further
       unsuccessful application for leave to remain. They were detained on 8
       June 2017 and claimed asylum on  17  July  2017.  This  in  turn  was
       refused and they appealed.

    2. Their appeal came before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  J  Bartlett  at
       Yarl's Wood on 6 November 2017. They were represented by a  solicitor
       and there was a Home Office Presenting Officer in attendance. At  the
       start of the hearing it was indicated on  behalf  of  the  appellants
       they intended calling the first appellant's father; a pastor;  and  a
       Mr Sissoko. The latter is a French national originally from Mali. The
       presenting officer objected to this on  the  basis  that  no  witness
       statements had been served.

    3. The first appellant's protection claim was on the  basis  she  was  a
       Christian and that she was in a relationship with Mr Sissoko  who  is
       of the Muslim faith. She claimed they  were  married  in  an  Islamic
       ceremony in the United Kingdom.  Because  of  this  relationship  she
       would be at risk in her home  country  from  her  family.  The  first
       appellant's claim of conversion to Islam was  in  issue.  The  second
       appellant's claim  arose  through  his  association  with  the  first
       appellant.

    4. The judge agreed to hear evidence from Mr Sissoko on the basis that a
       significant issue in the appeal was whether  or  not  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship existed between the first appellant and  him.
       The judge did not allow the other two witnesses to be called.

    5. The judge did not accept the relationship was genuine and referred to
       various inconsistencies between the evidence of the appellant and  Mr
       Sissoko. The judge referred to the absence of any documentation  from
       the Mosque as to their claimed religious marriage and referred to her
       activities in the Christian church. Part of the claim  was  that  the
       appellant's father and the pastor travelled to Ghana and spoke to the
       appellant's family on her behalf.

    6. In the alternative, the judge found there was no current threat  from
       the family, pointing out the appellants' long absence from their home
       country. She had been living in Italy since 2002 until  her  marriage
       broke down, coming to the United Kingdom  in  2009.  The  judge  also
       found that there was sufficiency of protection and, if needs be,  the
       appellants could reasonably internally relocate within Ghana.

    7. The judge  accepted  that  the  appellants  received  some  financial
       support  from  the  first  appellant's  father.  However,  the  judge
       concluded this did not mean their  relationship  amounted  to  family
       life for the purposes of article 8. Again,  in  the  alternative  the
       judge concluded the decision was proportionate.

The Upper Tribunal

    8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis  it  was  arguable  the
       judge should have heard from the first  appellant's  father  and  her
       pastor.

    9. There was no appearance on behalf of the appellants  and  no  further
       argument advanced. Notice of the hearing had  been  served  upon  the
       parties on 15 December 2017 at the address given in  the  grounds  of
       appeal. It was  returned  undelivered.  A  letter  was  sent  to  the
       appellants' solicitors on 4  January  2018.  This  too  was  returned
       undelivered on 9 January 2018. Attempts  were  made  to  contact  the
       appellants and the solicitors by telephone without success. It is for
       the appellants to notify the Tribunal of any change  of  address.  In
       the  absence  of  any  explanation,  and  in  giving  effect  to  the
       overriding objective, we proceeded in the appellants' absence.

   10. The presenting officer submitted that if there was any error  in  not
       allowing the witnesses to give evidence it was not a material  error.
       The judge at paragraph 26 had given numerous  reasons  for  rejecting
       the claimed relationship between the first appellant and  Mr  Sissoko
       and at paragraph 27 sought to make allowances for linguistic  issues.
       The first appellant's father may have been able to give some evidence
       about the relationship but at paragraph 32 the judge took  the  claim
       at its highest and even accepting a relationship the claimed fear was
       rejected. Furthermore, the judge concluded that there was sufficiency
       of  protection  and  the  option  of  relocation.  Consequently,  the
       potential evidence of  the  pastor  about  travelling  to  Ghana  and
       speaking to family members was not material.

Consideration

   11. The First-tier Tribunal is given a general discretion  as  to  how  a
       hearing should proceed and  the  judge  is  required  to  manage  the
       proceedings. Standard Directions  are  that  witness  statements  are
       served in advance. This makes for the efficient use of court time and
       enables the respondent to carry out checks. Failure  to  comply  does
       not however mean a witness should be prevented from giving  evidence.
       A tribunal should  not  exclude  the  evidence  of  a  witness  whose
       evidence is otherwise admissible and relevant. Had it been  necessary
       the judge could have considered an adjournment. It  would  have  been
       preferable had the judge heard from the witnesses proffered. However,
       in the circumstances of this appeal the refusal to hear from them did
       not amount to a material error of law.

   12. Potentially  their  evidence  may  have  gone  to  demonstrating  the
       relationship between the first  appellant  and  Mr  Sissoko  and  the
       family's reaction. Sustainable reasons were given for rejecting  that
       claim and the conclusion the appellants had not demonstrated  a  need
       for protection. Principally, the appellants had been away from  their
       home country for many years. The source of their claimed  fear  where
       family members. In any event, the judge considered the claim  at  its
       highest  and  concluded  there  was  sufficiency  of  protection  or,
       alternatively,  the  option  of  internal  relocation.  No  effective
       challenge to this conclusion has been made. Consequently, the failure
       to  hear  from  the  witnesses  would  not  have  made  any  material
       difference to the outcome.



Decision

The  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge   Bartlett   dismissing   the
appellants'  appeals  shall  stand.  No  material  error  of  law  has  been
established.


Francis J Farrelly 16th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

