
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07564/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 1 March 2019                      |On 18 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                   M R H M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Jesurum, Counsel instructed by Irving & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a  national  of  Iraq,  date  of  birth  2  March  1991,
    appealed against the Respondent's  decision,  dated  14  May  2018,  to
    refuse an asylum claim or seeking  Humanitarian  Protection  under  the
    Immigration Rules.  His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  G
    Clarke (the Judge) who on 31 October 2018 dismissed his appeals.

2.   Permission to appeal was given by Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge  McGeachy
    on 31 January 2019.

3.   The Appellant was represented  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  by  Ms  E
    Daykin of counsel who also settled the grounds seeking permission.   Mr
    Jesurum was not previously involved in the  case  and  looking  at  the
    grounds he noted that the principal ground which involved the issue  of
    Article 15(c) of the Convention was an argument that could  not  really
    effectively be run at the present time  in  the  light  of  the  extant
    country guidance.  He also noted that aspects of the remainder  of  the
    grounds were not wholly arguable, at least so far as he was  concerned,
    I think rightly.  Rather the argument which had attracted  Mr  McGeachy
    in granting leave, was the question of  whether  or  not  a  structured
    approach had, as identified in the case of AAH (Iraqi Kurds -  internal
    relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212, had been applied?

4.   By way of introduction to the background of this  case,  the  Appellant
    had previously made a claim which had been  considered  and  eventually
    dismissed by the Upper Tribunal in a decision of Deputy Upper  Tribunal
    Hanbury and Upper Tribunal Judge Craig as long ago as 2013.

5.   The Judge, in considering this matter, plainly identified by  reference
    to Devaseelan [2004] UKIAT 00282 the certain starting point and certain
    adverse conclusions which had been arrived at against  the  reliability
    of the Appellant's evidence as to what he had claimed had  happened  to
    him in his circumstances in his long journey to  get  into  the  United
    Kingdom.

6.   The difficulty the Appellant faced before the Judge was that there  had
    been damaging adverse findings and points taken against the reliability
    of  the  Appellant's  evidence  and/or   its   credibility.    Somewhat
    unfortunately the Judge refers to some of these matters by reference to
    the word 'plausibility' which does not fairly reflect that he  was  not
    believed on a number of issues, particularly buttressing his claim that
    he could not safely return to his home area of Kirkuk,  which  was  not
    part of the IKR, although it was said that in substance  there  was  no
    real difference in terms of safely getting to and from either area.

7.   Mr Jesurum sought to persuade me that the absence, as he would put  it,
    of a structured approach gave rise to the concern that  first  AAH  has
    not been followed as it should be, or absent of good reason  given  why
    it was not being followed. Further Mr Jesurum, was concerned that on  a
    remaking of this matter there might be issues which could give rise  to
    a different decision.

8.   I take those points into account because  it  seemed  to  me  that  the
    Judge, [D63 to 79] and [ D80 to 87], certainly made  an  assessment  of
    the reliability of the Appellant's evidence.  In particular, the  claim
    that the Appellant did not  have  any  appropriate  identity  documents
    (CSID) and that he would not be able to obtain a substitute  so  as  to
    safely relocate on return to Baghdad back to Kirkuk and the home  area.



9.   I concluded that this was one of those cases  where,  bearing  in  mind
    the low standard of proof of evidence required  to  identify  the  real
    risk of persecution or proscribed ill-treatment, namely  serious  harm,
    always runs into the difficulty  of  trying  to  prove  or  disprove  a
    negative.  Rather I concluded what had happened was that the  Appellant
    did not adduce the evidence of an acceptable level  of  reliability  to
    show the real likelihood of risk on return.  Mr Jesurum, with good  and
    obvious reason, said in the absence of a CSID or  appropriate  identity
    document, the inference must be that you could not safely return to the
    home area: This, to some extent, relies on the evidence advanced in AAH
    which the panel carefully considered.  Whilst paragraph 116 of AAH  was
    helpful it was not conclusive as to how a Tribunal should look  at  the
    matter.  In this case, in the context of the earlier  decision  of  the
    Upper Tribunal and the evidence that was advanced before the  Judge,  I
    conclude the Judge did properly consider whether or not  the  Appellant
    could return to the  home  area  and  did  consider  the  availability/
    accessibility of family support in the home area which would assist, if
    it was truly required, the Appellant to obtain an identity document.  I
    bear in mind, that the Judge did not accept the Appellant's evidence as
    to the loss of his documentation.

10.  I do not go behind that Judge's findings, he  heard  the  evidence,  he
    heard the Appellant's case, the case was  put  to  him  by  experienced
    counsel. Mr Jesurum, working hard with the material he had,  still  had
    the underlying difficulties of the insufficiency  of  the  evidence  to
    show  the  Appellant  would  face  the  real  risk  of  persecution  or
    proscribed ill-treatment.

11.  Accordingly, I concluded that the argument, as put by  Mr  Jesurum,  as
    attractive as it could be made, did not persuade me that the Judge made
    a material error of law.  I do  not  think  that  to  slavishly  repeat
    paragraphs of decisions identified errors of law.  In this case it  was
    quite clear that the Judge understood the  issues  raised  by  AAH  and
    recited a great deal of the headnote which, whilst not, as  Mr  Jesurum
    correctly says, the ratio of that case, it was a fair  summary  of  the
    considerations that the Tribunal concluded.

12.  Therefore, I conclude, in the light of the fact  that  the  Judge  also
    had the evidence/ background evidence before him it was a  decision  he
    was entitled to make. It was not said that the Judge has not failed  to
    properly address the evidence or made any material omissions  from  the
    consideration of the evidence   in the  round.  The  Original  tribunal
    made no material error of law. The Original Tribunal's decision stands.



NOTICE OF DECISION

13.  The appeal is dismissed.  The Original Tribunal's decision stands.

14.  There was an anonymity direction made and I continue that.

DIRECTION REGARDING ANONYMITY - RULE 14 OF  THE  TRIBUNAL  PROCEDURE  (UPPER
TRIBUNAL) RULES 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed   Date 14 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The appeal has failed therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed   Date 14 March 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

