
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07480/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Without a hearing                    |On 13 August 2020                    |
|8th August 2020                      |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER


                                   Between

                                     DHA
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

    Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    appellant in this  determination  identified  as  DHA.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any  failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings




      1. FtT Judge Boyes dismissed DHA's appeal against the refusal  of  his
         international protection and human rights claim for reasons set out
         in a decision promulgated on  14th  November  2019.  Permission  to
         appeal was granted by FtT  judge  Simpson  on  27th  January  2020.
         Directions for the further conduct of the appeal were sent and,  in
         the circumstances surrounding COVID 19, provision was made for  the
         question of whether there was an error of law and if so whether the
         decision of the FtT Judge should be set aside to be  determined  on
         the papers.

      2. Both parties complied with the directions. The respondent (although
         she had not seen the grant of permission and thus referred  to  the
         grounds of appeal and the submissions by the  appellant),  conceded
         there were errors of law such that the decision of  the  FtT  Judge
         should be set aside and the  appeal  remitted  to  the  FtT  for  a
         hearing de novo. The appellant did not object to such a  course  of
         action.

      3. Having reviewed the decision I am satisfied that the extent of  the
         findings to be made and the evidence to be heard are such that  the
         criteria for remittal to the FtT are met and appeal should be heard
         in the First tier Tribunal, no findings preserved.

      4.  I  therefore  set  aside  the  decision  and  remit   the   appeal
         accordingly.




    Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

    I set aside the decision and remit the appeal to the FtT  to  be  heard
    afresh.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an  order  pursuant  to  rule  13  of  the
    Tribunal  Procedure  (First-tier  Tribunal)  (Immigration  and   Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014.

    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).


Jane Coker

Upper Tribunal Judge Coker                       Date: 8 August 2020
