
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/07050/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |         Decision & Reasons           |
|                                      |Promulgated                           |
|On 9th June 2017                      |         On 20th June 2017            |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                               mr vikram singh
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Attendance
For the Respondent:    Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of  India  born  on  17th  July  1984.   The
    Appellant made claim for asylum based upon a fear that if  returned  to
    India he would face mistreatment due to belonging to Suthar, a backward
    caste.  That application was refused  by  the  Secretary  of  State  by
    Notice of Refusal dated 29th June 2016.  The Appellant appealed and the
    appeal came before Immigration Judge Samimi sitting at Hatton Cross  on
    9th December 2016.  In a  Decision  and  Reasons  promulgated  on  12th
    January 2017 the Appellant's appeal was recorded as having been allowed
    on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds.

 2. The Secretary of State lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal
    on 22nd January 2017.  Those grounds contended that it was  clear  from
    the findings within the determination at paragraphs 11 and 12 that  the
    judge had meant to dismiss the appeal under  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds rather than to allow it.  However, on the basis as set  out  in
    Katsonga v the Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2016]  UKUT
    228 as the "slip rule" cannot be used to  reverse  the  effect  of  the
    decision the entire decision would need to be set aside as  the  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge  had  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for  the
    conclusions.

 3. On 28th April 2017 Judge P  J  M  Hollingworth  granted  permission  to
    appeal.  Judge Hollingworth noted that the decision did not reflect the
    reasoning of the judge and it was unclear why the judge has allowed the
    appeal given his reasoning.  No Rule 24 response was served.

 4. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier  Tribunal  Judge.   The  Appellant  does  not  appear.   The
    Respondent appears by her Home Office Presenting Officer, Ms Isherwood.
     For the purpose of continuity within these proceedings I refer to  the
    Secretary of State as the Respondent albeit  that  this  is  an  appeal
    brought by the Secretary of State.

 5. As a starting point Ms Isherwood draws to my attention  the  fact  that
    the Appellant is not present.  She points out that the  Appellant  made
    application for a residence card in February 2017 which  was  rejected.
    She points out that his address which is the address upon which he  has
    been served in these proceedings remained the same and she submits that
    service of due notice upon him at his address is valid service.  I note
    that fact and I also note  that  there  is  no  document  in  the  file
    indicating or suggesting that the notice of hearing has been  returned.
    In these circumstances I find  that  there  has  been  due  and  proper
    service of this hearing upon the Appellant.

Submission/Discussion

 6. Ms Isherwood takes me to paragraphs 11 and 12 of the judge's  decision.
    I note from within those paragraphs that the judge had stated:

         "11. I find that the Appellant has not substantiated his claim  and
             would be able to seek the protection of the police  in  India.
             There is no evidence before  me  to  support  the  Appellant's
             claim that there is no sufficiency of  protection  within  the
             meaning of Hovarth [2000] UKHL in India.  I  find  that  given
             the Appellant is a healthy  young  man  it  is  reasonable  to
             expect him to seek internal relocation within India.  I do not
             find that the Appellant has  satisfied  the  lower  burden  of
             proof in relation to the Refugee Convention.

         12.  There is no suggestion that the Appellant  meets  Appendix  FM
             and or paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration  Rules.   ...   The
             Appellant has not submitted  any  evidence  of  his  continued
             parental relationship with his child or that he has been in  a
             durable relationship with an EEA national in  accordance  with
             the EEA Regulations."



The Law

 7.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

 8. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings & Remaking the Decision

 9. It is clear from paragraphs 11 and 12 of the judge's decision that  the
    judge did not endorse nor accept, the Appellant's  claim  and  that  he
    found against the Appellant in his claim.  It  is  clear  therefore  in
    such circumstances that the decision to allow the appeal constitutes  a
    material error of law.  There is no challenge made to the  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge consequently the correct approach  is  to
    note and record those findings as being preserved, to find that there a
    material error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
    and to remake the decision dismissing the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all
    grounds.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge  is  remade
dismissing the Appellant's appeal on asylum and on human rights grounds.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed D N Harris                            Date 15th June 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.






Signed D N Harris                            Date 15th June 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris



