
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: pa/07104/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th July 2019                  |On 14th August 2019                |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                   mr C S
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Emezie instructed by Dylan Conrad Kreolle
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The appellant appealed with permission against the decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Malik who dismissed the appeal against a refusal of
    a  protection  and  human  rights  claim  dated  17th  May  2018.   The
    respondent had refused to revoke  a  deportation  order  by  virtue  of
    Section 5(2) of the Immigration Act 1971.

 2. The appellant a male national of Nigeria born on 25th June 1980  claims
    to have entered the UK in  2001  and  came  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities in October 2004  when  he  was  arrested  on  suspicion  of
    driving offences.  He claimed asylum but thereafter was  listed  as  an
    absconder and his asylum claim was  refused  on  26th  July  2005.   No
    appeal was filed against that decision and he next came to light on 1st
    December 2009 during an enforcement visit.

 3. The appellant was convicted on 9th December 2009  at  Manchester  Crown
    Court  for  using  false  instruments/producing/furnishing  any   false
    documents/information and possesses/control a false/improperly obtained
    ID card which was released to another or apparatus etc. for  making  ID
    cards.  The appellant was sentenced to fourteen months' imprisonment on
    21st December 2009.  The sentencing judge recommended he  be  deported.
    The appellant was served with a signed deportation order on  17th  June
    2010 and he  appealed.   On  13th  September  2010  he  applied  for  a
    certificate of approval to marry an EEA national.  On 12th October 2010
    his deportation appeal was dismissed; he became appeal rights exhausted
    on 16th May 2011.

 4. On 12th August 2011 he was again listed as an absconder and  next  came
    to the attention of the authorities where encountered by the police  on
    10th January 2014.  Further submissions to revoke his deportation order
    were refused on 11th March 2014 and his appeal  against  that  decision
    was dismissed following an application for permission to appeal to  the
    Court of Appeal whereupon the appellant became appeal rights  exhausted
    on 12th July 2016.  He was again detained on 20th  March  2017  with  a
    view to removal and the appellant filed further  submissions  supported
    by an independent social worker's report  but  those  submissions  were
    rejected as a fresh  claim  and  permission  to  seek  judicial  review
    refused on 2nd June 2017.  Further submissions were again  rejected  on
    8th August 2017 and the appellant was  detained  on  15th  August  2017
    pending removal.  Further judicial review proceedings were  compromised
    with a consent order signed on 29th March 2018.  On 17th May  2018  the
    appellant's protection and human rights claim was refused.

 5. In the appeal before First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malik  the  appellant
    claimed that he had fled Nigeria following an  attack  on  him  by  the
    Buccaneers University Cult.

 6. The appellant asserted he was in a relationship with a Belgian national
    from 2002 to 2011 and an application for a  certificate  to  marry  was
    granted in March 2011 but his then partner ended  the  relationship  in
    April 2011.  He and his current partner started to live together in May
    2011 and they became engaged in December 2013.  The  appellant  is  not
    allowed to work.  His partner a British  citizen  suffers  from  mental
    health issues and his two children both of whom  are  British  citizens
    were born on 15th August 2012 and 31st August 2014 and are now 6 and  4
    respectively.  The appellant maintained that he had lived in the UK for
    seventeen years, formed strong ties with  his  immediate  and  extended
    family and friends.  He had lost connection with any ties  in  Nigeria.
    He asserted his partner would not be  able  to  cope  with  her  mental
    health situation and it would be difficult for her to work and care for
    the children and the children would suffer if he  were  deported.   The
    judge recorded that the partner worked as an auxiliary nurse and was in
    the second year of her four-year nursing course at university.

 7. The oral evidence before Judge Malik was that the  appellant's  partner
    would not be able to cope because of her anxiety and depression and she
    relied on the appellant to look after her children.  During periods  of
    illness she was not able to look after them and was scared  they  would
    be removed from her.  Some days she could not get out of bed.  She  has
    a cousin in Bristol who could not assist.  The appellant was said to be
    close to the children.  She could not rely on  the  NHS  or  government
    support and thought her mental health would deteriorate.  Not least she
    had suicidal thoughts.  She asserted in oral  evidence  she  could  not
    continue with her education if the appellant were deported as she would
    not get support whilst at university to look after the children.   When
    the appellant was in detention she had to phone in sick  and  had  been
    invited to a disciplinary hearing.  Her absence was due to depression.

 8. The First-tier Tribunal Judge rejected the appellant's claim for asylum
    not least because there was no reason why the appellant could not avail
    himself of the assistance  of  the  police  in  Nigeria  should  it  be
    required and bearing in mind he did not claim asylum on his arrival  in
    the UK despite claiming to have been in fear at that point his  account
    was rejected as being untrue.  His fear of FGM on the children was also
    rejected not least because the appellant and his partner  were  clearly
    opposed to it.  Further there was nothing before judge to suggest  that
    the appellant would be  specifically  at  risk  of  kidnap  or  of  any
    interest to the Boko Haram and in  any  event,  he  would  be  able  to
    relocate to another part of the country.

 9. The judge applying Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702  considered  in
    the First-tier Tribunal decision of 15th  April  2015  which  had  been
    upheld by the Upper Tribunal noting paragraphs 31  and  32  of  the  UT
    decision:

         "42.     The decision 15 April 2015, (which was upheld by  the  UT)
             found, at paragraphs 31 and 32, "The factors  which  weigh  in
             favour of the deportation order  remaining  in  force  include
             those which  we  now  identify.   The  appellant  has  a  poor
             immigration history, putting aside  his  criminal  conviction.
             He came here illegally 2001 and made no attempt to  regularise
             his status until 2004 when he made an unsuccessful  claim  for
             asylum.   Following  the  unsuccessful  appeal   against   the
             deportation order  the  appellant  failed  to  attend  a  bail
             renewal hearing on 24th May 2011 which resulted in  forfeiture
             of �2,500 worth of reconnaissance money and the appellant made
             no attempt to make contact with the  Home  Office  after  that
             until he was eventually encountered by the police  in  January
             2014.   He  has  therefore  shown  a  propensity   to   behave
             illegally.  It should also be  noted  that,  just  before  the
             expiry of his appeal rights, the appellant made an application
             to  marry  someone  who  is  not  his  present  partner.   The
             conclusion we draw from this immigration history is  that  the
             appellant has had little or  no  regard  for  the  immigration
             rules of this country and was  even  prepared  to  attempt  to
             enter into marriage as a means of securing his position in the
             event that his deportation appeal failed.  This must  also  be
             seen against the background of  the  initial  failure  of  his
             asylum claim.  Further, we  regard  the  appellant's  criminal
             offending as serious because we see this also, as  an  attempt
             to circumvent the laws of this country by  obtaining  identity
             documents that might have enabled him to work even  though  he
             had no entitlement to do so.  He was justifiably sentenced  to
             fourteen months' imprisonment with the sentencing judge saying
             that he would have recommended  deportation  if  it  had  been
             relevant to do so.  As the sentencing judge stated in relation
             to the offending.  "It seems to me that this case signifies  a
             determined attempt to evade the immigration  requirements  and
             involves  your   being   concerned   with   others   who   are
             professionally involved in people trafficking""."

10. Judge Malik identified that the deportation of foreign criminals was in
    the public interest and that the appellant's conviction  related  to  a
    serious criminal offence and  that  he  had  a  very  poor  immigration
    history.  Having set out Section 117C of the  Nationality,  Immigration
    and Asylum Act the judge noted that unless Exception 1 or 2 applied the
    public  interest  required  his  deportation.   His   serious   offence
    indicated that he was not socially and culturally integrated and  there
    being no significant obstacles to  his  integration  in  Nigeria  found
    where he had lived for many years such that he would be  aware  of  the
    language,  customs  and  culture  the  judge  specifically  found  that
    Exception 1 did not apply.  That was not challenged.

11. The judge found at paragraph 42 that it would be unduly harsh  for  the
    appellant's partner and children to remove to Nigeria  with  him  given
    they were British nationals and had never been to Nigeria.  As  British
    citizens unless the appellant's partner and children voluntarily  chose
    to relocate, they could not be forced to do so.

12. The judge with respect to the partner specifically found  at  paragraph
    44 that she entered into the  relationship  with  him  knowing  he  had
    immigration "issues" and  "neither  she  nor  he  could  have  had  any
    expectation whatsoever that they could continue their  relationship  in
    the UK.  With reference to the private life the appellant had  acquired
    in the UK this was at a time when he had been here illegally, he had  a
    very poor immigration history; had sought to circumvent the Immigration
    Rules; there were periods when he had evaded the authorities and failed
    to report.

13. At paragraph 45 Judge Malik specifically found that the best  interests
    of the children and the  mental  health  issues  of  the  partner  were
    addressed in 15th April 2015 determination which concluded

         "46.     ...  In  relation  to  the  family,  the  nature  of  that
             relationship is as set out in detail at paragraph  14  and  at
             paragraph 35.   The  panel  recognised  that  the  appellant's
             youngest child at 7 months may not have  formed  a  meaningful
             relationship with the appellant but that his daughter was very
             considerably disturbed by his absence during detention.  It is
             also  recognised  that  the  appellant's  partner   found   it
             difficult to maintain her  employment  without  the  appellant
             present to care for the children.  However, it was noted  that
             she was able  to  care  for  herself  during  the  appellant's
             absence in detention.  It cannot be argued therefore that  the
             Tribunal were ignorant of the difficulties which  his  absence
             could bring to the family unit.  It was also  noted  that  the
             partner and the children should not be isolated in the  United
             Kingdom, given that most of the appellant's family  and  other
             family members  are  also  resident  in  the  United  Kingdom.
             Indeed, his partner also has a cousin and that again the wider
             family relationships were considered at  paragraphs  17.   The
             effect upon the partner of the absence of the appellant during
             his detention and the effect upon the eldest  child  was  also
             set out in paragraph 19, recording the evidence of  Ms...  set
             out at paragraphs 19, 20 and 21 and  22.   The  Tribunal  were
             therefore fully appraised of the difficulties which  face  the
             family when the appellant was absent in detention and no doubt
             the difficulties that would be faced where he to be  deported.
             The Tribunal recognised at paragraph 37 that there would be  a
             harsh effect upon the partner and children upon  removal"  and
             "Overall therefore I do not find there to be any error of law,
             let alone a material error.  In those circumstances the appeal
             is dismissed.  The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  shall
             stand namely that the deportation order be not  revoked.   The
             appeal on human rights is also dismissed.""

14. The judge identified that a previous determination was not  binding  on
    the second Tribunal the first decision was the starting point and facts
    since that date could be considered and there had been further evidence
    of reports and addendum reports from an independent  social  worker  of
    4th April 2017, 16th May 2017 and the second addendum  report  of  21st
    August 2017 and the third addendum report of 10th February  2018.   The
    judge made the following findings from paragraphs 48 to 59

         "48.     Notwithstanding Devaseelan, since the decision of 15 April
             2015, there has been further evidence of reports and  addendum
             reports from an independent social worker of 4 April 2017,  16
             May 2017, the second addendum report of  21  August  2017  and
             third addendum report of 10 February 2018.  Given the dates of
             these reports they were not available  to  the  FtT  in  April
             2015.  The third  addendum  report  states  at  paragraph  2.5
             "Charles advised that his  family  is  here  in  Britain,  his
             mother is here, his siblings are here, and his children  spend
             time with their relatives.  They all try to  get  together  in
             school holidays and  at  family  parties.   When  all  of  the
             cousins are together, they like to go to  the  park,  they  go
             shopping and they all like to play on the trampoline and  play
             station together.  Charles argued that it would  be  difficult
             for ..... to continue this closeness with his family should he
             not be here, they all lived in  London  and.....  life  is  in
             Wigan with her work, the children's schools and  their  social
             activities.  Furthermore, the children are settled here, their
             friends are here, their schools are here.  For Charles  it  is
             so hard for them  as  a  family,  shouldn't  their  family  be
             entitled to a family life where he can support and financially
             provide for his family.  Charles further argued that  for  him
             his children and partner have been impacted by  this  for  too
             long".  [sic].

         49.      The report also states that  when  the  appellant  was  in
             detention his partner had to take  time  off  work  as  annual
             leave and phone in sick so she could care for the children  as
             there was no-one else.  The appellant's partner is recorded as
             stating at paragraph 3.3 that her "....anxiety is all over the
             place" and even though the appellant is with  them,  there  is
             always the worry he will be taken at  any  time.   The  social
             worker had also spoken to the head teacher for the appellant's
             elder child's school, who said the child was generally fine in
             school and had settled down.  The only concern  was  that  the
             child was late on Thursdays  and  Fridays  which  impacted  on
             their learning, emotional well-being and socially.

         50.      The independent social worker concluded "The analysis from
             the original report and the two addendum reports still  remain
             relevant and should be read in  conjunction  with  this  third
             Addendum report.  It is my belief  as  an  Independent  Social
             Worker with a background in Children and Families Social  Work
             that Charles has a strong relationship and emotional bond with
             his children as evidenced  within  the  original  report,  the
             first and second  addendum  report  and  this  third  Addendum
             report.  The signs of distress that ..... was showing when her
             father was detained stopped both at home and at a school  when
             Charles was at home with them ....... no longer appears to  be
             seeking  out  physical  contact  in   her   father's   absence
             .......has seen the specialist in relation to  her  behaviours
             when her  father  is  away  and  they  are  looking  in  ADHD,
             attachment and emotional well being.  These assessment are  on
             going.  As stated in the original  report,  first  and  second
             Addendum report  this  third  Addendum  report,  .....  mental
             health is still suffering as a result  of  what  is  happening
             with Charles and his current immigration status ..... is still
             receiving support through the  Mental-Health  Assessment  Team
             and is  still  awaiting  a  referral  for  coping  mechanisms.
             Although Charles is back home there is  a  sense  of  'limbo'.
             .....is still anxious about what will happen  to  Charles  and
             the  impact  on  him,  her  and  the  children  should  he  be
             deported.................................   This   exacerbates
             her anxiety and has led to her having panic  attacks,  on  one
             occasion her panic attacks have prevented her  from  attending
             with the Mental Health team, this is a  time  when  she  would
             most benefit from attending these appointments.  Added to this
             is the impact on ....attendance at work which has now resulted
             in a meeting at work in relation to her attendance.  This will
             also worsen  .....  anxieties  especially  should  Charles  be
             detained again as ..... will be left again with no one to care
             for the children which will again  impact  on  her  attendance
             record at work and her anxiety levels" and "Should Charles  be
             deported to Nigeria it is  the  professional  opinion  of  the
             author of this  report  that  this  will  have  a  significant
             detrimental   emotional   and   physical   impact    on    his
             children.......and.......and  therefore  it  is  in  the  best
             interests of his children  that  Charles  S  remains  in  this
             country with his children were they can enjoy their  right  to
             private family life with their father" [sic]

         51.      It is unclear to me as to whether the  patient  assessment
             for the appellant's partner of 16  July  2014  was  considered
             previously by the Tribunal, but I note it speaks of her having
             thoughts of self harm/thinking of taking an  overdoes  due  to
             stresses in her personal life.  At that time she was  pregnant
             with her second child and the appellant was in  a  deportation
             centre.  She spoke of having a good circle of friends, not all
             of whom were aware of her  personal  circumstances.   She  had
             been dealing with her  problems  by  herself  and  had  become
             distressed.  She had been supported by one of her  friends  in
             Devon.  She denied any plans or intent at  self  harm  at  the
             time.  It was the  impression  of  the  author  that  she  was
             suffering from generalised anxiety disorder secondary  to  her
             personal circumstances.  I have also considered the Care  Plan
             for the appellant's  partner,  the  risk  screening  document,
             again from 2014, which again speaks of her  condition  related
             to the appellant being in  detention  at  the  time,  suicidal
             ideation and severe depressive symptoms and that she would  be
             referred  to  children's  services  on  an  urgent  basis  for
             assessment and intensive support with her child and throughout
             her pregnancy.  It is recorded she  denied  any  intention  of
             ending her life and was happy with the support offered by  the
             mental-health assessment team.

         52.      I also note that he letter of 26 August 2016 from the home
             treatment  team  states  the  appellant's  partner  had   been
             discharged  due  to  the  care  being  completed,   with   the
             opportunity, should further input be required, to  access  the
             assessment team.  I also note that a letter of 7 November 2016
             records "My impression is that this  lady  has  suffered  from
             generalised anxiety disorder due to her  personal  issues  and
             problems, however there have been no problems with regards  to
             herself and no evidence of serious mental health issues  .....
             symptoms would recover while all the immigration problems  are
             settled and she continues to live  with  her  partner  in  the
             home.  This has been discussed with .....  and  she  does  not
             require any support from the  home  treatment  team.   She  is
             happy to be discharged".  [sic]

         53.      The letter of 1 April 2017 states the appellant's  partner
             ".....describes feeling very hopeless regarding the  situation
             and on Thursday, felt there was no way out  of  the  situation
             and took a small overdoses of 4 x Sertraline  100  mgs  whilst
             her Mum was caring for the children.  States, in the  heat  of
             the moment, perceived taking 4 tablets would end her life  and
             that she would not  have  to  "deal"  with  the  loss  of  her
             partner.  After talking the overdose, ....  describes  feeling
             immediately  remorseful  and  nauseous  and  reported  feeling
             "foolish" that she could have potentially put her life at risk
             when she needs to be there for her  children......advises  she
             arranged an appointment with GP the following day who referred
             to MHAT..........Denies any current suicidal ideation or  self
             harm thoughts and identified  her  children  as  a  protective
             factor however also recognises there are  unpredictable  risks
             to  self  due  to.....difficult  personal  circumstances   and
             situation beyond her control.  Has previously been referred to
             home treatment due to associated risk however  does  not  feel
             this level of support necessary at present and would  like  to
             address  long  term  coping  mechanisms"  and  ".....does  not
             present  with  significant  risks  to  self  at  the  time  of
             assessment and she denies  any  suicidal  ideation,  plans  or
             intent  and  identifies  her  children  as  strong  protective
             factor.  .....recognises to have poor copying  mechanisms  and
             does express feelings of being hopeless with suicidal ideation
             at times of increased psychological  stressors  regarding  her
             partner's immigration status ..... is aware this situation  is
             out of her control and is expressing a keenness to engage with
             psychological therapies to aid her to develop positive  coping
             mechanisms.  There are  no  identified  risk  to  others.   No
             current concerns of neglect or vulnerability".

         54.      The letter of 20 April 2017 notes the appellant's  partner
             describing "...worsening symptoms of depression with increased
             anxiety and feeling of panic.  She  is  not  sleeping  due  to
             ruminative  and  racing  thoughts  and  experienced  increased
             physical symptoms of anxiety  in  the  form  of  palpitations,
             nausea,  breathlessness  and  nausea.   Describe  thoughts  of
             feeling she cannot "cope" however asserts she has no  suicidal
             ideation or self harm thoughts and continues to  identify  her
             children are strong protective factor.  Responds  to  "no"  to
             questions on Colombian suicide severity rating scale".

         55.      A letter of 9 May 2017 speaks of the  appellant's  partner
             struggling in balancing her working life and  being  a  single
             mother of two young children; she had to pay a childminder  to
             look after the children in the evening where  she  would  have
             previously substituted her income with bank shifts  which  she
             was no longer  able  to  do.   The  letter  states  "Discussed
             arranging counselling but reports this has not been beneficial
             in the past.  Discussed psychological therapy and  information
             provided".

         56.       The  GP  letter  of  20  September  2017   confirms   the
             appellant's partner has a history of bipolar disorder and  has
             been on medication for a considerable  period.   She  attended
             surgery on 7 September with anxiety  and  depression  and  was
             taking   major   tranquillizers,    mood    stabilizers    and
             antidepressants and was given further tranquillizers. She  was
             reviewed on 15 September 2017 and remained in a very  elevated
             anxiety  state  and  low  mood  secondary  to   her   personal
             situation.  The doctor states "You asked me  to  take  a  view
             about how she would cope if Mr S was removed from the  country
             and my response would be that she would  not  cope  but  would
             deteriorate in mental health with a higher risk  of  requiring
             institutional care and the  children  therefore  being  looked
             after by social services".

         57.      A letter of 26  September  2017  records  the  appellant's
             partner  was  referred  to  the  primary  care   psychological
             service.  A letter of 6 December 2017 states ".....  presented
             with symptoms of depression and  anxiety  at  the  assessment.
             The  trigger  to  these  symptoms  appear  to  be  an  ongoing
             situation involving her partner in  which  he  faces  possible
             deportation from the UK.  Therefore a  lot  of  how  .....  is
             feeling is  a  normal  reaction  given  the  severity  of  the
             situation.  .....attended  her  assessment  and  we  discussed
             behavioural activation as an intervention  to  help  with  her
             symptoms of low mood.  She was keen to  engage,  but  did  not
             attend her next follow-up due to  illness.   This  appointment
             was rearranged and she then attended  one  follow  up  a  week
             later.  She was visibly upset at this appointment and had  not
             manged to do any of the small goals she has set herself.   She
             failed to attend her next follow up appointment  and  did  not
             give any prior warning of non-attendance.  A reminder text was
             sent to ask her to get in touch but when she failed to  do  so
             within 24 hours, she was discharged from the  service  as  per
             policy.  Risk - ..... reports frequent thoughts of wanting  to
             end her life, but no current plan or intent to do so.  She has
             the information for crisis services should she require it  and
             she states that her children are a protective factor for  her.
             Her case will now be closed to our service but  she  can  self
             refer at any time in the future should it be required."

         58.      A letter of 17 January  2018  speaks  of  the  appellant's
             partner again being referred  to  primary  care  psychological
             service, to be seen on 'Step 2 Wellbeing Course'.

         59.       I  have  also  considered  the  correspondence  from  the
             appellant's  elder  child's  school  regarding  progress   and
             attendance  together  with  a  letter  from  the   appellant's
             partner's employer regarding a formal  attendance  review.   I
             also note there is a letter from the  hospital  regarding  the
             appellant's child of 17 January 2018  which  states  "at  this
             point in time there is no evidence that ......  is  presenting
             with ADHD difficulties  within  the  come  or  school  setting
             .......will be followed up as planned.""

         ...

         61.      The issue before me now is whether exception 2 applies and
             whether the effect of the  appellant's  deportation  would  be
             unduly harsh and disproportionate in the context of Article  8
             on the appellant, his partner and their children.  Whilst  the
             appellant's partner's GP's letter of 20 September 2017  speaks
             of her condition deteriorating with a high risk  of  requiring
             institutional care, should he be deported, the  letter  of  26
             September 2017 does not present such a bleak outlook  and  the
             GP letter falls short of psychiatric report.   Whilst  it  was
             submitted the appellant's children may go  into  care  if  his
             partner was unable to cope, and accepting during his  absence,
             whilst  in  detention,   her   condition   appears   to   have
             deteriorated,  nonetheless  she  has  accessed   mental-health
             services, medication and support from her GP/counselling;  the
             children have not been taken into care during the  periods  of
             the appellant's absence and it appears his  partner  continued
             to work as  a  auxiliary  nurse,  study  and  care  for  their
             children, albeit her mental health also suffered  due  to  the
             uncertainty around the appellant's immigration status and  her
             ability to cope without him.   Yet  there  is  no  reasons  to
             assume she would be unable to continue to access the  services
             she requires going forward and also seek help  in  caring  for
             the children if need be.

         62.      I accept the appellant's removal will  impact  greatly  on
             his  partner  and  children,  given  the   findings   in   the
             independent social worker's reports, which indicate  they  all
             have a close bond and loving  relationship  -  and  given  the
             appellant is the main care giver for  the  children  when  his
             partner is at work/university.  I also accept  during  periods
             of the appellant's detention, his children  and  partner  were
             emotionally affected, as set out in  the  various  documentary
             evidence before me.  His removal now would  therefore  have  a
             similar  impact  on  them  and  I  do  not  underestimate  the
             emotional and practical upheaval the appellant's partner  will
             encounter in balancing her work and studies and having to care
             for  her  two  children,  together  with  managing   her   own
             wellbeing.  Yet as the children are both in  education,  there
             is no reason to assume she could not access  childcare,  after
             school provision, assistance from social services, friends and
             family,  the  church  or  reduce/adjust  her  work  and  study
             commitments accordingly.

         63.      I accept the appellant's absence from the daily  lives  of
             his partner and children, if deported, will  again  impact  on
             them all and cause distress, to a greater extent; but there is
             no reason to assume, in due course, his partner  and  children
             could not visit him in Nigeria.  There is also no  reasons  as
             to why support from the school, social services and/or the NHS
             could  not  be  accessed  for  the   children   if   required.
             Consequently whilst I accept the effect  of  the  respondent's
             decision is harsh on all the parties, including the appellant,
             I do not find it amounts to 'unduly harsh', nor compelling  or
             exceptional circumstances, when balancing the pursuit  of  the
             legitimate aim, the  protection  of  rights  and  freedoms  of
             others in the decision to deport and the  public  interest  in
             deportation.  In having regard to the best  interests  of  the
             children, I bear in mind their best interests are  "a  primary
             consideration", not a "the paramount consideration" and whilst
             I accept the appellant's removal  will  negatively  impact  on
             them, it is  an  unfortunate  by-product  of  the  appellant's
             offending that he and his children will be separated."

Application for Permission to Appeal

15. It was submitted in the grounds that the  conclusions  reached  by  the
    judge was unsustainable in the light of the findings made at paragraphs
    62 and 63 and undue hardship was a question of  fact  which  the  judge
    failed to attach significant weight to the report  of  the  independent
    social worker.

16. It was arguable that the judge misdirected herself in law in  that  she
    conflated the concept  of  undue  hardship  with  the  public  interest
    element of Section 117C.  The judge found at paragraph 63

         'Consequently whilst  I  accept  the  effect  of  the  respondent's
         decision is harsh on all parties including the appellant, I do  not
         find it amounts to  "unduly",  or  exceptional  circumstances  when
         balancing the pursuit of the  legitimate  aim,  the  protection  of
         rights and freedom of others in the  decision  to  deport  and  the
         public interest in deportation'.

    It was averred that the judge was wrong in  that  the  public  interest
    element was not a factor to be taken into account in the assessment  of
    the question of whether it would be unduly harsh.

17. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce,  solely
    on the ground that it was arguable that the approach to  unduly  harsh,
    was contrary to that endorsed by the  Supreme  Court  in  KO  (Nigeria)
    [2018] UKSC 53.

    The hearing

18. At the hearing before me Mr Clarke conceded that there  was  indeed  an
    error of law in the decision but noted that it was not the findings  of
    the judge which  had  been  challenged  but  the  assessment  of  those
    findings.

19. Mr Clarke submitted that  in  fact  the  concept  of  unduly  harsh  as
    indicated in KO at paragraph 14 was  a  threshold  test  and  this  was
    spelled out at paragraphs 23 and  27  of  KO.   The  judge  did  attach
    significant weight to the report of the independent social  worker  and
    indeed set much of it out.   The  effect  of  the  deportation  on  the
    children was not underestimated.  That the partner had accessed  mental
    health facilities and that the judge found at paragraph 61,  she  would
    be able to continue to access those  service  and  also  seek  help  in
    caring for the children was not  challenged.   The  partner  had  coped
    before when the appellant was detained.  The  test  was  not  met.   Mr
    Clarke took me through the decision pointing out  that  the  judge  had
    taken into account the  new  evidence  which  was  relevant  and  which
    identified the closeness of the children to their  extended  family  in
    the UK [48], the children attended and continued to attend school  [49]
    and that the partner received assistance with her mental  health  [50].
    The partner in August 2016 required no treatment [52].

20. Mr Emezie confirmed that there was no further evidence and the  overall
    picture was given in the report.  The appellant's partner was  bipolar,
    and the family were likely to be destitute if they went to Nigeria.

21. In the light of the evidence and  findings  of  the  judge,  Mr  Emezie
    submitted that the judge should have found it to be  unduly  harsh  for
    the appellant to be deported.  The Secretary of State accepted that  it
    would be unduly harsh for the children and family  to  go  to  Nigeria.
    The  conviction  was  a  long  time  ago  and  his  removal   was   not
    proportionate.

    Analysis

22. Mr Clarke submitted that the findings at 48 to 56 were  not  challenged
    and I agree.

23. The judge, however, made a material error of law by  directly  applying
    MM (Uganda) [2016] Civ 617 (the reference given  is  to  450  but  that
    cannot be located and I presume she meant 617) and, she erred in law by
    directing herself that the more pressing the public interest in removal
    the harder it would be to show that the effect on his child or  partner
    would be unduly harsh. The focus at this stage should however be on the
    child alone; KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53 confirmed at paragraph 32

         'Once one accepts, as the Department did at that stage (rightly  in
         my view), that the issue of "reasonableness" under section  117B(6)
         is focussed on the position of the child, it would be odd to find a
         different approach in section  117C(5)  at  least  without  a  much
         clearer indication of what is intended than one  finds  in  section
         117C(2)'.

24. I thus set aside the conclusion of the First-tier Tribunal  and  remake
    the decision.  Much of the evidence is set out in the determination and
    I  do  not  set  aside  the  findings  which  are  untainted   by   the
    misdirection. I preserve the general findings prior  to  paragraphs  62
    and 63.

25. Section 117C of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  sets
    out 'Article 8: additional considerations in  cases  involving  foreign
    criminals

         '(1)     The deportation of foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
         interest.

         (2)      The more  serious  the  offence  committed  by  a  foreign
         criminal, the greater is the public interest in deportation of  the
         criminal.

         (3)      In the case of a foreign criminal ("C") who has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         (4)      Exception 1 applies where-

             (a) C has been lawfully resident in  the  United  Kingdom  for
             most of C's life,

             (b) C is socially and  culturally  integrated  in  the  United
             Kingdom, and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   C's
             integration into the country to which  C  is  proposed  to  be
             deported.

         (5)      Exception 2 applies where C has a genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh.

         (6)      In the case of a foreign criminal who has  been  sentenced
         to a period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
         interest requires deportation  unless  there  are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2.

         (7)      The considerations in subsections (1) to  (6)  are  to  be
         taken into account where a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
         decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that  the
         reason for the decision was the offence or offences for  which  the
         criminal has been convicted.'

26. Paragraphs 398 and 399 of the Immigration Rules sets out the provisions
    with regard deportation and  the  exceptions  under  paragraph  398  as
    follows:

         '398. Where  a  person  claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under article 8 of the
         [ECHR], and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the United  Kingdom  is
             conducive to the  public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
             because they have been convicted of an offence for which  they
             have been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least  4
             years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the United  Kingdom  is
             conducive to the public good and the public  interest  because
             they have been convicted of an offence  for  which  they  have
             been sentenced to a period of  imprisonment  of  less  than  4
             years but at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the United  Kingdom  is
             conducive to the  public  good  and  in  the  public  interest
             because,  in  the  view  of  the  Secretary  of  State,  their
             offending has caused serious harm or  they  are  a  persistent
             offender who shows a particular disregard for the law,

         the Secretary of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will  consider
         whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and,  if  it  does  not,  the
         public interest will only be  outweighed  by  other  factors  where
         there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and  above  those
         described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                      (a)   it would be unduly harsh for the child to  live
                      in the country to which the person is to be deported;
                      and

                      (b)   it would be  unduly  harsh  for  the  child  to
                      remain in the UK without the  person  who  is  to  be
                      deported; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i)  the relationship was formed at a time when the person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii)      it would be unduly harsh for  that  partner  to
                  remain  in  the  UK  without  the  person  who  is  to  be
                  deported.'

27. If an appellant convicted of an offence which has  attracted  a  prison
    sentence of over 12 months but  under  4  years,  cannot  not  meet  an
    exception under the rules, he would  have  to  show  'very  compelling'
    circumstances to avert deportation. I accept that the Immigration Rules
    and the statutory test under Section 117C should be read consistently.

28. There is no doubt that the appellant is a foreign criminal because  for
    the purposes of Section 117D(2) because he has been  convicted  in  the
    United Kingdom of an offence and has been  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months.

29. The single issue in this appeal was the one of  split  of  the  family.
    The partner was always aware of the appellant's immigration status  and
    indeed he had never had immigration status.

30. In accordance with Section 117B(4)(b) little weight should be given  to
    a relationship formed with a qualifying partner that is established  by
    a person at a time when the person is in the United Kingdom unlawfully.
     There is no doubt that the appellant was and has always been in the UK
    unlawfully.  The appellant did not have lawful status when he formed  a
    relationship  and  having  met  the  appellant  in   2007   and   their
    relationship developing in May 2011, the partner must have known of the
    status  of  the  appellant  indeed  he  was  only  recently  convicted.
    Exception 399(b) cannot apply.   At  the  very  least  his  immigration
    status was precarious when the relationship was formed.

31. I have nonetheless set out the conclusions in relation to the  position
    of the partner.  These have a bearing on the position of the children.

32. It is accepted that deportation may have a detrimental effect on family
    life but nonetheless may remain proportionate even  though  the  family
    may well be broken up because of the appellant's bad behaviour but that
    is the consequence of deportation.

33. That approach has been recently reiterated in PJ (Jamaica) [2019]  EWCA
    Civ 1213 which identified that the issue was whether there was evidence
    on which it was properly open to the judge to find that deportation  of
    the appellant would result for the partner and/or  the  children  in  a
    degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily be involved for
    any partner or child of a  foreign  criminal  facing  deportation.   As
    explained at paragraph 39 by Holroyde LJ

         'I recognise of course the human realities of the situation, and  I
         do not doubt that SAT and the  three  children  will  suffer  great
         distress if PG is deported. Nor do I doubt that their lives will in
         a number of ways be made more difficult than they are  at  present.
         But those, sadly, are the likely consequences of the deportation of
         any foreign criminal who has a genuine and subsisting  relationship
         with a partner and/or children in this country. I accept Mr Lewis's
         submission that if PG is deported, the effect on SAT  and/or  their
         three children will not go beyond the degree of harshness which  is
         necessarily involved for the partner or child of a foreign criminal
         who is deported'.

34. The Court of Appeal also accepted  the  submission  on  behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State that the passage of time since the relevant offences
    'could not be a material consideration: the effect of KO  (Nigeria)  is
    that the seriousness of the offending is not a  relevant  consideration
    at this stage, and it must follow  that  the  fact  that  the  relevant
    offending  was  some  years  ago  cannot  assist  the   person   facing
    deportation'.

35. The real question is whether the deportation will have an unduly  harsh
    effect on the children.  It is accepted by the Secretary of State  that
    the children would not be expected to relocate to Nigeria.

36. The best interests of the children are a primary consideration and must
    be that they remain in the United Kingdom and with both parents.  There
    has been a detailed analysis of the independent social worker's  report
    and I have carefully read all three reports, the last  being  given  on
    10th February 2018.  As Mr Clarke pointed out the extended family is in
    Britain and the grandmother and aunts and  uncles  are  here,  and  the
    children spend time with them.  The social  worker  recorded  that  the
    cousins like to go to the park together.  They go shopping and they all
    play on the trampoline and PlayStation together.  The  children  remain
    at school and are occupied with their social activities.  It was  noted
    in the Secretary of State's refusal letter that in  fact  the  children
    started to be late for school after the  appellant  was  released  from
    detention.  It was noted that the children  are  settled,  had  friends
    here and school here.  Although  assessments  were  recorded  as  being
    undertaken on the older child no such final reports  were  filed.   The
    children will be upset by the removal of  their  father  but  as  cited
    above that is the nature, sadly, of deportation.  Otherwise their lives
    will continue as before.

37. I accept that the children's mother suffers from a generalised  anxiety
    order which was secondary to her  personal  circumstances  which  would
    affect the children but nonetheless the report of  November  2016  from
    the home treatment team referred to the appellant's partner having been
    discharged and that although  the  partner  suffered  from  generalised
    anxiety disorder due to her personal issues and problems

         "However, there had been no problems with regards to herself and no
         evidence of serious mental health issues ... symptoms would recover
         while all the immigration problems are settled and she continues to
         live with her partner in the home.  This has  been  discussed  with
         ... and she does not require any support from  the  home  treatment
         team.  She is happy to be discharged".

    The second letter of 1st April  2017  confirmed  that  the  appellant's
    partner denied any current suicidal ideation or self-harm thoughts  and
    identified her children as a protective factor.

38. A further letter of 20th April noted she had  worsening  symptoms  with
    depression.

39. The appellant's partner has struggled with balancing her  working  life
    and being a single mother of two young children but she  does,  on  the
    evidence (as I state no updated  evidence  was  put  before  me),  have
    access to a child minder to look after the children  and  a  challenged
    income does not constitute unduly harsh circumstances.

40. There is no doubt that the letters of  26th  September  2017  confirmed
    that the appellant's partner presented with symptoms of depression  and
    anxiety and again on 17th January 2018 she was referred to the  Primary
    Care Psychological Service to be seen on the Step 2 Wellbeing Course.

41. Against the background of the medical evidence which has been  set  out
    in full above the partner has continued to work part-time throughout as
    an auxiliary nurse at a hospital and at the same time has embarked on a
    four year part-time degree course  at  university  which  she  attended
    twice a week.  She passed the modules of her foundation degree and  was
    due to start again in September 2018.  There has been  no  evidence  to
    the effect that the partner's mental health has worsened  or  that  she
    has ceased working or she has ceased her part-time  degree  course.   I
    realise that the 2015 First-tier Tribunal decision was taken  prior  to
    the promulgation of KO but  even  if  the  effect  of  the  appellant's
    offending should not impact on the assessment of whether the  departure
    of the appellant would be unduly harsh on the partner I do not  on  the
    evidence find that it would be so.  The evidence was that there was  an
    extended family to help at the very least with the emotional support of
    the partner.  She works part-time and the children are either at school
    or nursery school.  She has the support  of  the  NHS  and  can  access
    psychological treatment.  Not least the partner  did  cope  during  the
    appellant's detention in 2017 albeit there may have  been  disciplinary
    proceedings.

42. It would appear that the  partner's  mental  health  difficulties  thus
    persist whether the appellant is present or not and as I state  I  have
    no further evidence before me of the current psychological state of the
    appellant's partner.

43. What is clear is that, to her credit, she has managed  to  continue  to
    look after the children, ensure that they get to school  and  that  she
    has retained her job despite there being a letter from the  appellant's
    partner's employer regarding a formal attendance review.

44. There was a letter from the hospital regarding the appellant's child of
    17th January 2018 which confirmed that there was no evidence  that  the
    child was presenting with ADHD  difficulties  in  the  home  or  school
    setting.  There were  no  special  educational  needs,  assessments  or
    reports before me.

45. It is not in doubt that the partner and the children given the findings
    in the independent social worker's reports indicate that  they  have  a
    close family  relationship  and  that  the  appellant  attends  to  the
    children when his partner is at work or at university or that there was
    an emotional impact when the appellant was detained.  The fact that the
    appellant's partner might have to seek assistance from Social Services,
    family or friends or reduce or adjust her work and study commitments is
    not something which could necessarily be  described  as  unduly  harsh.
    The children have never been taken into  care  during  the  appellant's
    absence and there are services that she may wish to access  should  she
    wish to do so both for herself and for the children that is from Social
    Services or the NHS and indeed the appellant's partner  has  made  good
    use of the services of her GP and the mental health services.  It is an
    overall and evaluative assessment that needs to be  undertaken  and  it
    may  be  that  the  deportation  of  the  appellant  is  uncomfortable,
    inconvenient or undesirable or difficult but it does  not  in  my  view
    reach the elevated threshold of harsh, let  alone  unduly  harsh  which
    raises an already elevated standard still higher.

46. Having found that the  appellant  does  not  fulfil  the  exception  in
    Section 117C, or Paragraph 399, I have looked at the  circumstances  in
    relation to the Exceptions 1 and 2 of paragraph 399 of the  Immigration
    Rules in conjunction with other factors relevant to the application  of
    Article 8.  Despite the contents of  the  independent  social  worker's
    report and the letters from St Mary  and  St  John's  Catholic  Primary
    School dated 2nd February 2018, the letter from the partner's  employer
    dated 5th February 2018 and  the  medical  evidence  nothing  in  those
    documents demonstrates that there  are  very  compelling  circumstances
    surrounding his family life in the UK to outweigh the  public  interest
    in his deportation.

47. The appellant does have a poor immigration history.  He entered the  UK
    illegally in 2001, did not come to the  attention  of  the  authorities
    where he was arrested in 2004, claimed asylum  but  promptly  absconded
    and was only encountered again when he was arrested  in  December  2009
    whereupon he was convicted and imprisoned.  This  appellant  has  known
    that there has been a signed deportation  order  since  2010.   He  was
    released on 3rd July 2010, was married on 14th March 2011 and following
    the dismissal of his deportation appeal in April 2011  again  absconded
    and then his partner disclosed the relationship had dissolved.  He  was
    only encountered again by the police in January 2014.  Since that  time
    the appellant has been engaged in challenging  his  deportation  order.
    It cannot be said that the Secretary of State has delayed  in  attempts
    to deport him.  The appellant spent his formative life  in  Nigeria  at
    the age of 39 would be able to find work in Nigeria and  there  was  no
    evidence of significant medical conditions but  reported  glaucoma  and
    irritable bowel syndrome but no medical evidence to establish  that  he
    had been so diagnosed.  Even if he has  it  is  clear  that  there  are
    medical facilities in Nigeria and a number of health insurance  schemes
    operating in the country.  It is acknowledged that the Nigerian  health
    care system may not meet the standards of the NHS  or  other  developed
    countries.  I  do  not  accept  he  could  not  acquire  basic  medical
    treatment.

48. In essence there are no very compelling circumstances set out such that
    the appellant's appeal should be anything other than dismissed.

Order

The appeal of CS is dismissed on all grounds.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 6th August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 6th August 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
