
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07544/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


Heard at Manchester    Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On 16th November 2018  On 17 December 2018


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY


                                   Between

                                  MRS. NMM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr Brown, Counsel, instructed by Citizens Advice
                    Bureau (Bolton)
For the respondent:    Mr C. Bates, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

    1. The appellant has been given permission to appeal the decision of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt who, in a decision promulgated on 1
       August 2018, dismissed her appeal against the respondent's decision
       to refuse to grant protection.

    2. Her claim was that she was born in July 1957 and lived all her life
       in a village in the Makhmur District in Iraq. She is Kurdish and
       follows the Sunni branch of Islam. The claim was that she has limited
       education and married when she was young and her experiences were
       restricted to events in the village where she lived.

    3. She said that in 2015 her husband and their son were taken by Daesh
       and she subsequently learnt they were killed. Fearfull of her own
       situation she then decided to leave Iraq. She left, along with her
       brother-in-law and his family but they were separated in Turkey and
       have had no contact.

    4. The respondent was not satisfied she was Iraqi. If she was, she could
       reasonably live in the IKR and obtained the necessary documentation.

The First tier Tribunal

    5. First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt did not find the appellant to be
       credible. The judge did not accept that she was uneducated and
       illiterate as she claimed. The judge referred to her inability to
       give details about the area where she claimed she was from. The judge
       also found her account about her husband and son vague.

    6. At paragraph 30 the judge states:

           "... as the appellant has not established, to the lower standard
           of proof, that she is from Iraq as claimed her claim for
           international protection arising from fear of persecution in
           that country must fail."

    7. The judge then concluded that the appellant was most likely from the
       IKR and could safely return there.

The Upper Tribunal

    8. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that the judge arguably
       made inconsistent findings in stating that she is not from Iraq but
       from the IKR. It was also arguable that the judge gave insufficient
       reasons for concluding she could obtain documentation.

    9. Mr Brown, who appeared below, advised me that the presenting
       officer's stance in cross-examination was that the appellant was not
       from Iraq at all. Mr Bates pointed out that the respondent did not
       accept she was Iraqi but did not offer an alternative, stating it was
       for the appellant to establish her claim. He did make the point that
       Kurdish Sorani is spoken not only in Iraq but also Iran and other
       countries.

   10. Mr Bates accepted the judge's decision as to the appellant's
       nationality was confusing. For instance, paragraph 1 contains a
       statement that the appellant is a citizen of Iraq. Then, at paragraph
       30 the judge states it has not been established that she is from
       Iraq. Had the judge stopped there he felt the decision was probably
       sustainable. However, the judge then went on to state that as she
       spoke Kurdish Sorani this suggested she was from the north of Iraq.
       Specifically, the judge found she was from the Kurdish Zone of Iraq,
       Arbul (sic Erbil).

   11. Mr Bates has very fairly acknowledged that the judge's decision reads
       as perverse and irrational and in his view is not sustainable. The
       judge had accepted she was not from the area she claimed to be from
       and found he was not Iraqi. However, the judge appears to have
       believed the IKR was a separate nation and then speculates she is
       from there. This is purely on the basis that she speaks Kurdish
       Sorani which, as stated is used in both Iraq and Iran as well as
       other 3rd countries.

   12. I agree that the judge's findings as to the appellant nationality are
       unsustainable. If the appellant is from Iraq then her precise place
       of origin will impact upon the documentation and the means of return.
       Consequently, this cannot be determined until the former is resolved.

Decision

The decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt materially errs in law
and is set aside. The matter is remitted for a de novo hearing in the First-
tier Tribunal.


Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



Directions.

    1. Relist for a de novo hearing in the First-tier Tribunal at Manchester
       excluding First-tier Tribunal Judge Garratt.


    2. A Kurdish Sorani interpreter is required.


    3. The appellant's representative, Mr Brown has indicated the
       appellant's representatives may seek a report from a nationality
       expert ( as opposed to a linguistic expert).


    4. Up-to-date bundle should be prepared for the hearing and exchanged no
       later than 2 weeks before the hearing.


    5. The hearing is expected to last around 2 hours.



Francis J Farrelly

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
Date: 17 December 2018
