
                                [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07016/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined without a hearing pursuant to rule|Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)|                              |
|Rules 2008                                   |On 24 September 2020          |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between


                                     SH
                         (anonymity direction MADE)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Grounds of Appeal by Ms R Kotak, Counsel, instructed
                    by JS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    written submissions provided by Mr C Howells, Senior
                    Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



      1. This is an 'error of law' decision  determined  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008, paragraph 4 of  the  Practice  Direction  made  by  the
         Senior  President   of   Tribunals:   Pilot   Practice   Direction:
         Contingency arrangements in the First-tier Tribunal and  the  Upper
         Tribunal  on  19  March  2020,  and  paragraphs  4  -  17  of   the
         Presidential Guidance Note no 1 2020: Arrangements During the Covid-
         19 Pandemic, 23 March 2020.


      2. The appellant appeals against the decision of Designated  Judge  of
         the First-tier Tribunal Manuell (the  judge)  who,  in  a  decision
         promulgated on 24 October 2019, dismissed his appeal in respect  of
         the  respondent's  decision  dated  9  July  2019  to  refuse   the
         appellant's protection claim. The Grounds of  Appeal  contend  that
         the judge acted in a procedurally unfair manner by failing to alert
         the appellant and his representative that it was not accepted  that
         the appellant was too unwell to give evidence (as  reflected  in  a
         psychiatric report) and to hold this  against  the  appellant  when
         assessing  his  credibility,  when  he  stopped   the   appellant's
         representative  from  making  submissions  in   response   to   the
         Presenting Officer's submissions as a preliminary  issue  that  the
         psychiatric evidence was insufficient to show  that  this  was  the
         case.

      3. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal  was  granted  by  Upper
         Tribunal Judge Lindsley in a decision dated 22 February 2020. Judge
         Lindsley directed that both the legal representative (Ms Kotak) and
         the Presenting Officer (Me Collins) should prepare sworn statements
         and to provide their contemporaneous records  of  the  hearing.  An
         'error of law' hearing listed for 17 April 2020 was vacated due  to
         the Covid-19 pandemic.

      4. On 23 April 2020 Mr Justice Lane, President of the  Upper  Tribunal
         (IAC), issued directions to the parties. The  directions  expressed
         the President's provisional view that, in light of the pandemic, it
         was appropriate to determine the questions (i) whether the  judge's
         decision involved the making of an error of law and,  if  so,  (ii)
         whether the decision should be set aside, without a hearing.

      5. On 14 May 2020 the Upper Tribunal received a joint application from
         the parties explaining that they had been  unable  to  comply  with
         Judge Lindsley's directions  and  requesting  that  the  appeal  be
         stayed until such time that Judge Lindsley's  directions  could  be
         complied with.

      6. On 22 June 2020 Upper Tribunal  Judge  Hanson  directed  that  both
         parties were to file their statements no later than 4pm on 10  July
         2020. This was also the deadline for  the  appellant  to  file  any
         further submissions in respect of the two questions in paragraph  4
         above. On 10 July 2020 the respondent filed and served a  statement
         from the Presenting Officer and his contemporaneous record  of  the
         hearing. The appellant sought an  extension  of  time  due  to  the
         consequences of the pandemic and counsel's need to self-isolate and
         her inability to access her written contemporaneous record  of  the
         hearing. On 12 August 2020 Ms Kotak's  statement  dated  11  August
         2020 and contemporaneous record of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  were
         filed and served.

      7. On 20 August 2020 Mr Howells, Senior Presenting Officer,  indicated
         that, in light of the signed statement dated 11 August 2020 and the
         first  page  of   her   contemporaneous   handwritten   record   of
         proceedings, the respondent was prepared to accept that  there  was
         procedural  unfairness  at  the  hearing  before   the   First-tier
         Tribunal, as claimed in  the  Grounds  of  Appeal.  The  respondent
         accepted that the unfairness constituted a material  error  of  law
         and that the First-tier Tribunal  decision  could  not  stand.  The
         Upper Tribunal was invited to set aside the  First-tier  Tribunal's
         decision and remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for  a  de
         novo hearing.

      8. Having regard to the overriding interest in rule 2 of the  Tribunal
         Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 to deal with cases justly and
         fairly,  and  having  considered  the  nature  of  the  appellant's
         challenge to the judge's decision  (which,  having  regard  to  the
         statements and  contemporaneous  records  now  provided,  does  not
         involve the need for further evidence to be considered), and having
         regard to the  relatively  narrow  focus  of  the  legal  challenge
         (relating to whether the  judge  acted  in  a  procedurally  unfair
         manner in  respect  of  the  absence  of  oral  evidence  from  the
         appellant and the psychiatric report), and  having  regard  to  the
         Grounds of Appeal and the respondent's submissions dated 20  August
         2020, and having satisfied itself that both parties have been given
         a fair opportunity  of  fully  advancing  their  cases,  the  Upper
         Tribunal  considers  it  appropriate,  in  light  of  the  Covid-19
         pandemic, to determine questions (i) and  (ii)  without  a  hearing
         pursuant to rule 34 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
         Rules 2008.


Background

      9. Given the joint position of the parties, with which  this  Tribunal
         agrees,  it  is  not  necessary   to   consider   the   appellant's
         circumstances in detail. He is a male national of Pakistan who  was
         35 years old at the date of the First-tier  Tribunal  decision.  He
         arrived in the UK  illegally  on  24  September  2004  using  false
         documents and claimed asylum on 18 April 2019. He claimed to be gay
         and to face a real risk of persecution  in  Pakistan  if  he  lived
         openly as a gay  man.  The  respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
         appellant was gay.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     10. At the hearing the appellant relied on a psychiatric report from Dr
         Anshu Bohra, dated  25  September  2019.  The  appellant  had  been
         diagnosed  with  Mixed  Anxiety  and   Depressive   Disorder.   The
         psychiatrist stated, "Given his [the appellant's]  current  medical
         condition and psychiatric symptoms and cognitive function I do  not
         feel he has capacity to give evidence in the First-tier  Tribunal."
         At the start of the hearing the Presenting  Officer  raised,  as  a
         preliminary point, the appellant's fitness  to  give  evidence.  He
         argued that the psychiatric report was insufficient  to  show  that
         the appellant  was  unfit  to  give  evidence.   According  to  the
         Grounds, supported by  the  first  page  of  counsel's  handwritten
         record of proceedings and her statement, and not challenged by  the
         respondent, the judge intervened prior to the  appellant's  counsel
         responding  and  indicated  his  view  that  the  psychiatrist  was
         qualified to determine the appellant's fitness  to  give  evidence.
         The judge  stated  that  the  Presenting  Officer  could  make  any
         submissions about the evidence at  the  end  of  the  hearing.  The
         Grounds of Appeal, supported by counsel's statement,  contend  that
         she assumed, by reason of the judge's  intervention  prior  to  her
         making  submissions,  that  the  judge  accepted  the   psychiatric
         evidence. The appellant was not called to give  evidence  (although
         his cousin did give evidence).


     11.  The judge did not find the appellant had given a credible  account
         of being gay. at [32] the judge stated,

             The evidence for any lack of capacity in the Appellant, or any
             serious mental illness affecting his ability to give  reliable
             evidence, was in the tribunal's view thin.

     12. And at [33] the judge stated,

             Notwithstanding that depression, the  Appellant  was  able  to
             attend his asylum interview (after 2  postponements),  comment
             subsequently on the record of the asylum  interview,  instruct
             his solicitors and provide to witness statements. The Tribunal
             finds that the evidence  is  insufficient  to  show  that  the
             Appellant lacks capacity or was incapable of  giving  evidence
             at  his  hearing,  with  appropriate  reasonable   adjustments
             reflecting his vulnerable and  depressed  state  of  mind,  in
             accordance with the tribunal's established  guidance  and  the
             current Equal Treatment Bench  Book.  The  tribunal  draws  an
             adverse inference from the Appellant's  failure  to  have  his
             evidence tested, and to address the numerous discrepancies  in
             his evidence. After all, it was the  Appellant  who  chose  to
             make an asylum claim based on his sexual orientation  and  the
             burden of proof lay entirely on him.

     13. Having gone on to consider and reject the  appellant's  account  of
         his claimed discovery of his sexual orientation as incredible,  and
         having regard to several inconsistencies  and  implausibility's  in
         the appellant's evidence, the judge dismissed the appeal.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     14. The grounds of appeal contend  that  the  judge's  intervention  in
         respect of the preliminary issue raised by the Presenting  Officer,
         created an assumption that the psychiatric  evidence  was  accepted
         and that it was not therefore necessary for  the  appellant  to  be
         called to give oral evidence. The judge's  appearance  appeared  to
         the determine  the  issue  of  the  appellant's  capacity  to  give
         evidence in his favour. Had the judge raised his  concerns  at  the
         beginning of the hearing the appellant could either have sought  an
         adjournment to obtain further medical evidence or  chosen  to  give
         evidence, despite his mental health issues. The judge's failure  to
         raise these concerns at the commencement of the hearing amounted to
         procedural unfairness inflecting the entirety of his findings.


Discussion

     15. The respondent accepts that the judge's  decision  is  procedurally
         unfair. I have independently arrived at the same conclusion.  I  am
         persuaded  that  the  particular  circumstances  of   the   judge's
         intervention, when the Presenting Officer raised the issue  of  the
         appellant's capacity to  give  evidence  as  a  preliminary  point,
         caused the appellant's counsel to believe that the  judge  accepted
         the psychiatrist's opinion that  the  appellant  was  incapable  of
         giving evidence. This may not have been the judge's intention,  but
         counsel's assumption, albeit  wrong,  was  reasonable  in  all  the
         circumstances. There is nothing in the documentation before  me  to
         suggest  that  the  judge   expressed   any   concerns   with   the
         psychiatrist's opinion regarding the appellant's capacity  to  give
         evidence during the hearing, or that he raised  any  such  concerns
         with the appellant's  counsel.  Moreover,  it  is  clear  from  the
         decision at [32] and [33]  that  the  judge  did  draw  an  adverse
         inference from the  appellant's  failure  to  give  oral  evidence.
         Whilst the judge may well have been entitled to  ultimately  reject
         the psychiatrists opinion, it was incumbent on him to have made his
         view entirely clear so as to give the appellant the opportunity  of
         choosing to give  oral  evidence  or  for  further  submissions  or
         evidence to be provided. I am satisfied that the judge's failure to
         do so  constituted,  on  the  particular  facts  of  this  case,  a
         procedural impropriety rendering the decision unsafe.


     16. For the above reasons I am satisfied that the judge's  decision  is
         unsafe and must  be  set  aside  in  its  entirety.  Under  Part  3
         paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal Practice Statement of the 18
         June 2018 a case may be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal if  the
         Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

              a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before
                 the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
                 opportunity for  that  party's  case  to  be  put  to  and
                 considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


              b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
                 is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be
                 re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
                 objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit  the  case
                 to the First-tier Tribunal.

     17. I have determined that the  judge's  conclusions  relating  to  the
         issue  of  the  appellant's  credibility,  based  partly   on   the
         appellant's failure to give oral evidence, are unsafe.  The  appeal
         will be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal so  that  a  new  fact-
         finding exercise can be undertaken. It will be for  the  First-tier
         Tribunal to determine the most  appropriate  mode  of  hearing  the
         appeal.

Notice of Decision

The making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved  the  making  of
errors on points of law and is set aside.

The case is remitted back to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  decided  afresh
by a judge other than Designated Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Manuell.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



D.Blum

Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum      Date: 22 September 2020


