
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07321/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2020                  |On 10 September 2020                 |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                    [R M]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This decision has been made  on  the  papers,  under  Rule  34  of  The
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008, further  to  directions
    issued by the Upper Tribunal on 7 May 2020. No objection  was  made  to
    the decision being made on the papers and written submissions have been
    produced by both parties, which have been considered.

 2. The appellant is a national of Albania  born  on  31  August  1990.  He
    arrived in the United Kingdom on 10 August 2017 and claimed  asylum  on
    17 November 2017. His claim was refused on 19 July 2019.

 3. The appellant claimed to fear return to Albania  as  a  result  of  his
    active involvement with the Democratic Party which  led  to  him  being
    attacked and threatened on two occasions by members  of  the  Socialist
    Party. The  respondent  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  an  active
    supporter of the Democratic Party but did not  accept  his  account  of
    having been attacked by members of the  Socialist  Party  and  did  not
    accept that he was at risk on return to Albania.

 4. The appellant appealed against that decision. His appeal was  heard  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Paul on 27 January 2020. Judge Paul  did  not
    accept  that  the  appellant  feared  persecution  in  Albania  and  he
    dismissed the appeal on all grounds, in a decision  promulgated  on  10
    February 2020.

 5. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was sought by the  appellant
    on three grounds and permission was  granted  on  the  third  of  those
    grounds, which asserted  that  the  judge  had  failed  to  make  clear
    findings on whether the appellant's account  of  past  persecution  was
    credible.

 6. In light of the need to take precautions against the spread  of  Covid-
    19, the matter was not immediately listed for a hearing but  was  first
    reviewed by the Upper Tribunal. In a Note and Directions sent out on  7
    May 2020, Upper Tribunal Judge Smith indicated that she had reached the
    provisional view that the question of whether the First-tier Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of error of law and, if  so,  whether  the
    decision should  be  set  aside,  could  be  made  without  a  hearing.
    Submissions were invited from the parties, neither of whom objected  to
    a decision being made without a hearing.

 7. Having considered the submissions from both parties I have reached  the
    view that the third ground has merit and that the judge erred in law in
    his credibility findings, which are not  cogently  reasoned  and  which
    lack clarity. At [23] the judge finds that he  is  prepared  to  accept
    that the appellant "may or may not have been  involved  in  an  act  of
    violence" and that "he may have therefore had violent  encounters  with
    supporters of the Government", but he considered that that was "a  long
    way short of him demonstrating a campaign of persecution". Although not
    at all clear, the judge's finding appears to be that he  accepted  that
    the appellant was a victim of  violence,  given  the  evidence  of  his
    injuries, but concluded that it was  a  single  incident  and  was  not
    evidence of targeted persecution. He did not elaborate on, or  explain,
    that finding, aside from the observation at [24] that  there  had  been
    only two incidents, which he  took  as  an  indication  of  a  lack  of
    interest in the appellant.  However,  as  the  appellant's  submissions
    assert at [10], the  appellant's  evidence  was  not  of  two  isolated
    incidents and the judge failed  to  address  the  other  incidents  and
    failed to explain whether or why he rejected the appellant's account of
    being abducted and threatened. The judge also made an  adverse  finding
    at [23], about the  appellant's  claim  to  have  targeted  because  of
    accusations he made against the previous Minister of the  Interior,  on
    the basis of the respondent's information  that  Samir  Tahiri  was  no
    longer a prominent figure at the time, but a proper reading of [51]  of
    the respondent's refusal letter shows that the judge misunderstood  the
    point being made by the respondent.

 8. Other than the fact that the appellant's family members  did  not  give
    evidence at  the  hearing,  the  judge  gave  no  further  reasons  for
    rejecting the appellant's account of fearing persecution on  return  to
    Albania. It may  well  be  that  an  overall  reading  of  the  judge's
    findings, particularly those at [25] and [26], suggests that the  judge
    did not find the appellant's account credible, but  it  is  simply  not
    clear from his earlier findings what he accepted and what  he  rejected
    by way of past persecution. In the circumstances, I find that the third
    ground is made out and I agree with Ms Rushe, for the  appellant,  that
    the judge's decision cannot stand and must be set  aside  and  re-made,
    and that the appropriate course is for the case to be remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo before a different judge. I  do
    not preserve any findings made by the judge.



DECISION

 9. The making of the decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of an error on a point of law and the decision is set aside. The
    appeal is remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  pursuant  to  section
    12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals,  Courts  and  Enforcement  Act  2007  and
    Practice Statement 7.2(b), to be heard afresh before  any  judge  aside
    from Judge Paul.


Signed:  S Kebede
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede     Dated: 7 September 2020
