
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07674/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 24 January 2019                   |On 12 February 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:       Miss L Gardner of Counsel
For the Respondent:      Mr C Howells Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision of Judge Mathews  (the  judge)
    of the First-tier Tribunal (the FTT) promulgated on 9 October 2018.

 2. The appellant is a Nigerian citizen born in June 1976. He made a  human
    rights and international protection claim on the basis that he would be
    at risk if he was returned to Nigeria as he is a bisexual man.

 3. The application was refused on 15 May 2018 and the appeal was heard  on
    13 September 2018 and dismissed on  all  grounds.  The  judge  did  not
    accept the appellant is bisexual and therefore concluded he  would  not
    be at risk if returned to Nigeria.

 4. The appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chamberlain who noted that it
    was contended that the judge erred in attaching weight to the  lack  of
    detail of the rape the appellant claimed to have experienced, erred  in
    his assessment of the timing  of  the  disclosure  of  the  appellant's
    sexuality, erred regarding the lack of evidence  from  witnesses  given
    the nature of the appellant's relationships  and  erred  regarding  the
    lack of detail of the appellant's journey to bisexuality.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing

 5. Miss Gardner relied and expanded upon the four grounds of appeal  which
    are summarised below.

 6. Firstly it was submitted the judge erred at paragraph 24 in finding  'I
    do not preclude sexual activity by  force  from  being  something  that
    could allow bisexuality to emerge in person, but I note that it appears
    to be a noteworthy stimulus that the  appellant  does  not  address  in
    detail. In my judgement a man being forced to  have  sex  with  another
    man, and then finding that he expresses bisexuality,  is  a  matter  of
    note.'

 7. It was submitted that the lack of detail was not put to  the  appellant
    by the respondent or judge and a lack of detail about an  alleged  rape
    might be thought both predictable and reasonable. The judge ignored the
    direct relevance of the appellant's diagnosis of PTSD  in  relation  to
    his ability to provide such detail. It was  submitted  that  the  judge
    also ignored what  detailed  evidence  there  was  in  the  appellant's
    witness statement about the rape and the judge  did  not  specify  what
    details might have been expected. The appellant had expressed  evidence
    of shame and fear of stigma and the judge failed to take this  evidence
    into account. The judge failed to apply or expressly address  his  mind
    to the lower standard of proof.

 8. Secondly it was submitted that the  judge  erred  at  paragraph  27  in
    stating 'The appellant also speaks of making no disclosure  as  to  his
    sexuality through fear of Tom  and  others,  yet  does  not  adequately
    explain why such fear has now receded, and had done so on release  from
    prison when he started to attend Pride events.'

 9. The failure to make  disclosure  was  not  put  to  the  appellant  and
    therefore he could not respond to it. It was submitted that the judge's
    conclusion on the question of timing  of  the  disclosure  ignored  the
    appellant's explanation and evidence on this point which  were  in  his
    witness statement.

10. Thirdly it was submitted that  the  judge  erred  at  paragraph  28  in
    finding it noteworthy that he had received no evidence from any of  the
    appellant's male sexual  partners  given  the  length  of  his  claimed
    sexuality, the number of partners he now refers to,  and  his  asserted
    confidence in his sexuality given his attendance at Pride events.

11. It was  submitted  that  the  judge's  conclusion  failed  to  consider
    arguments advanced in the appellant's skeleton argument to  the  effect
    that it  is  unreasonable  to  expect  certain  prescriptive  types  of
    relationships of a given individual. It was contended  that  the  judge
    held the appellant's willingness to have  casual  relationships  and/or
    his inability to maintain long-term relationships against him.  It  was
    unreasonable to expect the appellant to approach people  with  whom  he
    had had one night stands and ask  them  to  give  evidence.  The  judge
    failed to have regard to the appellant's explanation as to why  he  had
    lost contact with his sexual partners.

12. Fourthly it was submitted that the judge had erred at paragraph  29  in
    finding that the appellant  had  not  given  details  of  his  personal
    feelings and journey from being a heterosexual family man to a bisexual
    single man. The judge noted that the appellant had not  been  reluctant
    to discuss matters such as the death of his family and the judge  found
    the absence of a detailed account of  that  central  transition  to  be
    probative.

13. It  was  contended  that  the  judge  failed  to  have  regard  to  the
    appellant's evidence in his witness statement and his oral evidence  at
    the hearing and failed to consider the impact of the  appellant's  PTSD
    on his ability to give evidence. It was submitted that the judge  erred
    in conflating the way the appellant could be expected to feel about and
    describe the death of his family and  his  reluctance  to  discuss  his
    sexuality.

14. Mr Howells submitted that the judge had not materially erred in law and
    it was clear that the judge had taken into  account  the  diagnosis  of
    PTSD.

15. With reference to the first ground Mr Howells submitted that the  judge
    was not referring to a lack of detail regarding the act  of  rape,  but
    was referring to a lack of detail as to how the rape led to a change in
    sexuality.

16. Regarding the second  ground  it  was  submitted  that  the  judge  was
    entitled to consider the  late  disclosure  by  the  appellant  of  his
    bisexuality and was entitled to conclude that  there  was  no  adequate
    explanation.

17. With reference to the third ground it was submitted  that  it  was  not
    unreasonable to expect the appellant to approach at least  one  of  his
    partners to give supporting evidence and the judge had not erred in  so
    finding.

18. Regarding the fourth ground it was submitted that it was  open  to  the
    judge to make the finding at paragraph 29 and  to  make  a  distinction
    between the appellant's detailed account regarding  the  death  of  his
    family, and the absence of  a  detailed  account  in  relation  to  his
    bisexuality.

My Conclusions and Reasons

19. There is reference in the first and fourth grounds to the judge failing
    to take into account that the appellant had been diagnosed with PTSD. I
    do not find that the judge erred on this issue. In my view it is  clear
    that the judge was  well  aware  of  and  did  take  into  account  the
    diagnosis of PTSD. A reading of paragraphs 7-9  shows  that  the  judge
    considered Dr Battersby's report and was aware of the diagnosis of mild
    PTSD and the judge specifically refers to Dr Battersby's  opinion  that
    this condition is likely to impact upon the cogency of the  appellant's
    evidence.

20. At paragraph 8 the judge makes it clear  that  the  appellant  will  be
    treated as a vulnerable witness and records 'I have kept that  in  mind
    throughout my consideration of this appeal.'

21.  At  paragraph  9  the  judge  records  the  submissions  made  by  the
    appellant's counsel to the effect that the  appellant  required  simple
    questions, put at a slow pace, and that the appellant could take breaks
    whenever required, and the judge agreed  with  those  requirements  and
    conducted the appeal accordingly.

22. Further evidence of the judge taking the diagnosis of PTSD into account
    is demonstrated at paragraph 19 and again  at  paragraph  23  when  the
    judge is considering the appellant's account. I find no error of law on
    this issue. I find no evidence that the judge failed to apply the lower
    standard of proof.

23. I accept the submission made on behalf of the respondent in relation to
    the first ground In that the judge was  not  commenting  upon  lack  of
    detail in relation to the act of rape, but the lack of detail as to how
    the rape led to the appellant's change in sexuality.

24. I find that the judge was entitled to make the findings which  are  now
    the subject of challenge at paragraphs 24, 27, 28 and 29. The weight to
    be attached to evidence is a matter for the judge to decide. In my view
    it cannot be said that the findings made by the judge are  perverse  or
    irrational or unreasonable.

25. I do  not  accept  that  the  judge  has  disregarded  the  appellant's
    evidence. The decision demonstrates that the judge has considered  that
    evidence but has not found explanations given by the  appellant  to  be
    adequate. Those findings  were  open  to  the  judge  to  make  on  the
    evidence.

26. The grounds demonstrate a disagreement with the conclusions reached  by
    the judge but they do not disclose any material error of law. The judge
    has made findings open to make on the evidence and given  adequate  and
    sustainable reasons for those findings. It is clear  from  reading  the
    decision why the judge has dismissed the appeal.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 6 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Signed  [pic]                           Date 6 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
