

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number
PA/07838/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

Heard at Manchester CJC
Decision and Reasons Promulgated
On 21st February 2019                                                    On
8th March 2019



                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES

                                   Between

                                   A M I S
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:       Miss S Sanders (Counsel, instructed by Lei Dat &
Beg, Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's asylum appeal was rejected by the Appellant for the
   reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 6th of June 2018. The
   Appellant's appeal was dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Moxon in a
   decision promulgated on the 15th of August 2018. The Appellant was
   granted permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the basis that it
   was arguable that the Judge had erred in not following the relevant
   country guidance case and in relying on more recent evidence provided by
   the Respondent.

2. The Appellant is a non-Arab Dafuri from Sudan. In the decision the Judge
   noted that the Appellant had lived in the greater Khartoum area until the
   age of 22 and attended university and that her family remained in Sudan.
   The Judge found that the Appellant had not come to the adverse attention
   of the authorities or that she had been politically involved as claimed
   or at all. From paragraph 38 onwards the Judge assessed the risk to the
   Appellant and in paragraphs 38 to 58 gave his reasons for not following
   the country guidance in relation to non-Arab Dafuris living in Khartoum
   although he accepted that the situation would be different outside the
   city.

3. The Appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the
   basis that the Judge had not taken account of country guidance cases.
   Permission was refused by the First-tier Tribunal but granted by the
   Upper Tribunal on a renewed application. The parties made submissions in
   line with their respective positions, these are set out in full in the
   Record of Proceedings.

4. There is no dispute that there are relevant country guidance cases that
   cover the position of non-Arab Dafuris in respect of the risks that they
   may face on return to Khartoum. The relevant cases are AA (Non-Arab
   Darfuris-relocation) Sudan CG [2009] UKAIT 56 and MM (Darfuris)Sudan CG
   [2015] UKUT 10 (IAC). The Appellant's case is that whatever credibility
   findings were made in respect of the Appellant's claim the Appellant is
   entitled to international protection simply by virtue of the effect of
   the findings in the 2 cases and her being a non-Arab Darfuri.

5. The Judge did refer to the country guidance cases cited above and other
   relevant authorities in the section of the decision dealing with country
   guidance cases, paragraphs 10 to 13. Clearly those cases and the effect
   of the decisions were in the Judge's mind in the course of the decision-
   making process. That explains why the Judge set out in some detail the
   evidence that was considered at paragraphs 38 to 53. In paragraph 55 the
   obligation to follow country guidance cases was noted and the following
   paragraphs contained the reasons why the Judge, on the basis of the facts
   found and the rejection of the Appellant's credibility with regard to her
   account, felt justified in making the departure that he did.

6. Were the reasons given sufficient to justify departing from the country
   guidance? In my view the reasons given by the Judge were sufficient. The
   decision cannot be said to be superficial, the findings of fact were made
   on a justified analysis of the Appellant's evidence and have not been
   challenged. The Judge clearly had regard to the country guidance cases
   and the fact that they were to be followed unless departure could be
   justified and carefully analysed the evidence the Home Office relied on
   and considered it in the context of the case as a whole. The risk to the
   Appellant was placed in the context of her lack of any profile and that
   she had left Sudan legally.

7. In paragraph 56 the Judge took the view that the evidence relied on led
   to a finding that there had been significant and durable change. That
   evidence was reflected by the Appellant's own ability to obtain education
   to university level and her travel in and out of Sudan. The latter
   indicated an absence of the Appellant having a general fear in Sudan and
   was a view open to the Judge in the circumstances.

8. In summary the Judge was aware of the relevant country guidance cases
   and their binding nature and of the need to provide reasons for declining
   to follow the authorities. The review of the available evidence that the
   Judge relied on showed that the exercise was not superficial and the
   reasons given for departing from the authorities were combined with an
   examination of the Appellant's own circumstances on findings in relation
   to her account which have not been challenged.

CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.


Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of the
Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.)

Fee Award

In dismissing this appeal I make no fee award.

Signed: [pic]

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 4th March 2019

