
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/07134/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard in Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 3 August 2017                      |On 10 August 2017                     |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                     M G
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Ahmad, Ahmad & Williams solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Although an anonymity order was not made by the  First-tier  Tribunal,  this
is an appeal on protection grounds. It is therefore appropriate to  make  an
anonymity order.  Unless and until a tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,
the Appellant is granted anonymity. No report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies, amongst others, to both parties. Failure to  comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant's claim and Respondent's refusal

1.    The Appellant appeals against  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Juss promulgated on 7 February 2017 ("the Decision"). By the  Decision
the  Judge  dismissed  the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the   Respondent's
decision dated 29 February 2016 refusing his  protection  and  human  rights
claim.  The appeal to this Tribunal relates only to  the  protection  claim.


2.    The Appellant is a national of Pakistan.  He arrived in the  UK  on  6
October 2007 as  a  student  with  leave  which  was  extended  until  2012.
Thereafter, he overstayed. An application made on human rights  grounds  was
refused on  10  February  2013.  On  29  January  2016,  the  Appellant  was
encountered by the police who discovered that  he  was  an  overstayer.   He
then claimed asylum on 30 January 2016.

3.    The core of the Appellant's  claim  is  that,  in  2001,  his  parents
arranged for him to marry his maternal cousin.  He did  not  wish  to  marry
her because he was concerned that she  and  her  family  were  not  of  good
character.  When her family asked for a date to be set in January 2003,  the
Appellant refused and said that he wished to continue  with  his  education.
He claims that he was then attacked by the girl's  father,  the  Appellant's
uncle, MA and the girl's brothers.  He claims that the attacks  occurred  in
February 2003 and April 2005.  He claims that he  was  threatened  again  by
one of the brothers in September 2007 whereupon he left  Pakistan  and  came
to the UK.

4.    It is the Appellant's case that MA, his  uncle,  held  a  position  of
influence because of his links to the "noon  league  (called  Muslim  League
N)" (asylum interview Q23).  It is said that  the  uncle  used  to  organise
meetings for the party locally and, because of his  links  with  politicians
in that party, the Appellant claims that MA holds a  position  of  influence
throughout Pakistan and over the police throughout that country.

5.    The Appellant also says that he was disentitled by his father in  2011
and has produced a "disentitlement deed".  He says  that  he  came  to  know
about the disentitlement only in 2015 when he spoke to his sister.

6.    The Respondent roundly disbelieved the  claim.   She  did  not  accept
that the Appellant was at risk from his uncle and cousins as  claimed.   She
also did not accept that the uncle had the  influence  claimed  for  reasons
given at [21] to [31] of the refusal letter.  She pointed out that,  in  any
event, the persons who the Appellant claimed to fear were non-State  agents.
 Although  sufficiency  of  protection  and  internal  relocation  were  not
considered in detail in the letter (because the claim was  not  accepted  as
credible), it is clear from the tenor of the letter that she took  the  view
that those considerations would have been a complete  answer  to  the  claim
even if believed.  The Respondent also drew  attention  to  the  Appellant's
delay in making his claim for asylum.

7.     As to  the  claim  to  have  been  disentitled  by  his  family,  the
Respondent considered the document produced and applied  the  Tanveer  Ahmed
principles before going on to say this:

      "[42] There is no reason  to  doubt  the  validity  of  the  document;
      therefore  weight  can  be  placed  on   this   document.    Therefore
      considering the low standard of proof required in asylum claims it  is
      accepted that you have been disentitled by your father."

Grounds of appeal, permission grant and submissions

8.    As I pointed out to Ms Ahmad when she sought in  submissions  to  rely
only on her grounds, the terms of the permission  grant  do  not  appear  to
coincide with the grounds of appeal.

9.    The focus of the grounds of appeal is to be  found  in  the  following
paragraphs:

      "[4]  The IJ has considered the oral evidence  and  the  justification
      provided by the Appellant for not claiming  asylum  in  2011/12.   The
      Appellant stated when giving oral evidence that  his  family  disowned
      him in 2011/12 but it was not the only reason to  claim  asylum.   The
      Appellant stated that his family disowning him along with the  threats
      from local Pakistan Muslim League party made him claim asylum  in  the
      UK.  The Appellant stated that he received threats from Muslim  League
      Party due to which he claimed asylum in the UK.

      [5]   Furthermore,  the  IJ  has  not  taken  into  consideration  the
      objective evidence.  The Appellant's documentary evidence  along  with
      objective evidence, when considered together  would  be  a  compelling
      evidence."

10.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Scott
Baker on 6 June 2017 in the following terms (so far as relevant):

      "[3]  The respondent accepted at [54] of the refusal letter  that  the
      appellant had been disentitled by his father.   The  veracity  of  the
      disentitlement document produced in 2011 was accepted at [42]  of  the
      refusal letter.  There was  seemingly  no  challenge  in  the  refusal
      letter to the appellant's evidence that he had  heard  about  this  in
      2015.

      [4]   The determination is succinct and there is no reference  in  the
      body of this document to  the  acceptance  of  this  document  by  the
      respondent.  Accordingly the findings made by the judge are tainted by
      this omission in failing to note this acceptance.  The judge is  clear
      at [17] that he found the claim to be a  complete  fabrication.   Such
      finding was not open to him  on  the  evidence  as  presented  by  the
      parties."

11.   Although  Mr  Mills  submitted  that  permission  was  therefore  only
granted on that narrow ground and I should not consider  the  wider  grounds
as pleaded, I allowed Ms Ahmad to develop her  submissions  in  relation  to
the grounds as  a  whole,  particularly  since  permission  is  not  refused
expressly on the grounds as pleaded.

12.   Ms Ahmad's submissions can be summarised as follows.  First, she  said
that the Judge has failed to consider that the  Appellant  also  claimed  to
fear the Muslim League.  Second, she said  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to
consider whether the Appellant's uncle did  hold  the  influential  position
which the Appellant claimed and the Judge has simply adopted at [16] of  the
Decision the Respondent's reasoning on this aspect.  Third,  she  said  that
the Judge has ignored  the  background  evidence  produced  in  relation  to
honour killings.  Fourth, she said that the Judge has  made  factual  errors
in reciting the background to the claim which had tainted his  consideration
of the delay in the Appellant making his claim. Finally, in  her  reply  she
addressed the point made by the FTTJ when  granting  permission.   She  said
that since credibility was fundamentally  at  issue,  it  may  have  made  a
difference if the Judge had recognised the Respondent's  acceptance  of  the
"disentitlement deed" as genuine.

13.   As I note above, Mr Mills said that  I  should  deal  only  with  that
latter point since that is the only point on  which  permission  is  granted
(although that point is not referred to at all in  the  grounds).   Although
Mr Mills said that the "concession" that the disentitlement deed is  genuine
may be slightly generous given that the document had to be assessed  on  the
evidence in the round and the Appellant had otherwise been  disbelieved,  he
did not seek to withdraw that concession.  He said though that  it  was  not
binding on the Judge if, having  heard  the  evidence,  the  Judge  was  not
persuaded that the concession was rightly made.  He also accepted  that  the
Judge has not in fact made any finding  one  way  or  another  whether  that
document was genuine.  He also submitted that the document  is  not  central
to the Appellant's claim.   The  fact  that  the  Appellant  may  have  been
disentitled by his father was not his reason for claiming protection.

14.   In relation to the grounds and the core of the Appellant's  claim,  Mr
Mills pointed out that, even if the  facts  of  the  claim  were  true,  the
Appellant would also have to show that (a) he would be at risk some  fifteen
years after he claimed to have  refused  to  marry  (b)  that  there  is  no
sufficiency of protection from the authorities in  relation  to  the  threat
and (c) that he could not move to another part  of  Pakistan  to  avoid  the
threat.  Mr Mills also submitted that the Judge has not  erred  in  adopting
the Respondent's reasons  in  rejecting  the  Appellant's  claim  about  his
uncle's position  of  influence.   Provided  he  considered  the  claim  for
himself, the Judge was entitled to adopt those reasons.   He pointed out  by
reference to the asylum interview record that the Appellant  was  unable  to
give any detail about his uncle's position and why it is claimed that he  is
so influential.  On the Appellant's own case, the uncle is a  retired  civil
servant who  volunteered  for  a  political  party  locally.   There  is  no
corroborating evidence about his uncle's position.

Decision and reasons

15.   I begin by dealing with the point on  which  permission  was  granted.
As to the Respondent's position in relation to that  document,  I  have  set
that out at [7] above.  In fact, contrary to Mr Mills' submission, what  the
Respondent says does not appear to me  to  be  a  concession  at  all.   The
Respondent has simply  said  that  she  does  not  disbelieve  the  document
because there is no reason to do so.  She does not say  in  terms  that  she
accepts it to be genuine.  She merely accepts what the document  records  as
true because there is no reason to doubt the document and  there  is  a  low
standard of proof.  In my estimation, that  indicates  that  the  Respondent
considered  the  evidence  to  fall  into  that  "Karanakaran"  category  of
evidence which is not definitely accepted or rejected  but  rather  evidence
about which she is  unsure  and  which  is  not  therefore  discounted  when
considering the entirety of the claim.



16.   Further, I accept Mr Mills' submission that the  disentitlement  claim
is not the core of the Appellant's case.  The document reads as follows:

      "On oath I [name and address of father] stated that I  have  two  sons
      and five daughters among them one G M who is disobedient to my  family
      and elders.  The situation has gone negative to the roots  of  respect
      of my family.  G M has acrossed the limitations of God  Almighty.   He
      is not obeying my single order, included of solemnizing  his  marriage
      according to my will.  In these circumstances I have  disentitled  him
      by my moveable and immoveable property.  I also state that  I  am  not
      responsible for  any  act  done  by  G  M  (my  son)  perspective  and
      retrospective and in future."

17.   Taken at its highest, the document  may  corroborate  the  Appellant's
claim that he was told by his parents to marry and that  he  disobeyed.   It
does no more.  But the Appellant does not claim  to  fear  his  father.   He
claims to fear his  uncle  and  cousins  who  he  says,  in  effect,  sought
retribution for  dishonouring  their  daughter/sister.   The  document  says
absolutely nothing about this.

18.   The Judge summarised the Appellant's case  at  [3]  of  the  Decision.
The disentitlement is no part of that claim as summarised  and  rightly  so.
It is then that claim which the Judge rejects at [17] of the Decision  as  a
"complete fabrication".  Although the  Judge  does  record  at  [8]  of  the
Decision, the  submission  for  the  Home  Office  that  even  the  unwanted
arranged marriage in 2001 was not credible (suggesting that the Home  Office
itself had departed from acceptance of the deed), the Judge made no  finding
on that submission.  There is therefore no rejection of the claim  that  the
Appellant had refused to marry his cousin or that his father  had  therefore
disentitled him.  It was though not relevant to the claimed risk which  came
on the Appellant's account from his uncle and cousins. A  Judge  is  obliged
to make findings on the central claim but not on  peripheral  matters  which
have no relevance to the core of that claim.

19.   I turn then  to  the  Appellant's  grounds  and  submissions,  on  the
assumption that the Appellant has permission to argue  those.    As  to  the
assertion that the Judge failed to consider the Appellant's claim to  be  at
risk from the Muslim League, I asked Ms Ahmad to direct me to  the  evidence
which set out that claim as the interview record is  clear  (Q16)  that  the
Appellant only claimed to fear his uncle and cousins  as  a  result  of  his
refusal to marry his maternal cousin.  Although Ms Ahmad pointed me  to  the
questions and answers which follow at [Q20] to [Q24],  I  noted  that  those
concerned the uncle's position of influence  arising  from  his  association
with the Muslim League and did not indicate a  fear  of  the  Muslim  League
itself which Ms Ahmad was constrained to accept.

20.   If it is being suggested that the  claim  of  a  fear  of  the  Muslim
League materialised only in the oral evidence at the hearing  (which  would,
in itself, cast significant doubt  on  its  veracity),  then  I  would  have
expected a witness statement,  preferably  before  but  certainly  with  the
grounds, setting out the claim which it is said was made.   In  the  absence
of evidence that the Appellant was claiming to fear the  Muslim  League  (as
opposed to fearing his uncle who may be a  supporter  of  that  party),  the
Judge clearly did not err in failing to consider it.



21.   In relation to the Appellant's uncle's supposed position of  influence
with the Muslim League, the Judge dealt with this as follows:

      "[16] Fifth, there is the expressed fear of harm from [M A], who it is
      said gives his support to the Muslim  League  (Noon)  Party.   As  the
      Refusal Letter (paras 22-25) makes it only too clear, he works in  the
      Tax Office, and has no official political standing of his own and  the
      suggestion that in these circumstances the Appellant could not  invoke
      state protection in Pakistan against  what  are  non-state  agents  of
      alleged persecution (where the Refugee Convention is not even engaged)
      is fanciful."

22.    I accept that the Judge is  required  to  consider  for  himself  the
various elements of the protection claim (so far as relevant).  However,  as
Mr Mills  noted,  on  this  point,  the  competing  evidence  was  that  the
Appellant  knew  nothing  about  his  uncle's  role  with  the  party,   his
associations with politicians (only one of whom he could  name)  or  how  he
had gained those links ([Q20] to [Q24] of the asylum interview).  As to  the
links with the police, the Appellant's answer at [Q50]  appears  to  suggest
that the uncle's influence over  the  police  is  demonstrated  because  the
uncle's family are always fighting and therefore get reported to the  police
but they are then bailed rather than detained.   The Respondent  dealt  with
that aspect of the claim at [21] to [31] of the refusal  decision.   As  she
pointed out, the Appellant's claim in this regard was devoid of any  detail.
 She also pointed out that if the uncle was as influential with  the  police
as claimed, then there would be no investigations or detentions.   The  fact
that the family members were later bailed indicated only  that  there  is  a
"due process in place". If the Judge accepted the force of the  Respondent's
position on this aspect, as he clearly did, he was entitled to rely on  that
rather than repeating what is said in the letter.

23.   As to the background evidence, it is incorrect that the Judge did  not
refer to it.  At [17] of the Decision, he said this:

      "[17] Finally, it follows that any reference to such other  'objective
      evidence' as the BBC Report (at p6) dated 1st April 2016 stating  that
      Honour killings are on the rise of the CIPU  Report  (at  pp11-33)  is
      oitiose in the context of the appellant's claim....."

In circumstances where the Judge provided adequate reasons at [12]  to  [16]
of the Decision for finding the  claim  not  to  be  credible,  it  was  not
incumbent on him to go further.

24.   In any event, the Judge  found  at  [16]  of  the  Decision  that  the
Appellant's uncle does not have the influence  which  he  claimed.   I  have
already explained why that finding is one open to the  Judge.  Even  if  the
Appellant's claim were otherwise credible therefore, it would  fail  because
there would be a sufficiency of protection.  Ms Ahmad sought to persuade  me
that, even in this regard, there would be a need to consider the  background
evidence and she drew my attention in this regard to [2.2.6] of the  Country
Information and  Guidance  Pakistan:  Security  and  humanitarian  situation
report dated November 2015.  That though does no more than state that  there
is  caselaw  finding  that  there  is  generally  sufficient  protection  in
Pakistan but if there are  circumstances  requiring  additional  protection,
then caseworkers must consider  whether  the  authorities  can  provide  the
additional protection which  the  particular  circumstances  require  on  an
individual basis.  That is of no conceivable relevance,  particularly  given
the finding about the  (lack  of)  influence  which  the  Appellant's  uncle
holds.

25.    Finally,  I  accept  Ms  Ahmad's  submission  that  there  are   some
unfortunate factual errors at [2] of the Decision where  the  Judge  recites
the factual background to the case.  I accept that the Appellant arrived  as
a student not visitor.  It is though clear from [12] of  the  Decision  that
when the Judge came to make his findings, he was  cognisant  of  that  fact.
Similarly, although the Judge states at [2] that the Appellant's  leave  was
valid until 31 October 2010, it is clear from what is said at [14]  that  he
was aware that leave was extended until 2012. The date of the  asylum  claim
is also incorrectly stated at [2] of the Decision as  31  October  2010  but
since that follows a reference to the  Appellant  being  encountered  on  29
January 2016 and being said to have claimed asylum  "the  next  day"  (which
must therefore be 30 January 2016  and  correct),  that  makes  no  material
difference.

26.   Ms Ahmad sought to persuade me that  in  fact  the  Appellant  had  an
application outstanding after 2012 and therefore  there  was  no  reason  to
claim asylum earlier than he did because he  could  not  be  removed.   That
might have some potential implications for what is said about delay  in  the
Judge's reasons. It is, however, clear from the Respondent's refusal  letter
that the Appellant's last application was  made  outside  the  Rules  on  10
January 2013 (his leave as a student having expired  on  17  December  2012)
and was refused on 10 December 2013.  Ms  Ahmad  submitted  that  there  was
thereafter an administrative review against  that  decision  which  remained
pending and therefore prevented the Appellant's removal.   However,  leaving
aside that there is no right of administrative  review  against  a  decision
made  outside  the  Rules  (at  most  this  could  be  an  application   for
reconsideration), there is absolutely no evidence of  such  an  application.
The Appellant's leave had expired in any event on 17 December 2012.  He  was
thereafter liable to removal as an overstayer.

27.   Further, and in any event, none of this could make any  difference  to
the Judge's reasons based on the delay at [13] and  [14]  of  the  Decision.
As I have already noted, the asylum claim is predicated on a fear  from  the
Appellant's uncle and cousins who were said to  have  attacked  him  in  the
past.  That would be a claim which would have been evident to the  Appellant
from  the  outset.   The  claimed  delay  in  being   informed   about   the
disentitlement made no difference to the timing in relation to the  core  of
the claim.  Further, as the Judge notes at [14] of  the  Decision,  even  on
the Appellant's case that he learned of the disentitlement only in 2015  and
that this was the trigger for  the  claim,  there  was  no  explanation  for
delaying making the  claim  until  January  2016  after  the  Appellant  was
encountered by the police.

28.   For those reasons, I am satisfied that the Decision  did  not  involve
the making of a material error of law.  The  Judge  reached  findings  which
were open to him  on  the  evidence  before  him  and  were  sufficient  and
adequately reasoned.     I therefore uphold the Decision.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Decision did not involve the making  of  a  material
error on a  point  of  law.  I  therefore  uphold  the  First-tier  Tribunal
Decision of Judge Juss promulgated on 7 February 2017 with  the  consequence
that the Appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Signed           [pic] Dated:  9 August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
