
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07852/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 28th February 2019                         |On 18th March 2019            |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                                   M k a m
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms M Butler of Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran whose appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Mailer in a decision promulgated  on  5th  November
    2018.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  Ground 1 states that it is unclear
    what factual findings the judge made about the Appellant's  claim.   He
    appears to have accepted the Appellant's claim  to  be  the  son  of  a
    murdered Kurdish activist.

 3. The judge had gone on to find that the Appellant was  not  telling  the
    truth about his arrests and detention but the decision did not disclose
    which  parts  of  his  arrest  and  detention  were  believed   to   be
    fabrications.  It was unclear how  much,  if  any  of  the  Appellant's
    account the judge had accepted.  Reference is made to  well-known  case
    law.  In Ground 2 there was a failure to consider relevant evidence and
    there was a lack of reasoning and a failure to consider the  impact  of
    the Appellant's age.  The judge had rejected part  of  the  Appellant's
    account on the grounds that there was no explanation as to why Mohammed
    was unable to obtain an ID for the Appellant (126 to 127)  and  it  was
    not credible that Mohammed would not  give  the  Appellant  his  mobile
    number  (128  to  129).   However,  the  Appellant  had   provided   an
    explanation as to why Mohammed was unable to obtain an ID - as set  out
    in the grounds.  The Appellant gave a number of answers when questioned
    about Mohammed and the mobile telephone number.  It was said  that  the
    judge's conclusions failed to take into account the Appellant's age and
    situation at the time in question.   Ground  3  is  an  attack  on  the
    findings against the Appellant in terms of his credibility  and  it  is
    said there is a failure to give adequate reasons.  Ground 4 relates  to
    the failure to take into account relevant considerations in relation to
    persecution due to his father's activism.

 4. Permission to appeal was initially refused but granted by Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachy in a  note  dated  29th  January  2019.   Judge
    McGeachy said that,

         "I consider that it is arguable that the judge has been unclear  in
         his conclusions as to whether or not the Appellant was or  was  not
         detained on the three occasions he claims.  If he were detained  it
         would have been for the judge to make a finding on the consequences
         of that - whether the fact that he had been detained, albeit merely
         because in the first two case occasions he was only asked about his
         ID documents and  only  on  the  third  occasion  asked  about  his
         father."

    Before me Ms Butler relied on her grounds and picking  up  on  a  point
    raised by me said that at paragraph 140 of the decision the  judge  had
    begun the final sentence saying "As noted" where it was said  that  the
    Appellant had been arrested  and  detained  on  three  occasions.  This
    phrase added to the proposition that the decision was a  confused  one.
    The questioning of the Appellant had been escalating.  In  response  to
    comments from Mr Clarke she said that repetition of what  was  said  by
    the Appellant was not an analysis of what  had  really  happened.   The
    Appellant's age had not been properly factored in by the judge.  I  was
    asked to set aside the decision and remit it to the First-tier Tribunal
    having found an error in law.

 5. For the Home Office Mr Clarke said the judge had  dealt  with  all  the
    issues very carefully.  He had gone through the evidence  in  detail  -
    see paragraphs 111 et seq.  He had borne in mind that he was  16  years
    old when he entered the UK and claimed asylum.   He  had  set  out  the
    Appellant's claim in considerable detail.  In terms of paragraph 129 he
    did not find it credible that a man who had  supposedly  acted  as  his
    father since his birth until he left Iran  would  have  not  taken  the
    opportunity to provide the  Appellant  with  his  contact  number.   In
    paragraph 132 he said that having regard to the evidence as a whole  he
    found that the Appellant had not told the truth about  his  arrest  and
    detention.  The comment at paragraph 140 that he had been arrested  and
    detained on three occasions had to be seen  in  the  context  that  the
    judge was  considering  the  Appellant's  case  if  it  was  true-  see
    paragraph 134.

 6. There was no material error.  The judge had been entitled to  make  his
    comments on plausibility.  Reliance was placed on HK v SSHD [2006] EWCA
    Civ 1037 and in particular to paragraphs 29 and 30 of that decision.

 7. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 8. I think there is force in the submissions in the grounds of application
    referred to by Counsel and in the reasoning provided  by  Deputy  Upper
    Tribunal Judge McGeachy.  It is possible to read paragraph 132  of  the
    decision as the judge completely  rejecting  the  Appellant's  account.
    After all he did say the Appellant had not told  the  truth  about  his
    arrests and detention and followed that up by saying that  the  Iranian
    state had no  adverse  interest  in  him.   Nevertheless,  I  consider,
    picking up on the points taken in the grounds of  application  and  the
    comments of Deputy  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  McGeachy  that  it  is  not
    entirely clear whether the judge  is  rejecting  the  totality  of  the
    Appellant's evidence on this important point. The  issue  goes  to  the
    core of the Appellant's account as if his account is true then  he  may
    have a claim  that  to  return  him  to  Iran  would  breach  the  1951
    Convention and Article 3 ECHR.

 9. I have taken Mr Clarke's point that the judge's comments  in  paragraph
    140 which seem to accept that the Appellant was arrested  and  detained
    on three occasions should be seen in the context  that  the  judge  was
    considering, even if his account of  arrest  and  detention  was  true,
    whether he would face a risk of persecution on  return.   Nevertheless,
    the fundamental  problem  remains  that  the  judge  has  not  made  it
    specifically clear whether the Appellant's account of his  arrests  and
    detention should be entirely rejected and if so why all  three  arrests
    fall into that category.  As such there is a lack  of  clear  reasoning
    and findings on this important issue and it goes without saying that an
    Appellant is entitled to know what facts are accepted  and  what  facts
    are rejected.

10. There is also considerable merit in Ground 2 of the grounds.   Contrary
    to what the judge said the Appellant did provide an explanation  as  to
    why Mohammed was unable to obtain an ID for him.  That explanation  was
    not considered by the judge.  The  Appellant  also  gave  a  number  of
    answers when questioned about Mohammed in relation to his mobile phone.
     The judge did not appear to have taken that explanation  into  account
    and by not doing so, in my view, translates into the  factual  findings
    being unsafe. As the grounds indicate the evidence suggests that  there
    was a deferential relationship between an adult and an illiterate child
    which the judge has not properly considered.

11. It is crucial to know in this case exactly what  the  correct  findings
    should be in relation to the Appellant's claim that he was arrested and
    detained. The Appellant's account (as noted by the judge  in  paragraph
    23 of the decision) is that on the third occasion he was shouted at and
    pushed aggressively around the room but  the  judge  made  no  specific
    factual findings on that evidence which goes to the heart of the claim.

12. Absent clear reasons on these points I have concluded that the  judge's
    reasoning is not adequate which amounts to a material error in law; the
    decision is not safe and it  is  not  necessary  to  make  any  further
    comment on the grounds of application.

13. It therefore seems to me that further fact-finding is necessary and the
    matter will have to be heard again by the First-tier Tribunal as it  is
    necessary to set this decision aside in its entirety.  No  findings  of
    the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.  Under Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the
    2007 Act and of Practice Statement 7.2 the nature  and  extent  of  the
    judicial fact-finding necessary for the decision to be remade  is  such
    that it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

14. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

15. I set aside the decision.

16. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Order Regarding Anonymity  -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any member of their family.  This  order  applies
both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
order could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed    JG Macdonald                           Date    13th March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald


