

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
 (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                                    Appeal
Number: PA074662016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                   |Decision and Reasons promulgated     |
|on 2 August 2017                      |On 30 August 2017                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     CBD
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Ms Mensah instructed by AJO Solicitors
For the Respondent: Mr McVeety Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal against a decision of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
        Alty promulgated on 12 December 2016 in which the  Judge  dismissed
        the appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.
     2. The appellant is a Nigerian national born on 18 November  1992  who
        entered the UK lawfully in September 2010 as a  student.  Leave  in
        such capacity was extended until 8 January 2016. On 4 January 2016,
        the appellant claimed asylum was  refused  by  the  respondent  and
        appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.
     3. Permission to appeal the decision  of  the  Judge  was  granted  by
        another judge of the First-tier Tribunal on the basis it  was  said
        the refusal by the Judge to admit evidence by electronic  means  or
        to adjourn the proceedings in order  to  facilitate  the  means  to
        facilitate such evidence was "fairly arguable".



Error of law



     4. The grounds seeking permission to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
        asserted (1) that the Judge excluded the evidence of a key  witness
        living abroad, (2) erred in refusing to adjourn, and (3) failed  to
        take into account the evidence of  a  witness  and  make  a  proper
        assessment of the witness's evidence.
     5. The Judge records in the decision under challenge the procedure  on
        the day [5-17]. The Judge notes at [6] that an application was made
        at the outset  of  the  hearing  to  facilitate  the  provision  of
        evidence given by Skype from a named witness in Ghana  (Ms  D).  Ms
        Mensah had submitted this person's evidence was key to one  of  the
        main issues in the appeal, namely the  appellant's  sexuality.  The
        Judge records that  Ms  Mensah  stated  she  could  facilitate  the
        provision of the evidence on the day on her laptop or alternatively
        that the hearing could be  adjourned.  The  Presenting  Officer  in
        attendance indicated no objection to evidence being given by  Skype
        but left the matter in the hands of the Judge.
     6. The Judge reminded himself in [7] of the reported decision of  Nare
        (evidence by electronic means) Zimbabwe [2011] UKUT 00443 (IAC) but
        found the principles outlined in that case had  not  been  followed
        and, in particular, that the government of Ghana had not  confirmed
        they had no objection to the provision of live  evidence  from  its
        jurisdiction.
     7. The Judge concluded it was not appropriate to  take  evidence  from
        the witness by Skype and then  went  on  to  consider  whether  the
        proceedings should be adjourned [8 - 9]. The Judge noted it had not
        been brought to the attention of the judge  hearing  the  CMR  that
        there was a witness from overseas requiring consideration.  At  [9]
        the Judge finds:


         "9.  In reaching a decision, I have also taken into account that no
             indication is given today as to what steps it is  proposed  to
             take to facilitate the provision of video evidence or  whether
             it is anticipated that there will be any  objection  from  the
             Ghana  government.   No  procedural  timetable  is  suggested.
             Consequently, I am unclear whether Ms D's evidence  is  likely
             to become forthcoming or when."


     8. The Judge proceeded with  the  appeal  in  relation  to  which  the
        appellant and a named witness, the appellant's partner Mr  T,  gave
        evidence in English. The Judge considered the documentary  evidence
        provided in the  bundle  together  with  the  documentary  evidence
        referred to at [13], provided by Ms Mensah on the day, relating  to
        Country Information and Guidance report concerning Nigerian  sexual
        orientation and gender identity claims, March 2015. The Judge noted
        the main issue related to the credibility of the appellant's claim.
        Having considered the evidence the Judge concludes at [44] that:


        "44.      In conclusion, I find that the Appellant has not given  a
             plausible, coherent and consistent account  of  her  sexuality
             and the risk posed by it or of the risk  of  forced  marriage.
             Although none  of  my  findings  above  are  determinative  in
             themselves, when taking an  overall  view,  I  find  that  the
             Appellant has not demonstrated that  she  has  a  well-founded
             fear of persecution for the purposes of the Refugee Convention
             by reason of her membership of a PSG."


     9. It is not disputed that an application for the witness, who at that
        time was in Ghana, to give evidence by Skype was made on  the  day.
        Ms Mensah submitted her instructing solicitors had written  to  the
        Tribunal in advance indicating that a witness would  give  evidence
        by Skype. It is claimed no witness statement was prepared from  the
        witness and that there is no evidence before the Upper Tribunal  or
        before the Judge of the date when the  representatives  were  aware
        that Skype evidence was to be given.
    10.  It  was  also  submitted  on  the  appellant's  behalf  that   the
        representatives were not aware of the precedent  guidance  provided
        in case law and thought a simple letter indicating a wish  to  give
        evidence by electronic means would suffice.
    11. It was not disputed that there was at least one  potential  witness
        as to the appellant's sexuality, her claim being to be bisexual, in
        the United Kingdom but they were not called.  Ms  Mensah  submitted
        the witness was in a difficult position and did not  want  to  give
        evidence or assist the appellant although it is also the case  that
        no applications were made to the First-tier Tribunal for  an  order
        compelling the witness's attendance. The Judge also considered this
        issue at [33] but did not find the claim the witness did  not  wish
        to attend the hearing on the basis the relationship had  not  ended
        well, although initially  claiming  it  was  due  to  the  cost  of
        travelling from Scotland to Manchester, compatible  with  the  fact
        the witness had provided a letter in support.
    12. It was submitted on the  appellant's  behalf  that  had  the  Judge
        granted the adjournment and investigations undertaken and the  Nare
        process  followed,  the  deficiencies  in  the  evidence  gathering
        process, both before and at the hearing, could be rectified.
    13. It was further submitted on the appellant's behalf that  the  issue
        of fairness in the adjournment application  had  to  be  considered
        where the evidence that was required had a bearing on the decision.
        It was submitted that the need to hear from witnesses was relevant.
    14. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Mr  McVeety  referred  to  the
        fact there was a witness statement from Ms D in which that  witness
        states that she moved to Ghana as a result of the  'anti-gay'  laws
        in Accra in Nigeria.  If  the  witness  went  to  Ghana  to  escape
        homophobia it undermines the claim the witness could  not  approach
        the Ghana authorities, due to any real risk  of  ill-treatment,  to
        obtain their permission for her evidence to  be  given  from  their
        jurisdiction.
    15. Mr McVeety also referred to the fact that the witness in the UK who
        had not attended had also provided a witness  statement  which  had
        been considered by the Judge.
    16. The Secretary State has no  evidence  of  receiving  correspondence
        relation to this  matter  and  submits  the  Judge  considered  the
        fairness issue and the evidence given.
    17. The witness is a person whom the appellant has known for some  time
        and it would have been known at the time of the CMR  that  if  that
        person was to give evidence such evidence would have to  have  been
        given by indirect means, such as video link or  Skype.  It  is  not
        made out such evidence could not be given from Ghana,  even  if  it
        could not be given from Nigeria, but it is clear no effort was made
        to contact the Ghanaian authorities.
    18. It was not disputed on the appellant's behalf that  there  was  one
        witness in the United Kingdom and two overseas and it was  accepted
        there was no evidence of a real risk of harm in Ghana on the  basis
        of disclosure.
    19. The issue of evidence by electronic and other  means  is  a  matter
        which has had to be addressed by the Courts and Tribunal's in light
        of the digital age where the availability  of  devices  makes  such
        means of communication part of everyday life, for some.
    20.  There  is  an  issue  raised  regarding  whether  the  appellant's
        solicitors communicated adequately with the First-tier Tribunal  in
        relation to this matter and it is disturbing to note  a  submission
        being made  that  those  representatives  did  not  appreciate  the
        appropriate procedure if electronic evidence was to be given,  when
        the authority referred to by the Judge is dated 2011.
    21. In R (on the application of AM (Cameroon) v AIT [2007] EWCA Civ 131
        the Court of Appeal said that  unfair  decisions  on  interlocutory
        matters, such as adjournments or the  admission  of  evidence,  can
        amount to errors of law.  Such decisions will have  to  be  grounds
        for arguing that they display  gross  procedural  unfairness  or  a
        complete denial of natural justice.  In the instant case the  Court
        of Appeal thought that was the case because the  judge  refused  to
        adjourn when the appellant was medically unfit  to  give  evidence;
        because he  listed  the  case  for  a  day  when  counsel  was  not
        available; and because he refused permission  for  evidence  to  be
        taken on the phone.
    22. The consideration by the Judge of the application to admit evidence
        and  to  adjourn  required  the  exercise  of  discretionary   case
        management powers.
    23. In Nare (evidence by electronic means) Zimbabwe [2011]  UKUT  00443
        (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that the decision  whether  to  allow
        evidence to be  given  by  electronic  means  is  a  judicial  one,
        requiring consideration of the need to do so, the  arrangements  at
        the distant site, and the  ability  to  assess  such  evidence,  by
        reference to guidance such as that set out here. The Tribunal  said
        "the usual model in  the  common-law  system  is  for  direct  oral
        evidence to be given in the courtroom.  Departures from that  model
        are likely to reduce the quality of evidence, the  ability  of  the
        parties to test it, and the ability of  the  judge  to  assess  it,
        particularly where  it  has  to  be  assessed  against  other  oral
        evidence.  Any application to call oral evidence by electronic link
        therefore needs to be justified."  The  Tribunal  than  issued  the
        following non comprehensive guidance. (i) A party seeking  to  call
        evidence at an oral hearing by  electronic  link  must  notify  all
        other parties and the Tribunal  at  the  earliest  possible  stage,
        indicating (by  way  of  witness  statement)  the  content  of  the
        proposed evidence.  (If the evidence is uncontested, an  indication
        of that from the other parties may enable the witness' evidence  to
        be taken  wholly  in  writing.)   (ii)    An  application  to  call
        evidence by electronic link must be made in sufficient time  before
        the hearing to allow it to be dealt with properly.  The application
        should be made to the relevant judge (normally the Resident  Senior
        Immigration Judge) at the hearing centre at which the hearing is to
        take place, and must give (a) the reason why the  proposed  witness
        cannot attend the hearing; (b) an indication of  what  arrangements
        have been made provisionally at the distant site (c) an undertaking
        to be responsible for any expenses incurred. (iii) The  expectation
        ought to be that the distant site  will  be  a  court  or  Tribunal
        hearing centre, and that the giving of the evidence will be subject
        to on-site supervision by court or Tribunal  staff.   (iv)  If  the
        proposal is  to  give  evidence  from  abroad,  the  party  seeking
        permission must be in a position to inform the  Tribunal  that  the
        relevant foreign government raises no objection  to  live  evidence
        being given from within its jurisdiction, to a Tribunal or court in
        the United Kingdom.  The vast  majority  of  countries  with  which
        immigration  appeals  (even  asylum  appeals)  are  concerned   are
        countries with which the United  Kingdom  has  friendly  diplomatic
        relations, and it is not for an immigration judge to interfere with
        those relations by not ensuring that enquiries of  this  sort  have
        been made, and that the outcome was  positive.  Enquiries  of  this
        nature may be addressed to  the  Foreign  and  Commonwealth  Office
        (International Legal Matters Unit, Consular Division).  If evidence
        is given  from  abroad,  a  British  Embassy,  High  Commission  or
        Commonwealth may be able to provide suitable  facilities.  (v)  The
        application must be served on all other parties, in time  for  them
        to have a proper opportunity to respond to it.  (vi)  The  decision
        whether to grant the application is  a  judicial  one.   The  judge
        making the decision will take into account the  reasons  supporting
        the application, any response from other parties and the content of
        the proposed evidence, as well as of the  overriding  objective  of
        the rules.  If the application is granted,  there  may  be  further
        specific directions, which must be followed.
    24. The above guidance was not given as a whim  but  to  ensure  proper
        procedure is followed to enable a court or tribunal to  obtain  the
        best available evidence given by the person claiming to  be  giving
        it, in a secure environment, allowing two-way communication, and to
        enable adequate domestic and international arrangements to be made.
        What is clear is that such cannot be organised or satisfied  by  an
        application made on the day of the hearing.
    25. Considering  the  specific  elements  of  the  guidance  the  Upper
        Tribunal finds as follows:
    26. Point (i): A party seeking to call evidence at an oral  hearing  by
        electronic link must notify all other parties and the  Tribunal  at
        the  earliest  possible  stage,  indicating  (by  way  of   witness
        statement) the content of the  proposed  evidence.   The  appellant
        comprehensively failed to deal with this point, failing  to  notify
        either the respondent or the First-tier Tribunal until the  morning
        of the hearing or very near thereto. It has not been made out  that
        notification was given at the earliest possible  stage,  especially
        in light of the  fact  Ms  Mensah  was  unaware  of  the  date  the
        appellant's solicitors were aware when evidence would  need  to  be
        given by this method. The failure to give  adequate  notice  denied
        the opportunity for the parties to establish whether  the  evidence
        of the witness, then in Ghana, is uncontested. As stated, a witness
        statement  had  been  filed  the  witness  indicating   there   was
        communication with the appellant's representatives but they  failed
        to contact the respondent in relation to this issue.
    27. Point (ii:)   An application to call evidence  by  electronic  link
        must be made in sufficient time before the hearing to allow  it  to
        be dealt with properly.  The application  should  be  made  to  the
        relevant judge (normally the Resident Senior Immigration Judge)  at
        the hearing centre at which the hearing is to take place, and  must
        give (a) the reason why the  proposed  witness  cannot  attend  the
        hearing; (b) an indication of  what  arrangements  have  been  made
        provisionally  at  the  distant  site  (c)  an  undertaking  to  be
        responsible   for   any   expenses    incurred.    The    appellant
        comprehensively failed to deal with this  requirement.  It  is  not
        acceptable for an advocate  to  make  an  application  on  the  day
        evidence to be given by this means, seeking to justify a failure to
        comply with guidance by claiming such evidence could  be  given  by
        Skype on the advocates own laptop. Not all hearing centres have Wi-
        Fi and some buildings, even if part of the estate has a signal, not
        all parts of that building do. Whilst the  modernisation  programme
        should remedy any shortfalls in the future that is not the  current
        position. There also  appears  to  have  been  no  indication  what
        arrangements had been made in Ghana, which are as important as  the
        arrangements in the UK, especially in ascertaining the identity  of
        the person giving the evidence, reliability  of  signal,  available
        time  for  such  evidence  to   be   given,   together   with   the
        jurisdictional point which is discussed below.
    28. Point (iii):  The expectation ought to be  that  the  distant  site
        will be a court or Tribunal hearing centre, and that the giving  of
        the evidence will be subject to on-site  supervision  by  court  or
        Tribunal staff. No notice was given relation to the aspect of  what
        supervision, and by whom, was proposed in relation to  the  witness
        in Ghana.
    29. Point (iv): If the proposal is to give evidence  from  abroad,  the
        party seeking permission must  be  in  a  position  to  inform  the
        Tribunal that the relevant foreign government raises  no  objection
        to live evidence being given from within  its  jurisdiction,  to  a
        Tribunal or court in the United  Kingdom.   The  vast  majority  of
        countries with which immigration appeals (even asylum appeals)  are
        concerned are countries with which the United Kingdom has  friendly
        diplomatic relations, and it is not for  an  immigration  judge  to
        interfere with those relations by not ensuring  that  enquiries  of
        this sort have been  made,  and  that  the  outcome  was  positive.
        Enquiries of this nature  may  be  addressed  to  the  Foreign  and
        Commonwealth Office (International  Legal  Matters  Unit,  Consular
        Division).  If evidence is given from abroad,  a  British  Embassy,
        High Commission or Commonwealth may be  able  to  provide  suitable
        facilities. This is the jurisdictional point referred to above.  At
        no time was any approach made to the Ghana authorities to ascertain
        whether they have any objection to live evidence  been  given  from
        within their territory to a Tribunal in the United  Kingdom  or  to
        the  relevant  Embassy.  The  importance  of  such   enquiries   is
        reinforced by the Upper Tribunal stressing the  need  for  avoiding
        interfering with diplomatic relationships by ensuring that the host
        State is satisfied with such evidence being given. This  is  not  a
        communication by way of a recreational conversation with family  or
        friends but a means of formally  giving  evidence  to  a  court  or
        tribunal.
    30. Point (v) The application must be served on all other  parties,  in
        time for them to have a proper opportunity to respond  to  it.  The
        only application that it can safely said was made was that made  on
        the day by Ms Mensah, indicating a  comprehensive  failure  of  the
        appellant  to  advise  the  respondent  and  First-tier   Tribunal.
        Attempting to 'ambush' an opposing party in  this  way  is  grossly
        unfair and a breach of natural  justice  in  itself.  Although  the
        Presenting Officer gave an oral response at the hearing that is not
        determinative as it is arguable a proper response to an application
        could not have been made until all aspects of the guidance had been
        properly addressed, including the jurisdictional point.
    31. Point (vi): The decision whether to  grant  the  application  is  a
        judicial one.  The judge making the decision will take into account
        the reasons supporting the application,  any  response  from  other
        parties and the content of the proposed evidence, as well as of the
        overriding objective of the rules.  If the application is  granted,
        there may be further specific directions, which must  be  followed.
        The Judge considered and made the decision taking all  the  matters
        the First-tier Tribunal had been asked to  consider  into  account,
        including the overriding  objectives  set  out  in  the  First-tier
        Tribunal Procedure Rules.
    32. This Tribunal has also noted the Practice Directions on the  taking
        of video evidence at CPR PD 32 Annex 3 (see Annex A below for  full
        text), which state that "It should not be presumed that all foreign
        governments are willing to allow their nationals or  others  within
        their jurisdiction to be examined before  a  court  in  England  or
        Wales by means of VCF.  If there is any doubt about this, enquiries
        should  be  directed  to  the  Foreign  and   Commonwealth   Office
        (International Legal Matters Unit, Consulate Division) with a  view
        to ensuring that the country from which the evidence is to be taken
        raises no objections to it at a diplomatic level."
    33. This is an issue that has therefore been canvassed and in  relation
        to which guidance has been given, for some time.
    34. I do not find the Judge erred in  law  in  refusing  to  admit  the
        evidence by Skype on the day  in  light  of  the  history  of  this
        matter, including the comprehensive failure  of  the  appellant  to
        comply with the published guidance.
    35. In relation to the challenge to the decision of the  Judge  not  to
        adjourn the hearing, based upon the decision of the Upper  Tribunal
        in Nwaigwe (adjournment: fairness) [2014]  UKUT  00418,  Ms  Mensah
        places particular reliance upon [5] of the judgment in which it  is
        found:


         "5.  In the Rules matrix outlined above, rule 21(2) is a  provision
             of critical importance. Its  effect  is  that  where  a  party
             applies for an adjournment of the  hearing,  the  Tribunal  is
             obliged, in every case, to consider whether the appeal can  be
             "justly determined" in the  moving  party's  absence.  If  the
             decision is to refuse the application, this must be  based  on
             the Tribunal satisfying itself that the appeal can  be  justly
             determined in the absence of the party concerned.  This  means
             that, in principle, there may be cases  where  an  adjournment
             should be ordered notwithstanding that the  moving  party  has
             failed to demonstrate  good  reason  for  this  course.  As  a
             general rule, good reason will have to demonstrate in order to
             secure an adjournment. There are  strong  practical  and  case
             management reasons for this, particularly in the  contemporary
             litigation  culture  with  its  emphasis  on  efficiency   and
             expedition.  However,  these  considerations,   unquestionably
             important though they are, must be tempered and  applied  with
             the recognition that a fundamental common  law  right,  namely
             the right of every litigant to a fair hearing, is engaged.  In
             any case where a question of possible adjournment arises, this
             is  the  dominant  consideration.  It  is  also  important  to
             recognise that the relevant  provisions  of  the  2005  Rules,
             rehearsed  above,  do  not  modify  or  dilute,  and  are  the
             handmaidens, their master, and the common law right in play."


  36. The Judge was  fully  aware  of  the  requirements  of  fairness  when
      considering  the  application.  There  was  no  basis  on  which   the
      application was sought other than to arrange for the evidence from  Ms
      D to be given from abroad. As noted by Mr McVeety, a witness statement
      had been provided with the evidence and the  Judge  makes  a  specific
      finding that it was unclear from the submissions made whether  Ms  D's
      evidence was likely to be forthcoming or when.
    37. It has not been made out when considering the submissions  made  to
        the Upper Tribunal, the chronology and aspects  considered  by  the
        Judge, that either the decision to refuse to admit the evidence  of
        Ms D by Skype or the refusal of the application to adjourn for this
        purpose falls outside the reasonable exercise of the  discretionary
        case management powers available to the Judge. It has not been made
        out either decision is unfair or that the appellant has been denied
        the opportunity to put her case to the  First-tier  Tribunal  in  a
        manner identified by procedural requirements.
    38. It is not made out that the Judge  erred  in  law  in  relation  to
        either procedural decisions sufficient  to  amount  to  a  material
        error of law sufficient to warrant a grant permission to appeal  to
        the Upper Tribunal.
    39. The appellant fails to make out any arguable error in  relation  to
        any other aspect of the Judges decision.

Decision

    40. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal
        Judge's decision. The determination shall stand.


   Anonymity.


    41. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i)  of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.







Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 29 August 2017



                               ANNEX A


                               CPR PD 32





ANNEX 3


VIDEO CONFERENCING GUIDANCE

This guidance is for the use of video conferencing (VCF) in civil
proceedings. It is in part based, with permission, upon the protocol of the
Federal Court of Australia. It is intended to provide a guide to all
persons involved in the use of VCF, although it does not attempt to cover
all the practical questions which might arise.

Video conferencing generally

1.  The guidance covers the use of VCF equipment both (a) in a courtroom,
whether via equipment which is permanently placed there or via a mobile
unit, and (b) in a separate studio or conference room. In either case, the
location at which the judge sits is referred to as the 'local site'. The
other site or sites to and from which transmission is made are referred to
as 'the remote site' and in any particular case any such site may be
another courtroom. The guidance applies to cases where VCF is used for the
taking of evidence and also to its use for other parts of any legal
proceedings (for example, interim applications, case management
conferences, pre-trial reviews).
2.  VCF may be a convenient way of dealing with any part of proceedings: it
can involve considerable savings in time and cost. Its use for the taking
of evidence from overseas witnesses will, in particular, be likely to
achieve a material saving of costs, and such savings may also be achieved
by its use for taking domestic evidence. It is, however, inevitably not as
ideal as having the witness physically present in court. Its convenience
should not therefore be allowed to dictate its use. A judgment must be made
in every case in which the use of VCF is being considered not only as to
whether it will achieve an overall cost saving but as to whether its use
will be likely to be beneficial to the efficient, fair and economic
disposal of the litigation. In particular, it needs to be recognised that
the degree of control a court can exercise over a witness at the remote
site is or may be more limited than it can exercise over a witness
physically before it.
3.  When used for the taking of evidence, the objective should be to make
the VCF session as close as possible to the usual practice in a trial court
where evidence is taken in open court. To gain the maximum benefit, several
differences have to be taken into account. Some matters, which are taken
for granted when evidence is taken in the conventional way, take on a
different dimension when it is taken by VCF: for example, the
administration of the oath, ensuring that the witness understands who is at
the local site and what their various roles are, the raising of any
objections to the evidence and the use of documents.
4.  It should not be presumed that all foreign governments are willing to
allow their nationals or others within their jurisdiction to be examined
before a court in England or Wales by means of VCF. If there is any doubt
about this, enquiries should be directed to the Foreign and Commonwealth
Office (Legalisation Office) [email] with a view to ensuring that the
country from which the evidence is to be taken raises no objection to it at
diplomatic level. The party who is directed to be responsible for arranging
the VCF (see paragraph 8 below) will be required to make all necessary
inquiries about this well in advance of the VCF and must be able to inform
the court what those inquiries were and of their outcome.
5.  Time zone differences need to be considered when a witness abroad is to
be examined in England or Wales by VCF. The convenience of the witness, the
parties, their representatives and the court must all be taken into
account. The cost of the use of a commercial studio is usually greater
outside normal business hours.
6.  Those involved with VCF need to be aware that, even with the most
advanced systems currently available, there are the briefest of delays
between the receipt of the picture and that of the accompanying sound. If
due allowance is not made for this, there will be a tendency to 'speak
over' the witness, whose voice will continue to be heard for a millisecond
or so after he or she appears on the screen to have finished speaking.
7.  With current technology, picture quality is good, but not as good as a
television picture. The quality of the picture is enhanced if those
appearing on VCF monitors keep their movements to a minimum.

Preliminary arrangements

8.  The court's permission is required for any part of any proceedings to
be dealt with by means of VCF. Before seeking a direction, the applicant
should notify the listing officer, diary manager or other appropriate court
officer of the intention to seek it, and should enquire as to the
availability of court VCF equipment for the day or days of the proposed
VCF. The application for a direction should be made to the Master, District
Judge or Judge, as may be appropriate. If all parties consent to a
direction, permission can be sought by letter, fax or e-mail, although the
court may still require an oral hearing. All parties are entitled to be
heard on whether or not such a direction should be given and as to its
terms. If a witness at a remote site is to give evidence by an interpreter,
consideration should be given at this stage as to whether the interpreter
should be at the local site or the remote site. If a VCF direction is
given, arrangements for the transmission will then need to be made. The
court will ordinarily direct that the party seeking permission to use VCF
is to be responsible for this. That party is hereafter referred to as 'the
VCF arranging party'.
9.  Subject to any order to the contrary, all costs of the transmission,
including the costs of hiring equipment and technical personnel to operate
it, will initially be the responsibility of, and must be met by, the VCF
arranging party. All reasonable efforts should be made to keep the
transmission to a minimum and so keep the costs down. All such costs will
be considered to be part of the costs of the proceedings and the court will
determine at such subsequent time as is convenient or appropriate who, as
between the parties, should be responsible for them and (if appropriate) in
what proportions.
10.  The local site will, if practicable, be a courtroom but it may instead
be an appropriate studio or conference room. The VCF arranging party must
contact the listing officer, diary manager or other appropriate officer of
the court which made the VCF direction and make arrangements for the VCF
transmission. Details of the remote site, and of the equipment to be used
both at the local site (if not being supplied by the court) and the remote
site (including the number of ISDN lines and connection speed), together
with all necessary contact names and telephone numbers, will have to be
provided to the listing officer, diary manager or other court officer. The
court will need to be satisfied that any equipment provided by the parties
for use at the local site and also that at the remote site is of sufficient
quality for a satisfactory transmission. The VCF arranging party must
ensure that an appropriate person will be present at the local site to
supervise the operation of the VCF throughout the transmission in order to
deal with any technical problems. That party must also arrange for a
technical assistant to be similarly present at the remote site for like
purposes.
11.  It is recommended that the judge, practitioners and witness should
arrive at their respective VCF sites about 20 minutes prior to the
scheduled commencement of the transmission.
12.  If the local site is not a courtroom, but a conference room or studio,
the judge will need to determine who is to sit where. The VCF arranging
party must take care to ensure that the number of microphones is adequate
for the speakers and that the panning of the camera for the practitioners'
table encompasses all legal representatives so that the viewer can see
everyone seated there.
13.  The proceedings, wherever they may take place, form part of a trial to
which the public is entitled to have access (unless the court has
determined that they should be heard in private). If the local site is to
be a studio or conference room, the VCF arranging party must ensure that it
provides sufficient accommodation to enable a reasonable number of members
of the public to attend.
14.  In cases where the local site is a studio or conference room, the VCF
arranging party should make arrangements, if practicable, for the royal
coat of arms to be placed above the judge's seat.
15.  In cases in which the VCF is to be used for the taking of evidence,
the VCF arranging party must arrange for recording equipment to be provided
by the court which made the VCF direction so that the evidence can be
recorded. An associate will normally be present to operate the recording
equipment when the local site is a courtroom. The VCF arranging party
should take steps to ensure that an associate is present to do likewise
when it is a studio or conference room. The equipment should be set up and
tested before the VCF transmission. It will often be a valuable safeguard
for the VCF arranging party also to arrange for the provision of recording
equipment at the remote site. This will provide a useful back-up if there
is any reduction in sound quality during the transmission. A direction from
the court for the making of such a back-up recording must, however, be
obtained first. This is because the proceedings are court proceedings and,
save as directed by the court, no other recording of them must be made. The
court will direct what is to happen to the back-up recording.
16.  Some countries may require that any oath or affirmation to be taken by
a witness accord with local custom rather than the usual form of oath or
affirmation used in England and Wales. The VCF arranging party must make
all appropriate prior inquiries and put in place all arrangements necessary
to enable the oath or affirmation to be taken in accordance with any local
custom. That party must be in a position to inform the court what those
inquiries were, what their outcome was and what arrangements have been
made. If the oath or affirmation can be administered in the manner normal
in England and Wales, the VCF arranging party must arrange in advance to
have the appropriate holy book at the remote site. The associate will
normally administer the oath.
17.  Consideration will need to be given in advance to the documents to
which the witness is likely to be referred. The parties should endeavour to
agree on this. It will usually be most convenient for a bundle of the copy
documents to be prepared in advance, which the VCF arranging party should
then send to the remote site.
18.  Additional documents are sometimes quite properly introduced during
the course of a witness's evidence. To cater for this, the VCF arranging
party should ensure that equipment is available to enable documents to be
transmitted between sites during the course of the VCF transmission.
Consideration should be given to whether to use a document camera. If it is
decided to use one, arrangements for its use will need to be established in
advance. The panel operator will need to know the number and size of
documents or objects if their images are to be sent by document camera. In
many cases, a simpler and sufficient alternative will be to ensure that
there are fax transmission and reception facilities at the participating
sites.




