
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                             Appeal Number:
PA/07986/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                   |          Decision & Reasons         |
|                                       |Promulgated                          |
|On 12 February 2018                    |          On 16 February 2018        |
|                                       |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PEART

                                   Between

                                     s y
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Harris of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.  She was born  on  15  January
    1986.  She appealed against the respondent's  decision  to  refuse  her
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on human  rights  grounds  dated  1
    February 2017.  There was a supplemental decision dated 9 August 2017.

 2. Judge I D Boyes (the judge)  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  in  a
    decision promulgated on 6 November 2017.  The judge did  not  find  the
    appellant to be a credible witness. He found she would not be  at  risk
    on return and that the respondent's decision was proportionate in terms
    of Article 8.

 3. The grounds claim the judge:

      a) failed to properly assess  the  appellant's  risk  given  that  the
         respondent had alerted the persecutors of her asylum claim;

      b) incorrectly considered the documentation provided  from  the  court
         and three Sri Lankan lawyers;

      c) failed to consider the documentation from the LLRC; and

      d) did not consider the appellant's Article 8 claim.

 4. Judge Pullig granted permission on 7 December 2017.  He found no  error
    with regard to grounds (a) and (b).  Nevertheless, Judge  Pullig  found
    that the judge made no mention of considering the  LLRC  documents  and
    that failure to do so and the judge's failure to deal  with  Article  8
    was arguably an error of law such that he granted permission  on  those
    grounds.

 5. There was no Rule 24 response.

Preliminary Issue

 6. Ms Harris sought permission for me  to  consider  all  the  grounds  of
    appeal notwithstanding that Judge Pullig had  granted  permission  only
    with regard  to  grounds  (c)  and  (d).   I  considered  the  same  in
    accordance with the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  and
    Ferrer [2012] UKUT 00304.  There had been  no  renewed  application  by
    those instructing Ms Harris nor any explanation for failure to do so in
    time.  I considered the application with regard to [24]-[27] of Ferrer.
     I bore in mind as per [27]  of  Ferrer  that  neither  the  Tribunal's
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 read with the Upper Tribunal Rules  was
    such as to excuse a party from the requirement to seek and  obtain  the
    permission of the Upper Tribunal in order to raise grounds not  already
    before the Upper Tribunal.  There was no explanation for the failure to
    apply or the fact that the  application  was  out  of  time.   In  such
    circumstances, I refused the application.

Submissions on Error of Law

 7. Ms Harris relied upon grounds (c) and (d)  that  the  judge  failed  to
    consider the documentation from the  LLRC  and  did  not  consider  the
    appellant's Article 8 claim.  Ms Harris submitted that the  judge  made
    no findings with regard to the documentation from the LLRC and  it  was
    incumbent upon him to do so in terms  of  MK  (duty  to  give  reasons)
    Pakistan [2013] UKUT 641 (IAC).   The  fact  that  the  appellant  gave
    evidence to the LLRC placed her in a different risk  category  pursuant
    to the country guidance case of GJ (post-civil war:  returnees)  [2013]
    UKUT 319; in particular at [356](c):

         "356.    (7)(c)    Individuals  who  have  given  evidence  to  the
                      lessons   learned   and   reconciliation   commission
                      implicating the Sri  Lankan  security  forces,  armed
                      forces or the Sri Lankan authorities in  alleged  war
                      crimes.  Among  those  who  may  have  witnessed  war
                      crimes during the conflict, particularly in  the  no-
                      fire zones in May 2009, only those who  have  already
                      identified themselves by giving such  evidence  would
                      be known to the Sri Lankan authorities and  therefore
                      only they are at real risk of  adverse  attention  or
                      persecution on return  as  potential  or  actual  war
                      crimes witnesses."

 8. The appellant provided two letters from the LLRC at pages 23-26 of  her
    bundle which Ms Harris submitted the judge failed to properly consider.
     It was a material error of law to fail to conduct such analysis of the
    documents and determine what weight should be ascribed to them.

 9. As regards Article 8, it was the appellant's claim that  removal  would
    disproportionately breach her Article 8 rights.  The appellant suffered
    from  depression,  polycystic  ovaries  and  her  moral  and   physical
    integrity would be disproportionately affected by removal.   The  judge
    entirely failed to conduct a proportionality exercise  outside  of  the
    Rules.

10. Mr Mills asked me to consider the context.  As regards ground (c)  that
    had to be viewed in line with the judge's adverse credibility  findings
    regarding the other documentation.  The judge had found  the  appellant
    not to be credible.  She  had  produced  false  documentation.   Whilst
    there was no specific finding  that  the  LLRC  documentation  was  not
    genuine, there was an inference in  that  regard  and  particularly  so
    bearing in mind the judge's findings with regard to  GJ  at  [38].   As
    regards the claimed failure to engage with Article 8, it is  true  that
    the judge was brief,  however,  it  was  clear  at  [43]  that  he  had
    immediately jumped to a proportionality exercise such that he  did  not
    err.

Conclusion on Error of Law

11. The appellant's claim was founded  upon  her  witnessing  a  white  van
    abduction in January 2010.  She said she subsequently gave evidence  to
    the LLRC.  At [36] of the reasons for refusal dated 9 August 2017,  the
    respondent said that there was no evidence to suggest the appellant had
    given evidence to  the  LLRC.   To  counter  the  same,  the  appellant
    produced correspondence at pages 24 and 26 of her bundle claiming  that
    she had produced a statement for the LLRC  and  had  been  subsequently
    invited to interview, which I understand she failed to  attend.   I  do
    accept that the two letters I have referred to at [8]  above  were  not
    referred to in the  decision.   Nevertheless,  there  was  a  wholesale
    rejection as fraudulent, the documents the appellant had produced:

         "27. It is perhaps most appropriate that I start the discussion and
             my findings  in  relation  to  the  documents  produced.   The
             appellant maintains that the Tribunal can accept the documents
             as genuine for a number of reasons; there  is  a  clear  paper
             trail from the obtaining of them to the arrival of them in the
             UK, the appellant's mother and the lawyer were able to  obtain
             them after they became aware of the  existence  of  the  same,
             three separate lawyers have checked and independently verified
             the validity of the documents  and  their  appearance  in  the
             records of the court.

         30.  I am satisfied that the documents produced  by  the  appellant
             are not genuine.  I reach this conclusion  for  the  following
             reasons; none of  the  persons  who  attended  to  verify  the
             documents on behalf of  the  appellant  took  the  liberty  of
             either taking a copy of that which was within the court  file,
             obtaining a witness statement from the  registrar  or  similar
             official or even taking a copy themselves from that  contained
             within the file ......"

12. The judge placed no weight upon the appellant's  documentation.   There
    was no mention of the LLRC documentation although Mr Mills'  submission
    is that was implicit in the judge's adverse findings.  The  judge  went
    on to consider the appellant's credibility at [36].  For the reasons he
    expressed, he did not find her a credible witness.

13. He considered her risk on return in terms of GJ at [38]. He was not  in
    error in what he said at the end of [38] in his finding that there  was
    no evidence before the Tribunal as to what the appellant  had  said  to
    the LLRC. That was because there was  no  copy  of  the  statement  the
    appellant made to the LLRC, only  the  two  letters  acknowledging  her
    statement and inviting her to be interviewed. See pages 24  and  26  of
    the appellant's bundle.  I do find that in failing to specifically make
    findings with regard to that documentation, the judge erred  but  I  do
    not find such error to be material bearing in mind the overall  adverse
    credibility findings, in particular with regard  to  the  documentation
    which formed the foundation  of  the  appellant's  claim,  rejected  as
    fraudulent in a  document  verification  report  and  which  the  judge
    considered  and  made  findings  at  [27]-[35].    I   find   in   such
    circumstances, that  what  the  judge  said  at  [38]  was  by  way  of
    supplemental comment with regard to the specific risk categories in  GJ
    and why it was that the appellant failed to satisfy the same.

14. I do accept that the judge's Article 8 analysis in [43] was brief,  but
    I do not accept as a result that he erred materially.  It is  clear  at
    [43] that the judge engaged with the issues presented and whilst he did
    not say so, I find it is clear from what he said that he  engaged  with
    [29] of the skeleton which was equally sparse:

         "29. The Tribunal is also asked to consider the appellant's Article
             8 rights "outside the  Rules".   The  appellant  suffers  from
             depression for which  she  takes  medication;  her  moral  and
             physical integrity would  be  disproportionately  affected  by
             removal."

15. The judge engaged with the Article 8 claim in the terms it was  put  to
    him:

         "43. In regard to Article 8 there is nothing exceptional about  the
             appellant's case to justify  a  grant  of  leave  outside  the
             Rules.  That the appellant has  gynaecological  problems  does
             not mean she cannot obtain treatment for that  in  Sri  Lanka.
             The appellant has depression.  She is  not  taking  medication
             for it.  Depression, even untreated, cannot be said to  amount
             to a good argument that removing her from the UK will lead  to
             the disturbing of her moral and physical integrity."

16. I conclude that the decision does not contain a material error  of  law
    such that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal should be set aside.



Notice of Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no error  of  law  and
    shall stand.

Anonymity direction continued.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed                              Date 12 February 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Peart
