
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)           Appeal Number: PA/07488/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 12 October 2018             |On 12 November 2018               |
|                               |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    M. H.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

        1. The Appellant, a citizen of Iraq,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
           illegally in 2010 and claimed asylum. That  claim  was  refused,
           and his appeal rights against that refusal were exhausted  on  8
           October 2010.
        2. The Appellant lodged a further  protection  claim  on  12  March
           2014, which was refused on 20 July 2017. An appeal  against  the
           decision  to  refuse  this  protection  claim  was   heard   and
           determined by First Tier Tribunal  Judge  Hands  in  a  decision
           promulgated on 8 June 2018. The protection appeal was dismissed,
           but the Appellant's Article 8 appeal based upon his relationship
           with his two British citizen children was allowed.
        3. Permission to appeal was granted to the Respondent by First tier
           Tribunal Judge Bird on 4 July 2018.
        4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged in response to  the  grant  of
           permission to appeal. Neither party has applied pursuant to Rule
           15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
        5. Thus the matter came before me.




      The hearing
        6. When the appeal was called on for hearing the Appellant notified
           me that his former partner, and the mother of his two  children,
           was unable to attend. He said that he had expected her to do so,
           as indeed she had attended an earlier hearing, albeit  not  that
           before  Judge  Hands.  He  informed  me  that  his  partner  was
           hospitalised with a brain tumour, and that he did  not  seek  an
           adjournment, since he felt able to deal  with  the  Respondent's
           complaints himself.




    The challenge
        7. The grounds are not well drafted, and give the  impression  that
           they simply seek to re-argue the appeal. Mr Diwnycz struggled to
           distil from them any error of law challenge, and ultimately took
           them to assert that Judge Hands  had  failed  to  give  adequate
           reasons for her findings (as the Judge  who  granted  permission
           had done).
        8. The reality is that the  individual  complaints  raised  in  the
           grounds have no merit. The Judge clearly had well in  mind  that
           she needed to approach the Appellant's  evidence  with  caution.
           She had after all begun by reminding herself that  the  Tribunal
           had dismissed as untrue the 2010 protection appeal, and went  on
           to dismiss as untrue the protection appeal advanced before  her.
           That did not mean that the Article 8 appeal was bound  to  fail.
           It was after all, not in dispute  that  the  Appellant  was  the
           father of two British citizen children, and that he  was  unable
           to live in Birmingham as a result of the threats that  had  been
           made against his safety in that city. It was well  open  to  the
           Judge to accept on the evidence before her,  that  there  was  a
           genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship  with  those  two
           children, and she gave entirely adequate reasons for doing so.
        9. The Appellant did not need  to  demonstrate  that  he  had  sole
           parental responsibility, as ground 4 avers, and the  grounds  do
           not suggest that any immaterial evidence was taken into account,
           or that any material evidence was  left  out  of  account,  when
           addressing the issue of whether he had a genuine and  subsisting
           parental relationship with his two British citizen children.
       10. The Judge did not address directly the s117B(6) test, and it  is
           fair to say that her decision does not contain a  clear  finding
           as to whether it was reasonable to expect either child to  leave
           the UK to live in Iran. It is however possible in  my  judgement
           to infer such a finding from the text of the  decision,  and  if
           that is the proper inference to  be  drawn  from  it,  then  the
           appeal was bound to succeed because  Parliament  has  stipulated
           that in those circumstances the public interest does not require
           the removal of a father.
       11. What the Judge did do was to consider the effect  upon  the  two
           children of their father's removal.  She  concluded  that  there
           would be a detrimental effect upon them both [46]. In  so  doing
           it is, just, arguable  that  she  mistakenly  had  in  mind  the
           s117C(5) test that would only be relevant  in  the  event  of  a
           parent's deportation; circumstances which did not arise in  this
           appeal. However, it is in my judgement far more likely that  she
           was either returning to the  best  interests  of  the  children,
           which she had considered earlier  as  lying  in  favour  of  the
           Appellant's being able to remain  in  the  UK  and  continue  to
           parent his two children [41], or seeking to  draw  her  findings
           together into one overall conclusion on the  proportionality  of
           the decision under appeal. What is abundantly clear  however  is
           that the overall finding that it was disproportionate to  remove
           the Appellant was one that was well open to her on the evidence.
           In my judgement the reasons offered  for  that  conclusion  were
           adequate. The Respondent as the losing party can  see  that  the
           appeal succeeded because  the  Judge  accepted  as  genuine  and
           subsisting and  beneficial  to  all,  the  Appellant's  parental
           relationship with his British citizen children.
       12. Accordingly, and notwithstanding the terms in  which  permission
           to appeal was granted to the  Respondent  the  grounds  fail  to
           disclose any arguable error of law in the approach taken by  the
           Judge to the appeal.







   DECISION


   The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was promulgated on  8
   June 2018 contained no error of law  in  the  decision  to  dismiss  the
   Appellant's appeal which requires that decision  to  be  set  aside  and
   remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
      Unless and until the Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
        granted anonymity throughout these proceedings. No report of  these
        proceedings  shall  directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This
        direction applies both to the  Appellant  and  to  the  Respondent.
        Failure to comply with this direction  could  lead  to  proceedings
        being brought for contempt of court.




   Signed




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 12 October 2018
