
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07859/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27th September 2017                   |On 28th September 2017            |
|                                         |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     YM
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms. C Warren, instructed by ADL Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. G Harrison, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity order was made by the FtT.  It is appropriate to  continue
    that order, pursuant to  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269). I also  make  an  anonymity  order.
    Unless the Upper Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise,  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Shergill promulgated on 25th January  2017.   The  underlying  decision
    that was the subject of  the  appeal  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    ("FtT") was the decision of the respondent  dated  14th  July  2016  to
    refuse the appellant's protection and human rights claims.


 3. It is uncontroversial that the appellant  is  an  Iranian  national  of
    Kurdish ethnicity. The appellant's claim for  international  protection
    is based  on  his  imputed  political  opinion.   Broadly  stated,  the
    appellant claims that he was involved in a plan  to  threaten  a  local
    Mullah who had been preaching to the local population  and  encouraging
    them to fight in Syria. The appellant's account  was  rejected  by  the
    respondent for the reasons that are set out at paragraphs [10] to  [24]
    of the respondent's decision.  The respondent identified  a  number  of
    matters that lead her to reject the account of the  appellant  that  he
    and his friend hatched a plot to frighten or threaten a  local  Mullah,
    that  the  appellant's  friend  was  arrested,  and  that  the  Iranian
    authorities raided the appellant's home and  are  actively  seeking  to
    arrest him.  A summary of the appellant's  claim  as  it  was  advanced
    before the FtT is to be found at paragraph [5] of the decision  of  the
    FtT Judge.


 4. The Judge's findings of fact and reasons for dismissing the appeal  are
    to be found at paragraphs [15] to [40]  of  his  decision.   The  Judge
    notes at paragraph [15] that the appeal hinges on  the  credibility  of
    the appellant.  The Judge correctly records at paragraph [16]  that  he
    is obliged  to  consider  s8  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatments  of
    Claimant's, etc) Act 2004.  At paragraph  [21]  of  the  decision,  the
    Judge stated:


         " I am satisfied when looking at all of the evidence in  the  round
         that the appellant's credibility is damaged because he  has  failed
         to take advantage of a reasonable opportunity  to  make  an  asylum
         claim in another safe country. Therefore, the claimant  credibility
         is damaged under section 8 of the 2004 Act.


 5. At paragraphs [23] to [32] of his  decision,  the  FtT  Judge  notes  a
    number of areas of the appellant's account that the Judge considers are
    unexplained, or to be implausible.  At paragraphs [33] to [34]  of  his
    decision, the Judge states;


         "33.  I do not consider the claimed events  to  be  plausible  when
         considering all of the matters in the round to the lower standard.


         34.   Looking at all of the matters in the  round  I  am  satisfied
         that the appellant has put forward an account which has a number of
         significant discrepancies. Whilst I do not necessarily endorse  all
         of those discrepancies as set out in the refusal  letter,  the  key
         ones have been set out above with my reasoning as to why I consider
         them to be appropriate to be relied upon.  I  have  looked  at  the
         documentary evidence put forward by the  appellant  and  considered
         his oral evidence and I am not satisfied  here  adequately  counted
         the concerns for forward."


 6. The Judge concluded, at [41], that the appellant has not discharged the
    burden of proof to show with a reasonable degree of likelihood that  he
    has a well-founded fear of persecution for a reason recognised  by  the
    Geneva Convention.  The appeal was dismissed on protection grounds  and
    human rights grounds.


 7. The appellant advanced four grounds of appeal.  First, the Judge  erred
    in his assessment of the appellant's credibility and his application of
    s8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of  Claimants,  etc)  Act
    2004.  Second, the decision of the FtT Judge is tainted  by  procedural
    unfairness in that many of the adverse credibility findings made by the
    Judge are based upon matters that had not been raised by the respondent
    and were not raised during the course of the  hearing  of  the  appeal.
    The appellant was therefore given no opportunity to respond to  any  of
    the concerns that the FtT Judge may have had.  Third, it was irrational
    for the Judge to conclude that the appellant's credibility  is  damaged
    because of the evidence as to the funding of  the  appellant's  appeal.
    Finally, the purported discrepancies identified by the Judge are not in
    fact discrepancies, but a failure by the Judge to direct himself to the
    evidence that was before him, and to have proper regard to it.


 8. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  on  17th
    July 2017. The matter comes before me to consider whether the  decision
    of the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and  if  so,
    to remake the decision.


 9. Before me, Ms Warren relied upon the Grounds of  Appeal  and  submitted
    that viewed from a number of angles,  the  Judge's  assessment  of  the
    credibility of the appellant is flawed.  When  taken  together,  it  is
    plain that the decision of the  FtT  Judge  is  tainted  by  procedural
    unfairness, and the way in which the adverse credibility findings  were
    reached disclose a material error of  law  that  infected  the  Judge's
    consideration of the appeal.


10. Ms Warren submits that the  Judge  started  his  consideration  of  the
    credibility of the appellant by making  a  strong  adverse  credibility
    finding against the  appellant  at  paragraph  [21]  of  his  decision,
    because the appellant had failed to  take  advantage  of  a  reasonable
    opportunity to make an asylum claim whilst  in  another  safe  country.
    She submits that having made  that  adverse  credibility  finding,  the
    Judge went on to make further adverse credibility findings against  the
    appellant in respect  of  matters  that  the  appellant  was  given  no
    opportunity to address, are based upon speculation, or  are  considered
    by the Judge to be implausible. For example, at paragraph [29]  of  his
    decision, the Judge states that the  majority  of  Kurdish  people  are
    Sunni, a matter upon which he  takes  "judicial  notice  of"  from  his
    experience in the FtT.


11. In reply, Mr Harrison  adopted  the  Rule  24  response  filed  by  the
    respondent and dated 2nd August  2017.   He  conceded,  rightly  in  my
    judgement, that within the decision of  the  FtT  Judge,  there  are  a
    number of paragraphs in which the  Judge  appears  to  speculate.   For
    example, at  paragraph  [23]  of  his  decision,  the  Judge  found  it
    implausible that the appellant was capable of fleeing Iran in the short
    period of  time  that  he  claimed.   The  Judge  stated  that  it  was
    implausible that the significant amount of money that would be required
    in order for the appellant to have a safe passage to the United Kingdom
    could be raised in such a short period of time.  At paragraph  [24]  of
    his decision, the judge found it implausible that the  appellant  would
    be able to fund a case privately without additional financial  support.
    It appears that the Judge considered the lack of candour  as  to  where
    the financial support and came from, as a matter that cast  doubt  upon
    the appellant's general credibility.


12. The principles relating to the impact upon  proceedings  of  unfairness
    arising from error of fact were reconsidered by the Court of Appeal  in
    R & ors (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982.  The Court  of  Appeal  held
    that before the Tribunal can set aside a decision of  a  Judge  on  the
    grounds of error of law, it has to be satisfied that the correction  of
    the error would have made a material difference to the outcome,  or  to
    the fairness of the proceedings. A finding might only be set aside  for
    error of law on the grounds of  perversity  if  it  was  irrational  or
    unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  one  that   was   wholly
    unsupported by the evidence.


13. I have carefully read through the decision of the  FtT  and  noted  the
    many criticisms cited in the appellant's grounds of  appeal.    If  the
    only criticism of the decision was  that  the  Judge  had  treated  the
    appellant's failure to take advantage of a  reasonable  opportunity  to
    make an asylum claim whilst in another safe country, as a  matter  that
    damages the credibility of the appellant, I would  have  dismissed  the
    appeal.  However, I accept the submission made by Ms  Warren  that  the
    Judge's assessment of the credibility  of  the  appellant  viewed  from
    different angles is flawed, and when taken together, the findings  made
    by the Judge are  unreasonable  in  the  Wednesbury  sense,  or  wholly
    unsupported by the evidence.  Similarly, I am satisfied  that  in  many
    places, the Judge appears to have made  adverse  findings  against  the
    appellant upon matters that were not raised in the reasons for  refusal
    letter, or at the hearing of the  appeal  before  the  FtT.   They  are
    matters therefore, that the appellant had no  opportunity  of  properly
    addressing either in his witness statement, his oral evidence or in the
    closing submissions made to the Tribunal.


14. In MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan  [2014]  UKUT  00105  (IAC)  the  Upper
    Tribunal held that  where  there  is  a  defect  or  impropriety  of  a
    procedural nature in the proceedings at first instance, this may amount
    to a material error of law requiring the decision of the FtT to be  set
    aside.  The authorities referred to by the Upper Tribunal make it clear
    that upon an appeal such as  this,  the  criterion  to  be  applied  is
    fairness and not reasonableness.  The Judge's conduct  of  the  hearing
    and his decision is not to be evaluated  by  reference  to  a  test  of
    reasonableness or fault.


15. I accept the submission made by Ms Warren that when the decision of the
    FtT Judge is read as a whole, it is clear that in a number of  respects
    the Judge made findings and reached conclusions upon matters  that  had
    neither been raised in the reasons for refusal letter, nor it  appears,
    were raised at the hearing of the appeal before the FtT.  To that  end,
    they were adverse findings made in circumstances  where  the  appellant
    was afforded no opportunity to respond to any concerns that  the  Judge
    had.   The resulting unfairness to the appellant is apparent  from  the
    findings made by the Judge and the conclusions reached.


16. I am satisfied that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved in
    the making of an error on a point of law and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal is set aside.


17. I must then consider whether  to  remit  the  case  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal, or to re-make the decision myself.  As the Upper Tribunal did
    in MM (unfairness; E & R) Sudan [2014] UKUT  00105  (IAC),  I  consider
    that where a first instance decision is set aside on the  basis  of  an
    error of law involving the deprivation of the appellant's  right  to  a
    fair hearing, the appropriate course will be to remit the matter  to  a
    newly constituted First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.


Notice of Decision


18. The appeal is allowed and the decision of FtT  Judge  Shergill  is  set
    aside.


19. The appeal is remitted to the FtT for a fresh  hearing  of  the  appeal
    with no findings preserved.

Signed                                  Date          27th September 2017


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia






TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                27th September 2017

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

