
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07735/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Leeds                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 13 January 2020                   |On 4 March 2020                      |
|Decision given orally at hearing     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     THE HON. MR JUSTICE LANE, PRESIDENT


                                   Between

                                     mo
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L Mair, Counsel, ATLEU
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, who is a citizen of  Nigeria,  appeals  with  permission
    granted by the First-tier Tribunal against the decision of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal which, following a hearing in Bradford in September 2019,
    dismissed the appellant's appeal against the respondent's  decision  to
    refuse her protection claim.

 2. The appellant's claim in  essence  is  that  she  was  trafficked  from
    Nigeria and compelled to work in the sex trade abroad.  The  respondent
    did not believe her account.  The First-tier  Tribunal  also  concluded
    that, although elements of her claim were in its  view  plausible,  she
    was not in the end to be regarded as a witness of truth.

 3. Ms Mair, who did not appear in the First-tier Tribunal proceedings, has
    addressed me by reference to her  written  grounds  of  appeal.   Those
    grounds are threefold.  Firstly, Ms Mair points to the fact that  there
    was some medical evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, which pointed
    to  the  appellant  having  psychological  problems.   The   First-tier
    Tribunal, however, did  not  make  any  finding  by  reference  to  the
    relevant guidance as to whether the appellant was as a result  of  that
    material to be treated as a vulnerable witness.  Had the Tribunal  done
    so, Ms Mair submits it is at least possible that they may have come  to
    the conclusion that the appellant is vulnerable.  This,  she  contends,
    is relevant, in that it could  have  affected  the  way  in  which  the
    Tribunal treated the evidence.

 4. The judge who granted permission was not particularly impressed by this
    ground.  I understand that view.  The letter of 30 August 2019 from the
    appellant's  General  Practitioner  says  that  she  has  anxiety   and
    depression "relating mainly to worry over her immigration  status"  and
    that, although she had been given support and advice about managing her
    anxiety, no actual treatment was then being  undertaken.   Indeed,  the
    letter says that the appellant "is on no  regular  medication  although
    she was prescribed an acid suppressant at the  beginning  of  June  for
    symptoms that were thought possibly to be related to excess acid".

 5. Ms Mair rightly points out that it is the duty of those representing  a
    person who is or may be treated  as  vulnerable  to  raise  that  issue
    before the Tribunal in question; and there is no  indication  from  the
    decision or indeed from anything  else  that  I  have  seen  that  that
    happened in this case.  It is, however, right that the Tribunal  should
    nevertheless consider for itself whether or not  someone  ought  to  be
    treated as vulnerable for the purposes of  the  guidance.   I  do  not,
    however, consider that the medical evidence  before  the  Tribunal  was
    such as to create such a requirement on the First-tier  Tribunal.   For
    these reasons, I do not consider that there is merit in ground 1.

 6. Ground 2 relates to an alleged error with regard to the credibility  of
    the appellant's return to her trafficker.  Here, Ms  Mair  is  on  much
    stronger ground.  The First-tier Tribunal began  its  consideration  of
    the appellant's evidence by noting that  elements  of  it  fell  to  be
    regarded as plausible.  At paragraph 30, the Tribunal  noted  that  the
    appellant came from an area of Nigeria from  which  female  victims  of
    trafficking  regularly  emanate.   Furthermore,  at  paragraph  32  the
    Tribunal noted the appellant's claim that the traffickers had used  the
    juju  oath  and  made  threats  against  her  mother,  as  a  means  of
    controlling  the  appellant.   That  too  the  Tribunal   regarded   as
    plausible.  The description of the juju oath in question is to be  seen
    at paragraphs 35 and 36 of the decision.

 7.  Notwithstanding  these  findings  in  favour  of  the  appellant,  the
    Tribunal found  that  the  appellant's  explanation  for  returning  to
    prostitution, after she had left the person in control of  her,  lacked
    credibility.  She had failed adequately to explain why she returned  to
    work as a prostitute.

 8. Because an element of a person's claim to be in need  of  international
    protection is regarded as plausible does not mean that a judicial fact-
    finder is compelled to find in that  person's  favour.   There  may  be
    other elements of the case which, looked  at  in  the  round  with  the
    elements considered to be plausible, nevertheless show that the account
    is lacking in credibility.  However, a finding that certain  background
    matters are  plausible  can,  depending  on  the  facts,  result  in  a
    heightened requirement for a Tribunal to explain  why,  notwithstanding
    those plausibility findings, the account is regarded as incredible.

 9.   With that in mind, one looks at paragraph  37  of  the  decision  and
    notes, as Ms Mair points out, that passages in the appellant's  witness
    statement explained why she  returned  to  work  as  a  prostitute  and
    continued working as such.  Threats had been made against  her  mother,
    after the appellant ceased to work; and, even after the  death  of  her
    mother, the appellant says  she  continued  to  work  because  she  was
    scared.  She also earned money and felt that she had no  choice.   None
    of this finds any consideration  in  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

10. The third ground of challenge relates to  a  finding  by  the  Tribunal
    regarding the appellant's educational history.  The appellant was vague
    as to dates, a matter which the First-tier Tribunal  considered  to  be
    significant.  Ms Mair says that, in fact, this matter was of peripheral
    importance.  Whether or not that was so, I do not consider it necessary
    to resolve.

11.  I say that because it is in my view plain that the First-tier Tribunal
    did commit an error of fact, in misunderstanding the evidence that  the
    appellant had given and in therefore wrongly concluding  that  she  had
    completed both primary and secondary education in Nigeria.  The  reason
    for this is that, in the interview record, the appellant was  asked  at
    question 19, which school she attended. She responded by saying that it
    was a named primary and secondary school.  The fact that the school had
    both primary and secondary elements  did  not  at  all  mean  that  the
    appellant completed both of those educational elements at  the  school.
    Mr Diwnycz for the respondent was in agreement that, on this ground  at
    least, there was an error of law. I agree. The error of  fact  led  the
    Tribunal to make an adverse credibility finding that was unsupported by
    the evidence.

12. As a result, both grounds 2 and 3 of Ms  Mair's  grounds  of  challenge
    succeed.  As a result,  the  credibility  findings  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal cannot stand.  I have heard submissions as to what should then
    follow.  Ms Mair informs  me  that  the  competent  authority  for  the
    respondent is reconsidering the trafficking matter and, in addition, it
    is hoped that there may be, with the  benefit  of  legal  aid,  a  more
    substantial consideration of the appellant's health than we find in the
    somewhat terse letter of 30 August 2019.

13. In all the circumstances, having regard to the overriding objective and
    the nature and extent of the fact-finding that  would  be  required,  I
    have concluded that this is a matter where it is  appropriate  for  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside and for the case to
    be re-heard in  its  entirety  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  with  no
    preserved findings.  I therefore set the decision aside and  remit  the
    matter to the First-tier Tribunal on that basis.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                      Signed                     Date 20 February 2020


                      The Hon. Mr Justice Lane
                      President of the Upper Tribunal
                      Immigration and Asylum Chamber







