
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07461/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Justice Centre   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18th February 2020                |On 21st April 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     SM
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARy OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Rutherford, Counsel instructed by CB Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal in respect
    of the appellant's children. As this appeal concerns the interests of
    minor children, it is appropriate to make an anonymity direction.
    Unless and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify him or any other member of his family. This
    direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


 2. The appellant is a national of Zimbabwe. He arrived in the UK in
    September 2001 as a visitor. In March 2002 he made an application for
    leave to remain as a student. That application was rejected by the
    respondent in April 2002 and the appellant remained in the UK
    unlawfully. In December 2008, he claimed asylum. That claim was refused
    by the respondent in February 2009 and his appeal against that decision
    was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal for reasons set out in a
    decision promulgated on 6th April 2009.  The appellant remained in the
    UK unlawfully and entered into a relationship with his partner and they
    married on 19th August 2011.  The appellant's partner is a Zimbabwean
    national resident in the UK. There are two children of the appellant's
    relationship with his partner. The appellant's son was born on 5th May
    2011 and his daughter was born on 1st May 2013.  The appellant's
    partner has a son from a previous relationship. The appellant's
    stepson, SM, was born on 18th September 2004.


 3. On 13th December 2013, the appellant was convicted at Wolverhampton
    Crown Court of doing an act of cruelty to a young person under 16, for
    which he received a two-year sentence of imprisonment. The appellant
    was served with notice of liability to deportation, and after
    considering representations made by the appellant in February 2014, the
    respondent made a decision dated 12th July 2017 to deport the appellant
    and refuse his human rights claim. The appellant's appeal was allowed
    by FtT Judge E Smith in a decision promulgated on 30th November 2017.
    His decision was set aside by Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul for reasons
    set out in a decision promulgated on 9th May 2019. The appeal was
    remitted to the FtT for rehearing. The only finding preserved was that
    it would be unduly harsh for the children to live in Zimbabwe with the
    appellant.


 4. The appeal was reheard by FtT Judge Parkes on 25th June 2019 and
    dismissed for reasons set out in a decision promulgated on 11th July
    2019. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Grubb on
    11th September 2019.


 5. Before I turn to the decision of Judge Parkes, it is useful to say a
    little more about the appellant's conviction.  In his sentencing
    remarks, His Honour Judge Challinor stated:


         "... I have to sentence you for the offence of cruelty to a child.
         The child was your stepson, who was only eight years old. He was a
         vulnerable child who needed care and protection and over a
         significant period you have been assaulting him. The medical report
         shows clearly he has many injuries over his face, body, ears,
         shoulder, hands, lower limbs, covered in bruises and scars. You
         have clearly been beating him regularly with belt, cane (sic).  You
         have been restraining him by holding him inappropriately, although
         I accept there is no stamping involved in this case. The evidence
         of the district nurse... is very telling. You were described as not
         shouting when she heard you but enraged. She could hear [SM]
         screaming. She said the sounds made her feel physically sick.
         Heaven only knows what was going on in that house and what has been
         going on in that house to that little boy at your hands. When the
         police attended you tried to conceal what you had done by lying to
         them, telling them that there was no one else in the house. That
         tells me a great deal about you and what you knew you were doing.
         You knew what you were doing was not only wrong but criminal and
         that is why you lied. I do not believe, and do not accept, that
         this was excessive chastisement. Later, when police went upstairs,
         they found [SM] injured and cowed in one of the bedrooms.


         I have to assess the seriousness of this offence. I regard your
         culpability as high. The reason for that is because these were
         sustained assaults. You used weapons: belt, cane.  I do not regard
         this as sadistic behaviour, but it was very cruel in the sense that
         most people understand that word. And, finally, the attempt to
         conceal what you had done aggravates your position. In terms of
         harm, of course the injuries speak for themselves. That little boy
         must have felt a lot of pain as a result of what you were doing to
         him. But the effect upon [SM] was dramatic, traumatic. His teacher
         speaks of difficult behaviour at school.  His teacher ... speaks of
         how unhappy he was and how he found it difficult to relate to the
         children and how he was being violent.... It is difficult to know
         or to assess the long-term effect upon [SM] but it is very likely
         to be very significant. One cannot but be struck by what he said in
         his ABE interview after describing how you were beating him,
         assaulting him.... In mitigation on your behalf I accept that the
         injuries, the physical injuries to [SM] were no more serious than
         actual bodily harm. I also accept that your experience as a child
         has affected you, although you are old enough and you have been in
         this country long enough to know what you were doing was very wrong
         ..."


 6. Unsurprisingly, care proceedings followed in the Family Court and the
    children were made the subject of a Care Order under s31 Children Act
    1989.  The children were placed in the care of Wolverhampton City
    Council. The children were later returned to the care of the
    appellant's partner and following his release from prison, eventually,
    on 28th September 2015 the appellant was permitted to return to the
    family home.  The Care Order made by the Family Court was discharged.


The decision of FtT Judge Parkes


 7. The focus at the hearing of the appeal before Judge Parkes was upon the
    question whether the effect of the appellant's deportation on the
    children would be unduly harsh. Judge Parkes summarised the background
    to the appeal at paragraphs [13] and [14] of his decision. The judge
    heard evidence from the appellant and his wife. At paragraphs [19] to
    [23], the judge refers to the evidence set out in the report of the
    independent social worker regarding the appellant's relationship with
    his children and his stepson, and the steps taken by the appellant to
    address what had happened previously. The judge considered the evidence
    set out in the report regarding the research on the negative effect of
    reduced father-child contact, and the effect on other relationships.
    At paragraph [21], the judge noted:


         "At page 8 of the report the central paragraph discussed what
         happened when the appellant was in prison. It appears that the
         local authority arranged contact, the appellant's own son developed
         some sleeping problems and became anxious. In the subsequent
         paragraph the report suggested that because the appellant is so
         heavily involved with the children and they are so attached to him
         that separation would result in serious loss and disruption of
         their attachment and irreparable loss."


 8. The judge noted the independent social worker concluded that the
    current circumstances are stable, and the appellant is playing an
    important role in the care of the children at a critical stage of their
    lives, when they are young and vulnerable.  The judge noted the opinion
    of the independent social worker that the appellant should be permitted
    to remain in the UK as it is in the best interests of the children.  At
    paragraphs [24] to [28], the judge considered the matters set out in
    the report of the independent social worker. The judge noted the
    possible consequences for  the welfare of the children arising from
    separation from their father, is a feature in all deportations where
    there is an existing family in the UK. The judge accepted at paragraph
    [25], that the appellant's wife will find it difficult without the
    appellant's support and contribution to family life and that will have
    an effect on what she is able to do for the children, but that too, is
    a feature in a great many deportation cases.  At paragraphs [27] to
    [30], Judge Parkes concluded:


         "27. The principal evidence as to how the family coped when the
         appellant was in prison is at page 8 of the ISWR in the 2nd
         paragraph.  Whilst I accept that it was a very difficult period for
         the children, the report does not highlight any issues that could
         be said to be unexpected or out of the ordinary. The family did not
         involve social services as had first happened when the appellant
         was arrested and there is no suggestion that any issues that the
         children may have had were not coped with. There is no evidence
         from their schools to suggest any conduct or issues that could be
         said to be remarkable or which required extra intervention on their
         part.


         28.  I appreciate that when the appellant was first arrested and
         sent to prison in the event it turned out that the separation was
         not permanent. It would not have been clear at that time that that
         would be the case, the sentencing judge expressed a strong view
         that the appellant should not have been allowed back into [SM]'s
         life and so the family may have hoped for the outcome that
         prevailed, but they cannot have any basis to expect it.


         29.  Having regard to the report of the ISW and the other evidence
         discussed above, bearing in mind the preference of the children
         that the Appellant should remain and that as is ordinarily the case
         it would be in their best interest that he should remain an active
         part of their lives I cannot find that it would be unduly harsh for
         the children to remain in the UK in the absence of the appellant. I
         accept that the family life would be difficult and very
         challenging, but the evidence does not show that it would be bleak
         or severe, let alone unduly so.


         30.  There is nothing in the evidence to show that there are
         circumstances that would take the Appellant's circumstances and
         those of his family could be said to be very compelling and there
         is no justification for allowing the appeal under article 8 outside
         the rules."


The appeal before me


 9. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, in reaching his
    decision, Judge Parkes failed to consider whether the public interest
    in deportation is outweighed by other compelling circumstances. The
    appellant claims the judge failed to refer to the decision of the Upper
    Tribunal in RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq
    [2019] UKUT 123 and the decision of the Court of Appeal in NA
    (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, and although the failure to
    refer to the authorities is not in itself fatal, the judge simply
    stated there is no justification for allowing the appeal under Article
    8 outside the immigration rules, when no such jurisdiction arises.
    Furthermore, in considering whether there are very compelling
    circumstances, the judge failed to have regard to a unique feature of
    the appeal. That is, the sole criminal offence for which the appellant
    was convicted and sentenced arose from the appellant's poor parenting,
    and the appellant has been rehabilitated to the extent that he is now
    in a genuine and subsisting and caring parental relationship with the
    very victim of his crime.  There was evidence before the Tribunal that
    the appellant has successfully completed an intensive parenting program
    demonstrating clear insight and an ability to reflect on his previous
    actions, and evidence that there has been a noticeable change in the
    family's attitude and mood since the appellant's return home. The
    appellant claims this was not therefore a "run-of-the-mill" deportation
    and the unique circumstances were worthy of proper consideration.


10. Second, although the judge noted the conclusion of the independent
    social worker that the appellant is playing an important role in the
    care of the children at the critical stage of their lives when they are
    young and vulnerable, the judge failed to consider the importance of
    differentiating between the different ages of the children and the
    particular needs and vulnerabilities of each of the children.


11. Ms Rutherford submits the appellant's conviction and human rights
    claim, and the respondent's decision to deport, arises from an unusual
    set of circumstances.  The appellant's only conviction relates to his
    conduct towards his stepson, a relationship that is now described as
    strong and stable, and in respect of which there are no on-going
    concerns. Ms Rutherford submits that at paragraphs [16] to [30] of his
    decision, Judge Parkes does not address the ultimate question as to
    whether the public interest in the deportation of the appellant is
    outweighed by  very compelling circumstances beyond whether it would be
    unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the
    appellant.  Here, the victim of the offending was in fact the
    appellant's stepson and since the offence was committed, the Care Order
    previously made by the Family Court has been discharged and the
    appellant is now living with the family.  Ms Rutherford submits there
    has been a real change in the family dynamics, and unusually, here, the
    social workers accept the appellant can live with the children and he
    has been permitted to return to the family home. The expert evidence
    before the Tribunal was that the appellant should be permitted to
    continue to live with the family and the children.  The social workers
    conclude it is in the best interests of the children to have the
    appellant back in the family home and their professional input was not
    challenged by the judge. Ms Rutherford submits the judge does
    adequately consider whether it would be unduly harsh for the children
    to be separated from the appellant.


12. In reply, Ms Aboni relies upon the respondent's rule 24 response dated
    4th October 2019.  The respondent submits that at paragraphs [16] and
    [30], the judge properly noted that the issue is whether it would be
    unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK without the
    appellant, and if that test is not met, whether there are very
    compelling circumstances over and above those set out in paragraph 399
    of the immigration rules.  Mrs Aboni submits that it is clear from
    reading the decision as a whole, that the judge gave adequate reasons
    for finding that it would not be unduly harsh for the children to
    remain in the UK without the appellant and it was open to the judge to
    conclude that there are no very compelling circumstances to outweigh
    the public interest in the deportation of the appellant.


Discussion


13. Section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007 defines a foreign criminal, a
    person not a British citizen who is convicted in the UK of an offence
    and, inter alia, sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12
    months. Section 32(4) of the 2007 Act sets outs out the clear
    proposition that deportation of a foreign criminal is conducive to the
    public good. That is a statement of public policy enacted by the
    legislature, which the courts and tribunals are obliged to respect.
    Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act requires the Secretary of State to make a
    deportation order in respect of every foreign criminal, subject to the
    exceptions set out in section 33.  Insofar as is relevant that is:


         "(2) Exception 1 is where removal of the foreign criminal in
         pursuance of the deportation order would breach-


             (a)  a person's Convention rights, or


             (b)  the United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee
             Convention.


         ...


         (7)  The application of an exception-


             (a)  does not prevent the making of a deportation order;


             (b)  results in it being assumed neither that deportation of
             the person concerned is conducive to the public good nor that
             it is not conducive to the public good;


         but section 32(4) applies despite the application of Exception 1 or
         4.".


14. Part 5A of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 ("the 2002
    Act") informs the decision making in relation to the application of the
    section 33 exceptions. Section 117A in Part 5A provides that, when a
    court or tribunal is required to determine whether a decision made
    under the Immigration Acts breaches a person's right to respect for
    private and family life under Article 8, and, as a result, would be
    unlawful under section 6 of the HRA 1998, the court, in considering the
    public interest question, must (in particular) have regard to the
    considerations listed in section 117B and, additionally, in cases
    concerning the deportation of foreign criminals, to the considerations
    listed in section 117C.


15. The core issue in the present case was whether the decision to refuse
    the human rights claim made by the appellant was a justified
    interference with the right to respect for family life, in the context
    of the appellant's conviction and the fact that he is a 'foreign
    criminal' as defined in s117D(2) of the 2002 Act.  The Immigration
    Rules set out the approach to be followed by the Secretary of State
    where a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims that the
    deportation would be contrary to the United Kingdom's obligations under
    Article 8 ECHR. Paragraph 399(a) required the judge to consider inter
    alia whether it would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the
    UK without the appellant. Applying paragraph 399(a) of the immigration
    rules and s117C(3) of the 2002 Act, the public interest required the
    appellant's deportation unless Exception 2 set out in s.117C(5)
    applies.  That is, the appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental
    relationship with a qualifying child and the effect of her deportation
    on the child would be unduly harsh. In KO (Nigeria) -v- SSHD [2018]
    UKSC 53,  Lord Carnwath considered the meaning of the expression
    "unduly harsh".  He observed, at paragraph 23:


         "The expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to introduce
         a higher hurdle than that of "reasonableness" under section
         117B(6), taking account of the public interest in the deportation
         of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an element
         of comparison. It assumes that there is a "due" level of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies something going beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set by section 117C(1),
         that is the public interest in the deportation of foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of harshness going beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any child faced with the
         deportation of a parent. What it does not require in my view (and
         subject to the discussion of the cases in the next section) is a
         balancing of relative levels of severity of the parent's offence,
         other than is inherent in the distinction drawn by the section
         itself by reference to length of sentence. Nor (contrary to the
         view of the Court of Appeal in IT (Jamaica) v Secretary of State
         for the Home Department [2017] 1 WLR 240, paras 55 and 64) can it
         be equated with a requirement to show "very compelling reasons".
         That would be in effect to replicate the additional test applied by
         section 117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more.".


16. In SSHD v PG (Jamaica), Holroyde LJ said, at paragraph 34:


         "It is therefore now clear that a tribunal or court considering
         section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act must focus, not on the comparative
         seriousness of the offence or offences committed by the foreign
         criminal who faces deportation, but rather, on whether the effects
         of his deportation on a child or partner would go beyond the degree
         of harshness which would necessarily be involved for any child or
         partner of a foreign criminal faced with deportation. Pursuant to
         Rule 399, the tribunal or court must consider both whether it would
         be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner to live in the country
         to which the foreign criminal is to be deported and whether it
         would be unduly harsh for the child and/or partner to remain in the
         UK without him."


17. At paragraph 38, Holroyde LJ further observed:


         "In the circumstances of this appeal, I do not think it necessary
         to refer to decisions predating KO (Nigeria), because it is no
         longer appropriate, when considering section 117C(5) of the 2002
         Act, to balance the severity of the consequences for SAT and the
         children of PG's deportation against the seriousness of his
         offending. The issue is whether there was evidence on which it was
         properly open to Judge Griffith to find that deportation of PG
         would result for SAT and/or the children in a degree of harshness
         going beyond what would necessarily be involved for any partner or
         child of a foreign criminal facing deportation.".


18. Judge Parkes considered the evidence of the appellant, his wife, and
    the independent social worker.  The judge was concerned first and
    foremost with the question of whether it would be unduly harsh for the
    appellant's children and his stepson, if the appellant is deported from
    the United Kingdom. For reasons set out at paragraphs [19] to [29] of
    his decision, Judge Parkes concluded that he was unable to find that it
    would be unduly harsh for the children to remain in the UK in the
    absence of the appellant.  The judge undoubtedly applied the correct
    test and I am quite satisfied it was open to him to reach the
    conclusion that he did for the reasons given.


19. In NA (Pakistan) -v- SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ 662, Lord Justice Jackson
    held that the fall back protection set out in s117C(6) also avails
    those who fall outside Exceptions 1 and 2 and that on a proper
    construction of section 117C(3), the public interest requires the
    person's deportation unless Exception 1 or Exception 2 applies or
    unless there are very compelling circumstances, over and above those
    described in Exceptions 1 and 2.  As to the meaning of "very compelling
    circumstances" over and above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2,
    Lord Justice Jackson said:


         "28. ... The new para. 398 uses the same language as section
         117C(6) . It refers to "very compelling circumstances, over and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A." Paragraphs 399
         and 399A of the 2014 rules refer to the same subject matter as
         Exceptions 1 and 2 in section 117C , but they do so in greater
         detail.


         29.  In our view, the reasoning of the Court of Appeal in JZ
         (Zambia) applies to those provisions. The phrase used in section
         117C(6), in para. 398 of the 2014 rules and which we have held is
         to be read into section 117C(3) does not mean that a foreign
         criminal facing deportation is altogether disentitled from seeking
         to rely on matters falling within the scope of the circumstances
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2 when seeking to contend that "there
         are very compelling circumstances, over and above those described
         in Exceptions 1 and 2". As we have indicated above, a foreign
         criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters, but he would need
         to be able to point to features of his case of a kind mentioned in
         Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A of the 2014 rules),
         or features falling outside the circumstances described in those
         Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made his claim based on
         Article 8 especially strong.


20. In RA (s.117C: "unduly harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT
    00123 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal considered the approach to s117C(6) of
    the 2002 Act. The Upper Tribunal held that the test for showing 'very
    compelling circumstances' over and above undue harshness was
    particularly high, and found at [22], was "extremely demanding". The
    Upper Tribunal also considered the significance to be accorded to the
    particular issue of rehabilitation.  The Tribunal said, at [32]:


         "As a more general point, the fact that an individual has not
         committed further offences, since release from prison, is highly
         unlikely to have a material bearing, given that everyone is
         expected not to commit crime. Rehabilitation will therefore
         normally do no more than show that the individual has returned to
         the place where society expects him (and everyone else) to be.
         There is, in other words, no material weight which ordinarily falls
         to be given to rehabilitation in the proportionality balance (see
         SE (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]
         EWCA Civ 256, paragraphs 48 to 56).  Nevertheless, as so often in
         the field of human rights, one cannot categorically say that
         rehabilitation will never be capable of playing a significant role
         (see LG (Colombia) v Secretary of State for the Home Department
         [2018] EWCA Civ 1225). Any judicial departure from the norm would,
         however, need to be fully reasoned."


21. Here, Judge Parkes concluded at paragraph [30] that there is nothing in
    the evidence to establish the appellant's circumstances and those of
    his family are such that they can be said to be, very compelling, so as
    to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds. The judge could have
    expressed himself better, but it is not a counsel of perfection.


22. I reject the claim that in reaching his decision the judge did not have
    regard to the particular circumstances of the offence for which the
    appellant was convicted and the fact that he is now living in the
    family home, with the children, and in particular his stepson.  At
    paragraph [19], the judge clearly considered the evidence that the
    appellant was allowed back to the family home and the Care Order made
    by the Family Court had been discharged. The judge noted the evidence
    set out in the reports that the children wished the appellant to
    return, and the appellant had taken steps to address what had happened.
    At paragraph [28], the judge noted that notwithstanding the remarks
    made by the sentencing judge, the separation of the appellant from SM
    in particular, had not been permanent.  At paragraph [29], the judge
    again referred to the preference of the children that the appellant
    should remain and that ordinarily, it would be in their best interests
    that he should remain  an active part of their lives.


23. I also reject the claim that the judge failed to differentiate between
    the different ages of the children and the particular needs and
    vulnerabilities of the children when considering the impact upon the
    children, of the appellant's deportation.  The appellant's son was 8
    and his daughter was 6 years old at the date of Judge Parkes' decision.
     The appellant's stepson was 15 years old.  The evidence of the
    independent social worker was that the appellant is playing an
    important role in the care of the children at the critical stage of
    their lives when they are young and vulnerable.   At paragraph [25],
    the judge noted that children can be characterised as vulnerable and at
    a critical stage of development at most points of growing up, and that
    forms the backdrop against which many deportations take place.  At
    paragraph [27], the judge considered how the family had coped when the
    appellant was in prison. The judge accepted it was a very difficult
    period for the children, but the report of the independent social
    worker did not highlight any issues that could be said to be unexpected
    or out of the ordinary. There was no evidence that any issues that the
    children may have had were not coped with, and there was no evidence
    from their schools of issues that could be said to be remarkable or
    which required extra intervention on their part.


24. Looking at the evidence before the First-tier Tribunal, it is difficult
    to identify anything which distinguishes this case from other cases
    where a parent who is subject to deportation as a foreign criminal, is
    separated from a child. All children deprived of a parent's company
    during their formative years will be at risk of suffering harm. It is
    necessary to look for consequences characterised by a degree of
    harshness over and beyond what every child would experience in such
    circumstances.  It is important to bear in mind the observations of
    Hickinbottom LJ in PG (Jamaica) at paragraph 46:


          "When a parent is deported, one can only have great sympathy for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in circumstances in
         which they can remain in the United Kingdom with the other parent,
         they will inevitably be distressed. However, in section 117C(5) of
         the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its will that, for foreign
         offenders who are sentenced to one to four years, only where the
         consequences for the children are 'unduly harsh' will deportation
         be constrained. That is entirely consistent with Article 8 of ECHR
         . It is important that decision-makers and, when the decisions are
         challenged, tribunals and courts honour that expression of
         Parliamentary will."


25. Great weight should generally be given to the public interest in the
    deportation of such offenders, but it can be outweighed, applying a
    proportionality test, by very compelling circumstances. In my judgement
    on the evidence before Judge Parkes and in light of the facts found by
    him, it was in the end open to the judge to conclude that there are no
    features in this case that come close to reaching the very high
    threshold of "very compelling circumstances", and it was open to the
    Tribunal to conclude there is no justification for allowing the appeal
    on Article 8 grounds.  In my judgement and on any rational view of the
    circumstances in this case, it was open to Judge Parkes to conclude
    that the removal of the appellant could not be said to be
    disproportionate when weighed against the strong public interest in
    deporting foreign national criminals.


26. The judge undoubtedly considered all matters in the round. The public
    interest in the deportation of a foreign criminal is not set in stone
    and must be approached flexibly.  In my judgement, the judge had proper
    regard inter alia to the conviction that the led to a sentence of
    imprisonment, the ties that the appellant retains with his family and
    in particular his children, and the family circumstances described in
    the evidence and the matters set out in the experts reports.  Children
    living with a foreign criminal will very often have a good and strong
    relationship with a parent facing deportation. The fact that the victim
    of the crime for which the appellant was convicted and sentenced was
    the stepson of the appellant and that the family have now been reunited
    and are living together does not detract from the strong public
    interest in the deportation of the appellant as a foreign criminal,
    absent something compelling which makes the appellant's claim based on
    Article 8, especially strong. It follows that in my judgement, it was
    open to the judge to conclude the deportation of the appellant is in
    the public interest and not disproportionate to the legitimate aim for
    the reasons given by him.


27. As the Court of Appeal said at [18] of Herrera v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    412, it is necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise as
    errors of law what are in truth no more than disagreements about the
    weight to be given to different factors, particularly if the judge who
    decided the appeal had the advantage of hearing oral evidence. The
    assessment of such a claim is always a highly fact sensitive task.  The
    FtT judge was required to consider the evidence as a whole and in my
    judgment he plainly did so, giving adequate reasons for his decision.
    The findings and conclusions reached by the judge are neither
    irrational nor unreasonable.  The decision was one that was open to the
    judge on the evidence before him and the findings made.


28. It follows that I dismiss the appeal


Decision:


29. The appeal is dismissed and the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Parkes, stands.


Signed                                                    Date 13th April
2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


_____________________________________________________________

NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3. Where the person  making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days (10 working days, if the  notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6. The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing  on  the  covering
letter or covering email

