
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07619/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 6 November 2018                   |On 30 November 2018                     |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HUTCHINSON


                                   Between

                                    mr sh
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss M Harris, Counsel instructed by Elder Rahimi
                    Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
                    of the Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Background

 1. The appellant is a citizen of  Iran  who  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the respondent dated 5  June  2018  to
    refuse the appellant's protection claim.  In a decision promulgated  on
    3 August 2018 Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  Parkes  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal on all grounds.

 2. The appellant appeals  with  permission,  to  the  Upper  Tribunal,  on
    grounds that the judge gave  inadequate  reasons  for  his  credibility
    findings and erred by failing to make  findings  upon  risk  on  return
    stemming from the appellant's evangelical activities on  social  media.
    In granting permission Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Grant concluded
    that  whilst  there  were  credibility  issues  with  regard   to   the
    appellant's claim of events that took place in Iran,  it  was  arguable
    that the judge had erred in failing to make any findings upon  risk  on
    return arising out  of  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  which
    include attendance at church and social media activities including  his
    posting upon Facebook.

Submissions

 3.  Miss  Harris  relied  on  what  were  essentially  narrative   grounds
    addressing each and every paragraph of the decision.  Miss Harris  took
    me through  the  evidence  that  was  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    including the evidence in support from the previous church and the oral
    evidence from his current church and that both  churches  consider  the
    appellant to be genuine;  in  particular  she  relied  on  the  witness
    statement from Mr Baillie.  She emphasised the context Mr  Baillie  had
    known the appellant in.  Miss Harris  submitted  that  there  were  two
    separate church organisations testifying  about  both  the  appellant's
    attendance at church and the genuineness of his  fear  and  that  these
    were  factors  which,  coupled  with  the  appellant's   social   media
    activities, should have been engaged with.  Miss  Harris  reminded  the
    tribunal of  the  relevant  background  in  relation  to  the  judicial
    guidance on assessment of claims on the basis of religion.

 4. In respect of ground 1 Miss Harris pointed to the judge's  findings  at
    [21]  of  the  decision  and  reasons  and   criticised   the   judge's
    consideration of Mr Baillie as an expert rather than  considering  that
    he was also a witness as to fact.    However, as confirmed in TF and MA
    [2018]  CSIH  58  evidence  from  Church  witnesses  in  positions   of
    responsibility giving their opinion about  the  genuine  nature  of  an
    appellant's conversion, is expert evidence.  I also take  into  account
    that the judge directed himself that  the  Mr  Baillie's  evidence  was
    evidence in the appellant's favour and it was considered in that light.



 5. The judge found at [22] that the appellant was unable  to  explain  why
    his work colleagues were prepared to take the risk  that  they  did  in
    evangelising the appellant which is information that  the  judge  found
    "might have been expected."  Miss Harris submitted that  the  appellant
    had provided an explanation at paragraph 17 of  his  witness  statement
    that there was nothing implausible about being evangelised in  the  way
    he was and stated that he felt angry, bitter and resentful and that the
    three people who  evangelised  him  spent  time  speaking  to  him  and
    learning about his unhappiness.

 6. Miss Harris submitted that at [23] that the judge relied  on  the  fact
    that the appellant's church enrolled him on a course for new  believers
    even after the appellant had been baptised in another church which  the
    grounds submitted was to ignore the fact that  although  the  appellant
    had been enrolled on a course, the witness from the appellant's current
    church confirmed that he had no doubt  about  the  genuineness  of  his
    conversion.  Miss Harris also submitted that it was very unlikely  that
    someone would have no  gaps  in  their  religious  knowledge.   It  was
    pointed out to Miss Harris that Mr Baillie's evidence, as  recorded  at
    [20], was that the appellant had some gaps in his knowledge and it  was
    in this context that the judge made the findings he did  at  [23]  that
    the appellant's knowledge of Christianity was  limited  to  the  extent
    that he was still undergoing instructions  in  circumstances  where  it
    appears that his current church would not have considered him ready for
    baptism and Mr Baillie's evidence was recorded that "for baptisms there
    is a ten week course followed by an interview to confirm the  candidate
    is genuine" and Mr Baillie had indicated that the previous church had a
    "different philosophy and take people more at face value"  whereas  his
    church preferred a more informed choice.

 7. Whilst the judge considered that in the context of the fact  that  both
    Oasis and Mr Baillie's church considered the appellant to  be  genuine,
    the judge nevertheless found that it was "troubling" that the appellant
    appeared to have started a house church with limited knowledge  of  the
    religion to the extent that he is still undergoing instruction now  and
    his current church would not have considered him ready for baptism.

 8. Miss Harris also questioned the judge's negative findings that  it  was
    the appellant who was targeted whereas it was  his  wife  who  was  the
    preacher and the  judge  noted  that  in  these  circumstances  it  was
    problematic that she was released without charge having blamed  it  all
    on the appellant.  The judge also  reached  the  finding  that  if  the
    authorities had been informed by someone who had  attended,  one  would
    have assumed they would have been told about what had  taken  place  at
    the meeting including that the appellant's wife was the preacher.

 9. Miss Harris and the grounds took issue with the judge's conclusion that
    Mr Baillie did not fully support the appellant.  However  she  conceded
    that this was not what the decision said, rather that "the  appellant's
    church attendance in the UK led to his being baptised in  circumstances
    which Mr Baillie did not fully support".

10. It  was  Mr  Whitwell's  submission  that  the  judge's  findings  were
    adequately reasoned and  there  were  four  over  all  strands  of  his
    reasoning:

      a) why his work colleagues would  take  the  risk  to  evangelise  the
         appellant in the way that they did;

      b) the appellant's knowledge of Christianity;

      c) the circumstances of the appellant's arrest;

      d) the lack of risk to his wife.

11. Mr Whitwell submitted that  the  appellant,  although  he  reported  to
    address the issue of why he was evangelised, did not  address  why  his
    work colleagues would have taken the enormous risk that he claims  they
    did.  Mr Whitwell submitted that it was not  that  the  judge  did  not
    accept that the appellant was attending church as he  claimed.   Indeed
    the judge at [32] accepted that it was possible that the appellant  had
    converted to Christianity since his arrival having made out  the  claim
    of events in Iran.  However the judge's concern was more in the context
    of the appellant stating that he was an individual who  had  started  a
    house church yet in the UK he is an individual who continues to undergo
    instructions and where his existing church would not have baptised  him
    in the time frame in which he was baptised by his previous church.

12. In respect of the appellant's  wife  Mr  Whitwell  submitted  that  the
    grounds were only a disagreement with the judge's reasoning.  The judge
    took into consideration that at [25] that it was the appellant who  had
    been speaking to his colleagues and despite his  being  the  object  of
    their intentions and the one who received the information  on  which  a
    decision to convert, it was the appellant's wife who led  the  meetings
    at their house "although it is not clear how she  would  have  had  the
    knowledge or understanding to lead a meeting or to inform others."

13. In relation  to  the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  Mr  Whitwell
    accepted that the judge had not made any specific  findings.   At  [19]
    the judge set out that the appellant was asked how he blogged if he was
    not very literate and he had replied

         "that he can read short subjects on his Facebook but profile is the
         sign of the hand and the person who descended from the sky  and  he
         then set his profile as his name and surname.  A friend set  it  up
         and the appellant puts posts up.  Items are sent to the appellant's
         account and if he likes them he posts them, the appellant does  not
         write them.  The appellant did not know if his account  was  closed
         or suspended, he accesses it daily."

14. In terms of the reported case of AB and Others  (internet  activity)  -
    state of evidence) Iran [2015] UKUT 0257 (IAC)  Mr  Whitwell  submitted
    that there was insufficient evidence to show that the  appellant  would
    come to the attention of the authorities at the "pinch point" discussed
    in AB and Others.

15. In reply Ms Harris again relied on  her  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    failed to deal with the photographic evidence of the  house  church  in
    finding at [31] that they did not set up a house church  in  Iran  Miss
    Harris also referred  me  to  the  appellant's  evidence  at  interview
    including from question 50 to 100 in respect of  his  evidence  on  his
    conversion.

Error of Law Discussion

16. Although, as also identified by the permission judge,  the  appellant's
    evidence of the claimed events in Iran is problematic,  notwithstanding
    those difficulties,  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    consideration of the  appellant's  sur  place  activities  in  the  UK,
    including in his ongoing practice of Christianity.

17. It was not disputed that two churches consider the appellant  to  be  a
    genuine convert and the judge heard oral evidence from the  appellant's
    current pastor. Mr Baillie's evidence indicates that he  and  his  wife
    both speak Farsi.  He indicates that he has known the  appellant  since
    April 2018 and that the appellant had had a 'rudimentary understanding'
    of the Gospel when he came.  Although the appellant  had  already  been
    baptised in the UK Mr Baillie sets out the work  he  has  done  on  his
    faith since joining Mr Baillie's church. Mr Baillie identified that  he
    had interacted with the appellant primarily before,  during  and  after
    church meetings.  He described the appellant as keen to share his faith
    and that two further individuals the  appellant  has  invited  are  now
    attending  the  church  regularly.   Mr  Bailli's   witness   statement
    concludes that he believes the appellant to be a  genuine  follower  of
    Christ.

18.  Although  the  judge  acknowledged  the  evidence  in  favour  of  the
    appellant's practice of Christianity  in  the  UK,  he  fails  to  give
    adequate reasoning for  his  conclusion  that  the  appellant  has  not
    genuinely converted or 'that he has in  reality  embraced  the  faith'.
    Although the judge relies  on  his  negative  credibility  findings  in
    relation to the appellant's account of what happened in Iran,  that  is
    insufficient in itself to justify the finding that  the  appellant  has
    not in reality embraced the faith, when the evidence  from  the  Church
    was this was in fact what he had done.

19. The First-tier  Tribunal  rejected  the  appellant's  account  of  what
    happened in Iran and because of that rejection, went  on  to  similarly
    reject the appellant's account,  and  the  account  of  the  supporting
    evidence, that he is a practicing Christian in the UK.

20. As identified in TF and MA (above) such  an  approach  is  problematic.
    The rejection of the appellant's own evidence  that  he  is  a  genuine
    convert does not become evidence that he is  not  genuine,  to  be  set
    against other, independent evidence, from which the genuineness of  the
    conversion can be inferred, which is the error the First-tier  Tribunal
    has fallen into.  That other evidence  must  be  assessed  on  its  own
    merits without any assumption that it is in  some  way  suspect  or  of
    little value.

21. TF and MA makes clear that the problem  with  discounting  evidence  by
    church witnesses and in concluding as the judge in this case has  done,
    that participation in church activities was carried out in  bad  faith,
    is that it makes a leap from finding that the appellant has  told  lies
    to a finding that he is living a lie.  I am of the view that the First-
    tier Tribunal has made such a leap without providing  adequate  reasons
    as to the evidence pointing to such a conclusion.

22. In addition, there is a complete absence of findings in relation to the
    appellant's on-line activities, print-outs of  which  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Although the judge recorded  that  the  appellant
    did not know if his account was closed or suspended, he  also  recorded
    that the appellant accessed his account daily.   The  judge  failed  to
    make any findings as to the effect of the posts that the appellant  had
    already made and there is an absence of any findings,  particularly  in
    light of what was  said  in  the  background  material  about  internet
    activity, including as discussed in AB and Others (above).

23. The evidence considered by the Upper Tribunal identifies that  although
    the authorities do not chase everyone who just might be an opponent, if
    that opponent comes to their attention for  some  reason,  that  person
    might be in quire serious trouble.  The evidence also  identifies  that
    some  people  on  return  are  asked  about  their  internet  activity,
    particularly their Facebook password and that it is clear  the  Iranian
    authorities  are  'exceedingly  twitchy'  about  blogging   activities.
    Clearly if asked about such activities, a person could not be  expected
    to lie, not only because of the relevant jurisprudence but  because  it
    is often quite easy for this to  be  checked  up.   If  the  return  of
    someone to Iran creates a 'pinch point' so that the returnee is brought
    into  direct  contact  with  the  authorities  in  Iran,  the  evidence
    indicates that it is quite  likely  they  will  be  asked  about  their
    internet activity and likely if they have any such activity, that  will
    be exposed and if it exposed and it is  less  than  flattering  of  the
    government it will lead to a real risk of persecution.

24. Although the appellant's internet activity is  of  a  religious  rather
    than a political theme, there is a lack of any findings by  the  First-
    tier Tribunal as to the likely view  of  the  authorities  as  to  that
    activity.  Although the judge rejected the appellant's  claim  that  he
    left Iran illegally, his alternative findings that such illegal exit by
    itself is not a source of danger, fails to make any findings as to  the
    effect of illegal exit in the circumstances  the  appellant  claims  he
    will find himself, where he claims to have  posted  entries  about  his
    religion and where the evidence suggests that illegal exit might create
    a 'pinch point' on return where his claimed internet  activities  could
    come to light and arguably create a real risk of persecution.  There is
    an absence of adequate findings in this regard.

25. Although I am much less persuaded by the arguments in relation  to  the
    alleged  errors  in  the  judge's  reasoning  about   the   appellant's
    activities in Iran, I cannot say for certain  that  if  the  judge  had
    applied the  correct  approach  to  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    religious practice in the UK, as advocated in TF and MA, that he  would
    necessarily have  reached  the  same  conclusion  in  relation  to  the
    appellant's claim of what happened in Iran.

Notice of Decision

26. For those reasons I am satisfied that the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal contains errors of law such that it should be set aside in its
    entirety.  The extent of the findings of fact are such that the  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal, to be heard de novo, other than
    by Judge Parkes.

DIRECTIONS

       . The bundle of  evidence  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  not
         properly  tabulated/compiled  and  is  difficult  to  follow.   The
         appellant's representative is directed to file with the  First-tier
         Tribunal and serve on the respondent, an updated  bundle  with  any
         and all evidence to be relied on.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date:  20 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee was paid or payable so no fee award is made.


Signed                                  Date:  20 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hutchinson










