
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07634/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 March 2020                     |On 24 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MT
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Mr Davsion, Ison Harrison, solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1976  and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Eritrea. By a decision dated 30  July  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State
    granted restricted leave for six months to the  appellant  but  refused
    his application for asylum under the provisions of Article 1(F) of  the
    Refugee Convention. The appellant appealed against that decision to the
    First-tier Tribunal which, in a  decision  promulgated  on  28  October
    2019, allowed the appeal. The Secretary  of  State  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The respondent had accepted that the appellant is a citizen Eritrea and
    the the factual basis of the appellant's  claim,  namely  that  he  had
    deserted from National Service and departed from Eritrea illegally. The
    respondent also accepted  that  the  appellant  had  been  detained  in
    Eritrea, first on the charge of organising  an  unregistered  religious
    gathering and, secondly, as  a  suspected  Pentecostal  Christian.  The
    appellant had trained with the Eritrean  police  force  (EPF).  In  the
    employment, the Secretary of State considered that  the  appellant  had
    participated in human rights  abuses  perpetrated  by  the  EPF.  As  a
    consequence, the appellant should be  excluded  from  protection  as  a
    refugee under Article (1) (f) (b) of the Convention.

 3. The judge found  that  the  appellant  had  stated  in  interview  that
    'beating people who had not admitted the crime was not a problem' [59].
    He found that the appellant was  present  during  interrogations  as  a
    trainee. The judge concluded [63] that 'respondent did not  satisfy  me
    that the appellant's presence during an  investigation  facilitated  or
    contributed to the crimes against humanity.  In  my  view,  the  abuses
    would have taken place regardless of the appellant's presence and I  do
    not consider that he aided or abetted acts against humanity.' The judge
    was satisfied that the appellant's involvement was involuntary [65] and
    found the appellant had not made  a  substantial  contribution  to  the
    abuse [64].

 4. There are three grounds of appeal. First, respondent submits  that  the
    judge found that the appellant was an investigator for  14  months  and
    had variously stated that he had been  a  trainee  for  three  and  six
    months respectively. The judge failed to make any clear finding  as  to
    why the period of six months as a trainee was accepted as accurate.  At
    [44], the judge had found that  'the  appellant's  failure  to  give  a
    consistent account suggest that he is not being wholly truthful and  is
    trying to minimise his involvement with the EPF.' Notwithstanding  that
    observation, it was not clear why the judge accepted that the appellant
    had been a trainee for six months. The  inconsistency  was  significant
    given the judge's finding at [61], which appears  to  have  weighed  in
    favour of allowing the appeal, that the  appellant  had  been  'present
    during interrogations as a  trainee  and  was  there  as  part  of  his
    national service.'

 5. If being a 'trainee' was relevant  to  the  degree  of  involvement  or
    culpability of the appellant in the abuse, then it was unclear why  the
    judge accepted the appellant's evidence as to his period working  as  a
    trainee,  especially  given  the  judge's  misgivings   regarding   the
    reliability of the appellant's evidence. I find  that  that  ground  of
    appeal has merit. It is clear from reading of  the  decision  that  the
    judge did consider it significant that the appellant was 'involved'  in
    the abuse concerned but as a trainee. The Tribunal's failure to provide
    reasons why the appellant's evidence on this element of his account was
    accepted amounts, my opinion, to an error of law given the significance
    of the capacity in which the appellant was 'involved' in abuse.

 6. The second ground of appeal concerns  the  judge's  alleged  inadequate
    reasoning of the appellant's  'involvement'  in  human  rights  abuses.
    Against a background of the judge's concerns with the  failure  of  the
    appellant give a consistent account past events  [44],  the  judge  has
    provided no proper analysis of the apparent  distinction  made  by  the
    appellant in his asylum interview between 'beating' and 'torture'.  For
    example, at Q40, the appellant had been asked whether he had ever  been
    involved in torturing anyone. He replied, 'I cannot say I was torturing
    them but they were prisoners who are beaten  up  some  when  beaten  up
    though (sic)' [my emphasis].

 7. I agree with the Secretary of State that the appellant appears to  make
    a distinction between 'beating' and 'torture' (both arguably  forms  of
    abuse) with which the judge has not properly engaged. I also agree that
    the appellant appears unequivocally in interview to accept that he  had
    been involved in 'beatings during investigation'. At  [53],  the  judge
    wrote: 'as to whether the appellant actually beat a detainee,  I  found
    this difficult to  determine.  The  appellant  stated  that  the  first
    interview that he had been 'involved' in beating a  detainee.  However,
    'involved' can include at one end of the spectrum personally beating  a
    detainee,  to  the  other  end,  mere  presence.  In  many  cases,  the
    distinction  does  not  matter  is  the  person's  presence  would   be
    contributing to the acts against humanity. Especially if you knew  that
    these things happen.' I agree with the  Secretary  of  State  that  the
    appellant's answer at interview to Q43 'it was not a  problem'  to  the
    question 'so when you beat people you would not admit crime, you didn't
    see anything wrong with this?'[my emphasis] has been overlooked by  the
    judge. I find that the judge's discussion of 'involvement' in abuse  at
    [53] fails to engage with the relatively clear evidence provided by the
    appellant at interview. On my reading, the  appellant  has  not  denied
    that he beat people and that  he  did  not  consider  such  beating  'a
    problem.' The failure  of  the  judge  to  engage  properly  with  this
    evidence and to make unequivocal findings constitutes, in  my  opinion,
    legal error.

 8. Finally, the Secretary  of  State  complains  that  the  judge,  having
    recorded at [57] that the appellant relied upon the defence of  duress,
    has failed to engage with that defence by reference to the  appropriate
    legal test. That test appears in the Rome Statute at Article 31(1)  (d)
    and has three elements. First, the person relying upon the defence must
    show that  he/she  was  subject  to  a  threat  of  imminent  death  or
    continuing  or  imminent  serious  bodily  harm;  that   he/she   acted
    necessarily  and reasonably to avoid this threat; that he/she  did  not
    intend to cause a greater harm than the one sought  to  be  avoided.  I
    agree with the Secretary  of  State  that,  having  recorded  that  the
    appellant relied  upon  duress,  there  has  been  no  discussion  that
    defence. Consequently, the judge's analysis is incomplete. I agree also
    with the Secretary of State that the judge's reliance upon his  finding
    that the appellant was a trainee fails to engage with Article 33.

 9. For the reasons which I have set out above, I find that the judge erred
    in law and that the decision of the Tribunal should be set aside. I set
    aside all the findings of fact. There will  need  to  be  a  new  fact-
    finding exercise, which is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal.
    The appeal is returned to that Tribunal for it to remake  the  decision
    following a hearing de novo.





    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision following  a  hearing
    de novo.


Signed                                           Date 18 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



















