
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07763/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 15 April 2019                          | On 8 May 2019                    |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL

                                   Between

                                   Mr m k
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Janjua, Counsel, instructed by Morden
Solicitors (London)
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant a national of  Namibia,  has  permission  to  appeal  the
    decision of Judge Grimmett of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT)  dismissing
    his appeal against the decision made by the  respondent  dated  5  June
    2018 refusing his protection claim.  The judge,  like  the  respondent,
    was prepared to accept that the appellant was a gay  man  but  did  not
    find credible his account of adverse experiences in Namibia.

2.   The appellant's grounds of appeal amount  to  two  grounds,  the  first
    contesting that the judge erred in her assessment  of  credibility  and
    the second maintaining that the judge failed to consider or  apply  the
    principles set out in HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31.

3.   I heard submissions from both representatives for which  I  express  my
    gratitude.

4.   I consider that ground 1 is not made out.  It alleges in fine that  the
    judge's  assessment  of  credibility  disregarded  the  fact  that  the
    appellant's account was consistent with and strongly supported  by  the
    country background evidence.  However, first of all the  judge  plainly
    did have regard to the background country evidence: so  much  is  plain
    from paragraphs 12 and 13 for example.  Second, that background country
    information did not establish that gay men in general were at  risk  of
    persecution or serious  harm  -  Mr  Janjua  accepted  as  much  during
    submissions.  Third, whilst that background information did identify  a
    number of difficulties and discriminatory circumstances facing gays  in
    Namibia - including the illegality of  same  sex  acts  -  the  judge's
    findings (which were that the appellant faced  discrimination  but  not
    persecution) were wholly consistent with that evidence.  I  would  also
    observe that the grounds take no issue with the judge's  identification
    of a number of internal inconsistencies in the appellant's  account  as
    well as a failure to provide sufficient evidence.

5.   Mr Janjua sought to argue that  the  judge  should  have  regarded  the
    appellant as having established a well-founded fear of  persecution  by
    virtue of the fact that he could not  conduct  himself  as  a  gay  man
    without  contravening  Namibian  law  criminalising  same   sex   acts.
    However, it is well-established that the mere fact that a  state's  law
    making certain  acts  illegal  does  not  necessarily  mean  the  state
    persecutes such acts, since what has to  be  shown  is  that  they  are
    applied in practice.

6.   In C-71/11and C-71/11 Y and Z the CJEU held  at  [55]  that  "the  mere
    existence  of  legislation  criminalising  homosexual  acts  cannot  be
    regarded as an act affecting the applicant in a manner  so  significant
    that it reaches the level of seriousness necessary for a  finding  that
    it constitutes persecution ..." and that in undertaking  assessment  of
    risk it is necessary to determine "whether, in the applicant's  country
    of origin, the term of imprisonment provided for by such legislation is
    applied in practice" ([59]).  In the  appellant's  case  there  was  no
    evidence that any term of imprisonment was applied in practice.

7.   As regards the appellant's second ground, it only has traction  if  the
    appellant had established that he faced persecutory acts if he did  not
    conceal his sexuality.  The judge clearly found that he would not  face
    persecutory acts.

8.   Mr Janjua sought to rely on what the judge said at paragraph 14:

         "I am not satisfied that the appellant came to the  United  Kingdom
         with the intention of claiming asylum as  he  failed  to  claim  on
         arrival but only claimed after he was stopped and refused entry.  I
         am satisfied that he has been subject to some discrimination in his
         past while at school in view of that he said in  interview.   I  am
         not satisfied he has shown he has had  any  difficulties  with  his
         family because  of  the  inconsistencies  in  his  account.   I  am
         satisfied that he has had gay relationships in Namibia  and  whilst
         he  may  have   suffered   some   harassment   has   not   suffered
         discrimination or persecution as a result.   I  am  not  satisfied,
         therefore, that he is at risk  of  persecution  or  article  3  ill
         treatment if returned to Namibia now."

9.   However, whether or not the appellant would conceal  his  sexuality  on
    return to Namibia, on the judge's findings, none  of  the  reasons  for
    such concealment could relate to fear of persecution.  They could  only
    relate to fear of discrimination.  For the above reasons the judge  did
    not materially err in law and her decision to dismiss  the  appellant's
    appeal must stand.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                  Date: 3 May 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
