
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07369/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 June 2021                                |On 22 July 2021               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN

                                   Between

                                     MAR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:     Mr West, Counsel instructed by Kalam Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This has been a remote hearing to which both parties have
      consented. The form of remote hearing was video by Microsoft Teams
      (V). A face to face hearing was not held because it was not
      practicable and all issues could be determined in a remote hearing. I
      did not experience any difficulties, and neither party expressed any
      concern, with the process.

   2. The appellant is appealing against the decision of Judge Roots of  the
      First-tier Tribunal ("the judge") promulgated  on  17  September  2020
      dismissing his protection and human rights appeal. This was the  third
      time the First-tier Tribunal considered this appeal (the previous  two
      decisions were set aside).

   3. In summary, the appellant, who is a citizen of Bangladesh born  on  13
      August 1991, claims that in 2009, after witnessing  his  friend  being
      assaulted by a gang associated with the Awami League ("the gang"),  he
      agreed to provide a statement to the police and testify in  court.  He
      claims that he has faced, and continues to face, politically motivated
      retribution as a result. In addition, the appellant claims that he  is
      an atheist with a  social  media  presence  who  has  received  online
      threats  and  that  he  faces  a  risk  from  Islamic  extremists   in
      Bangladesh.

   4. The appellant first entered the UK in 2011 as a student.  He  left  in
      2015, and travelled  to  Sweden,  where  he  claimed  asylum.  He  was
      returned to the UK in August 2016, pursuant to the Dublin Regulations.
      He applied for asylum upon arrival in  the  UK.  His  application  was
      refused on 14 July 2017.

Decision of the First-tier Tribunal

   5. The judge noted that the respondent  accepted  as  genuine  the  First
      Information Report ("FIR") and charge sheet submitted by the appellant
      in respect of the attack in 2009 and that the respondent also accepted
      that the appellant had witnessed  an  attack.  It  was  not,  however,
      accepted by the respondent that the gang were connected to  the  Awami
      league and that the  appellant  faced  a  risk  as  a  consequence  of
      witnessing the attack.

   6. In respect of the attack in 2009, the judge found:

        a. Several of the attackers were known to the appellant  (including
           a childhood friend and cousin).


        b. The attack was  relatively  mild  (the  appellant's  friend  was
           beaten up and suffered some injuries including broken teeth).

        c.  The  appellant  and  his  friend  were  involved  in  community
           activities to try  and  help  street  children  who  had  become
           involved in crime and drugs and this may have brought them  into
           conflict with the gang.

        d. The attack was not politically motivated or by a gang  connected
           to or affiliated with the Awami League. The judge supported this
           finding by noting       (i) the FIR  and  charge  sheet  do  not
           refer to the attackers having a political motive; and  (ii)  the
           appellant's  contemporaneous  deposition  in   the   Bangladeshi
           proceedings does  not  refer  to  any  political  motivation  or
           political background. At paragraph  49  the  judge  stated  that
           there was not credible evidence of the  gang  who  attacked  him
           having political connections or affiliations, or a link  to  the
           government.

        e. There is a contradiction between the appellant stating  that  he
           was the only witness to the attack  in  2009  and  the  evidence
           submitted by the appellant concerning proceedings in  Bangladesh
           which includes statements from other witnesses to the attack.

        f. The appellant's evidence was that in 2013  police  came  to  his
           house asking for him as they were continuing to pursue the  case
           against the perpetrators but they could not continue because  of
           his absence. The judge stated that the appellant had not given a
           credible explanation as to why his role was so  crucial  in  the
           proceedings given the witness statements from other witnesses.

        g. The appellant  gave  inconsistent  evidence  about  whether  the
           proceedings against the perpetrators in Bangladesh  are  ongoing
           or have been withdrawn.


        h. The appellant remained in Bangladesh for almost two years  after
           the attack. The judge stated that the appellant had not given  a
           credible explanation as to his whereabouts or how he was able to
           continue to study. The judge noted that in the  AIR  (q.89)  the
           appellant said "in those two years they didn't hurt  me  because
           they know me and see me grow up together. We locally  know  each
           other". The judge found that this suggested that as long as  the
           appellant stayed out of their area and did  not  interfere  with
           their activities the gang would leave him alone.


        i. The relatively minor attack in 2009 does not remain  the  source
           or cause of ongoing risk on  return  to  the  appellant  or  his
           family.

   7. The appellant submitted a declaration by  a  lawyer  stating  that  he
      received a petition from the appellant's mother to take action against
      "terrorists" who are threatening the appellant's family and will  kill
      them if he testifies against them. The judge found that the letter did
      little to support the appellant's claim because (a) it is  dated  2017
      and therefore some years after the  attack,  (b)  the  author  of  the
      letter states that he knows the appellant but does not  say  how,  and
      (c) the letter states that the trial depends on the appellant  without
      explaining why given the existence of three other witnesses.

   8. The judge found that there was  a  significant  delay  in  making  the
      protection claim as the appellant did not make a claim when he came to
      the UK in 2011 as a student. However, the judge stated at paragraph 73
      (and again in paragraph 81) that the delay was only a relatively minor
      consideration.

   9. The judge  summarised  her  findings  in  respect  of  the  attack  in
      paragraphs 74 - 81. The judge stated that the  attack  was  relatively
      minor,  did  not  involve  a  gang  with  political   motivations   or
      connections, one of the perpetrators was the  appellant's  cousin  who
      lived next door to him, the appellant remain safely in Bangladesh  for
      nearly two years continuing his studies and for a time living at home,
      the appellant did not report the  threats  made  against  him  to  the
      police in Bangladesh, and the  appellant  gave  inconsistent  evidence
      about why his evidence was so crucial.

  10.  With  respect  to  the  appellant's  claimed  blogging  and  Facebook
      activity, the judge found  that  the  appellant's  evidence  was  very
      limited and he had not given a credible explanation as to why he would
      use his own name or post a photo of himself on some posts and  a  fake
      identity on others. The  judge  found  that  the  appellant's  witness
      statement of 26 August 2020 did not address any specific documents  or
      attempt to explain what they were in any detail.

  11. The judge noted that the evidence submitted by the appellant  included
      an on-line threat. However, the judge found that the appellant did not
      address this threat in his evidence and it is not clear  when  it  was
      sent, where it was posted or at whom it was directed.

  12. The judge also considered a document indicating an on-line threat from
      another person. The judge noted that this, too, is not referred to  in
      the  appellant's  witness  statement  and  was  not   relied   on   in
      submissions. The judge found that the threat did not appear to contain
      any reference to the appellant.

  13. The judge found at paragraph 90 that the evidence of  threats  against
      the appellant was limited and considerably  out  of  date.  The  judge
      stated that the appellant confirmed that there was no evidence  before
      the Tribunal of threats from after 2017. The judge  found  to  be  not
      credible the appellant's explanation  that  he  did  not  put  further
      threats into the bundle as this would simply be repetition.

  14. After finding that the appellant would not be at risk on  return,  the
      judge considered whether, in the event that he was wrong, there  would
      in any event  be  sufficiency  of  protection  or  a  viable  internal
      relocation option.

  15. With respect to sufficiency of protection, the judge  found  that  the
      evidence submitted by the appellant  indicated  that  the  police  had
      shown a willingness to pursue the gang and had only  ceased  doing  so
      because he had left the  country,  and  that  the  appellant  had  not
      adduced evidence to show that he would not be afforded protection.

  16. With  respect  to  internal  relocation,  the  judge  noted  that  the
      appellant had lived for two  years  in  Bangladesh  without  any  harm
      coming to him and, even taken at its highest, the appellant's evidence
      did not show that the gang had the influence or  resources  to  locate
      him elsewhere in Bangladesh. With respect  to  the  reasonableness  of
      internal relocation, the judge found that  the  appellant  is  from  a
      wealthy family, supported by his father and would be able to  live  in
      Dhaka.

  17. The judge also found that it would not breach article 8 ECHR to remove
      the appellant. The judge found that he is from a wealthy family,  well
      educated, remains in close contact  with  family  and  does  not  have
      significant  health  concerns.  The  judge   found   that   in   these
      circumstances his removal would be proportionate.

Grounds of Appeal

  18. The grounds of appeal are lengthy and challenge almost every aspect of
      the decision. They are divided into seven "grounds" but within each of
      the seven grounds are various different arguments. I  have  summarised
      the various challenges, following  the  structure  and  order  in  the
      grounds, as follows:

  19. Ground 1: Failure to properly assess the credibility of the appellant.
      Under this heading, the appellant claims that the judge:

        a. placed too high a burden of proof on the appellant;


        b. was wrong to state at paragraph 44 that there was no evidence of
           the gang being linked to the ruling party;

        c. failed to state why she did not accept that the  appellant  knew
           the assailants in the gang personally, and knew  that  they  had
           Awami League connections; and

        d. erred by stating that there was no evidence to support the claim
           that the gang were  supported  by  the  Awami  league  when  the
           appellant gave evidence in the form of the AIR and  written  and
           oral  evidence,  and  provided  evidence  in  the  form   of   a
           declaration from a Bangladeshi lawyer, which was  authentic  and
           strong evidence.

  20. Ground 2. Making adverse findings  without  giving  the  appellant  an
      opportunity to deal with the issues. Under this heading, the appellant
      claims that the judge erred by drawing an adverse  inference  from  an
      issue that was not raised by the respondent or judge at  the  hearing,
      and which the appellant did not have an opportunity to respond  to  as
      it was not put to him.  The  issue  was  that  there  is  an  apparent
      inconsistency between the  appellant  saying  that  he  was  the  only
      witness to the attack and there being three  witness  statements  from
      other witnesses to the attack in the appellant's bundle.

  21. Ground 3. Error in respect of considering the appellant's  ability  to
      continue studying in Bangladesh. Under  this  heading,  the  appellant
      claims that the judge erred by not putting to him that  he  considered
      that the appellant had not given a credible account of how he  managed
      to continue studying if he was at risk from the attackers. The grounds
      contend that this was never at issue and therefore the  appellant  did
      not have an opportunity to provide an explanation.

  22. Ground 4.  Error  in  considering  the  lawyer's  letter.  Under  this
      heading, the appellant claims that the judge:

        a. erred by drawing an adverse inference  from  the  appellant  not
           giving the date when his father attempted to lodge a  FIR,  when
           he was not asked this;


        b. failed to ascribe proper  weight  to  the  lawyer's  letter,  in
           accordance with PJ v Secretary of State for the Home  Department
           [2014] EWCA Civ 1011; and

        c. irrationally rejected that the gang of assailants had  political
           connections as the lawyer's letter was written by a lawyer.

  23. Ground 5. Error in considering section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration
      (Treatment of Claimants,  etc)  Act  2004.  Under  this  heading,  the
      appellant claims that the judge erred by failing to consider that  the
      appellant was lawfully in the UK from  2011  to  February  2015  as  a
      student and that he claimed asylum as soon as  he  was  returned  from
      Sweden under the Dublin Regulations (having travelled to  Sweden  once
      his leave expired in order to claim asylum there).

  24. Ground 6. Error in considering the sur place protection  claim.  Under
      this heading, the appellant claims that:

        a. it was illogical for the judge to presuppose that a political or
           religious activist  would  not  have  a  picture  of  themselves
           online;


        b. it was wrong for the judge to find that  it  was  unclear  which
           website the appellant had posted on as it was  accepted  by  the
           respondent that his posts were on Facebook; and

        c. it was bizarre for the  judge  to  find  as  relevant  that  the
           appellant has not reported the threats to the police in  the  UK
           when the threats originated from Bangladesh.

  25. Ground 7. Error in considering sufficiency of protection and  internal
      relocation. Under this heading, the appellant claims that:

        a. the judge ignored the fact that the assailants were  bailed  out
           easily and able to resume threatening the appellant due to their
           political connections;


        b. the judge failed to take into consideration that the appellant's
           father's FIR was not accepted by the authorities;

        c. the judge did not explain why the objective evidence provided by
           the appellant was not accepted, in particular as to the  culture
           of corruption within the police and judiciary;

        d. the judge failed to take into consideration that  the  only  way
           the appellant was able to remain in  Bangladesh  for  two  years
           after the attack was by hiding; and

        e. the judge failed to explain why it would be reasonable  for  the
           appellant to relocate by going back into hiding.

Submissions

  26. I heard submissions from Mr West, on behalf of the appellant,  and  Mr
      Kotas, on behalf of the respondent.

  27. Although Mr West relied upon all of the grounds of appeal,  the  focus
      of his submissions was on the first ground, which he characterised  as
      the core challenge. He submitted that the judge  fell  into  error  by
      failing to explain why she rejected the  consistent  evidence  of  the
      appellant that he knew the assailants  were  connected  to  the  Awami
      league. He argued that it was incumbent on the judge to make  a  clear
      finding on this crucial point and explain her reasoning.

  28. He also argued that the judge failed to adequately address the  letter
      from the Bangladeshi lawyer, which, he claimed,  clearly  corroborated
      the appellant's claim that there was a link between the gang  and  the
      Awami league. Mr West submitted that it was critical for the judge  to
      explain with clarity why this key aspects of the lawyer's letter  were
      rejected.

  29. With respect to the other grounds, Mr West stated that  there  was  an
      overarching issue, which is that the judge repeatedly  failed  to  put
      points, in respect of which she drew  an  adverse  inference,  to  the
      appellant, thereby depriving him of an opportunity to make  his  case.
      Mr West argued that it is not for an appellant pre-empt issues that  a
      judge might take against him; and had these points  been  put  to  the
      appellant he may have been able to explain  them.  Mr  West  described
      this as a persistent feature in the decision.

  30. Mr Kotas argued that the first ground is no more than  a  disagreement
      with the judge's factual findings, which the  judge  was  entitled  to
      make for the sustainable reasons she gave. With respect to  the  other
      grounds,  relying  on  WN  (Surendran;   credibility;   new  evidence)
      Democratic Republic of Congo [2004]  UKIAT 00213, Mr Kotas argued that
      the judge did not need to put points to the appellant and it  was  for
      the appellant to make his case.

  31. I asked the parties whether, even if the judge erred as claimed,  this
      was immaterial if the appellant could safely and  reasonably  relocate
      internally. Mr Kotas stated that he accepted that if the  judge  erred
      in relation to grounds 1-5 the decision could not stand as the judge's
      findings on internal relocation, although framed as a finding  in  the
      alternative, relied on findings that are subject to the  challenge  in
      grounds 1-5.

Analysis

Ground 1: Failure to properly assess the credibility of the appellant

  32. An issue in contention before the First-tier Tribunal was  whether  or
      not the gang was affiliated to the Awami league,  as  claimed  by  the
      appellant. This was a key issue because the risk the appellant  claims
      to  face  on  return  arises  from  the  gang  having  this  political
      connection.

  33. The judge made a finding of fact that the  gang  was  not  politically
      connected to the Awami league. In the  first  ground  of  appeal,  and
      during his submissions, Mr West sought to challenge  this  finding  of
      fact from various angles. His arguments, however, are not  persuasive,
      for the following reasons:

        a. First, the judge clearly understood and recognised that  it  was
           the appellant's evidence that he personally knows  some  of  the
           assailants and their affiliation to the Awami  league.  This  is
           plain  from  paragraph  46  where  the  judge  stated  that  the
           appellant claimed to know the gang was affiliated to  the  Awami
           league because of "his  own  local  knowledge".  The  judge  can
           legitimately be criticised for  stating  at  paragraph  44  that
           there was "no evidence" to support the political  connection  to
           the gang when, clearly, it was the appellant's own evidence that
           he knew there was  a  connection.  However,  as  is  clear  from
           paragraph 46 (as well as from reading the decision as a  whole),
           the  judge  did  in  fact  recognise  and  appreciate  that  the
           appellant  gave  evidence  stating  that  he  knew,  from  local
           knowledge, that the gang was politically connected. This is  not
           a  case  where  the  judge  overlooked,  or  misconstrued,   the
           appellant's evidence. Rather, it is one where the judge did  not
           accept it. It  is  well  established  that  where,  as  here,  a
           challenge is being made to a finding of fact,  caution  must  be
           exercised before interfering with it. See, for example,  Lowe  v
           The Secretary of State for the Home Department [2021]  EWCA  Civ
           62


        b. Second, the judge did not apply the wrong standard of proof when
           making this evaluative  finding  of  fact.  The  judge  directed
           herself correctly to the standard of proof in paragraph  32  and
           there is  nothing  in  the  language  used  by  the  judge  when
           assessing  whether  the  gang  is  politically  connected  -  or
           elsewhere in the decision - to indicate that the wrong  standard
           was applied.

        c. Third, the judge did not overlook any evidence when  making  her
           findings of fact. It is plain, from reading the  decision  as  a
           whole, that the judge had regard to the documentation  submitted
           by the appellant to corroborate the  occurrence  of  the  attack
           (see paragraph 51), the letter from a  Bangladeshi  lawyer  (see
           paragraphs 61 - 65), the evidence of  the  appellant  (see,  for
           example, paragraphs 45,46, 50, 53, 57-60, and  66-68),  and  the
           objective evidence which was said to support the claim that  the
           gang is Awami league affiliated (see paragraphs 47 - 48).  There
           is no merit, therefore,  to  the  contention  that  legal  error
           arises from a failure to have regard to material evidence.

        d. Fourth, the judge did not fail to give adequate reasons for this
           finding of fact. Reasons are adequate if they  provide  a  party
           with sufficient detail to understand why a decision was reached.
           See Fage UK Ltd. v Chobani UK Ltd. [2014] EWCA Civ 5  at  [115].
           The parties can be in no doubt as to why the  judge  found  that
           the attackers were not affiliated to the Awami  league,  as  the
           judge explained her reasoning clearly. In short, the judge found
           that the FIR and charge sheet do  not  refer  to  the  attackers
           having   a   political   motive   or   affiliation,   and    the
           contemporaneous depositions (including that of the appellant) in
           the Bangladeshi  proceedings  do  not  refer  to  any  political
           motivation or connection.

  34. In summary, the first  ground  cannot  succeed  because  it  fails  to
      identify a legal error and amounts to no more than a disagreement with
      a finding of fact that the judge was entitled,  for  the  reasons  she
      gave, to make.

Ground  2.  Making  adverse  findings  without  giving  the   appellant   an
opportunity to deal with the issues.

  35. In some cases, such as where a point is conceded  by  the  respondent,
      fairness may require an issue to be put to an appellant before  it  is
      decided against him. However, this will not normally be the case where
      an issue is in contention. As explained in WN (Surendran; credibility;
      new evidence) Democratic Republic  of  Congo  [2004]  UKIAT  00213  at
      paragraph 28:

           [N]either in Scotland nor in England and Wales is it thought  in
           the higher courts that every point which concerns an Adjudicator
           when dealing with the credibility of an Appellant  needs  to  be
           raised explicitly with the Appellant in order for him to pass  a
           comment upon it. There may be tactical reasons why an  Appellant
           and his advocate decide  not  to  grapple  with  what  might  be
           thought to be a problem; they may hope that the Adjudicator will
           not see it as a significant point or indeed may not spot  it  at
           all; but it is for an Appellant whose credibility is  challenged
           as this  Appellant's  credibility  most  emphatically  was,  and
           challenged in almost every possible respect, to put forward  all
           the evidence he can and to deal  with  the  discrepancies  which
           arise. Even where the Secretary of State is not represented, the
           Appellant cannot assume that points which are  not  put  by  the
           Adjudicator to him for his comment are points which  are  to  be
           regarded as accepted, especially if they are obvious  points  of
           contradiction or implausibility which he has failed  to  grapple
           with. It is not necessary for a fair hearing that every point of
           concern which an Adjudicator has, be put expressly to  a  party,
           where  credibility  is  plainly  at  issue.  As  we  have   said
           elsewhere, it is a matter of judgment whether to omit to  do  so
           is unfair or whether to do so risks appearing to be unfair as  a
           form of cross-examination. On balance, the  Adjudicator's  major
           points of concern are better put, especially  if  they  are  not
           obvious. The questions should be focussed but open, not leading,
           expressed in a neutral way and manner, and not at  too  great  a
           length or in too great a number. But, whether  or  not  that  is
           done, it is for the Claimant to make his case.

  36. In this case, as is made  clear  in  paragraph  24  of  the  decision,
      although the respondent conceded that the appellant had witnessed  the
      gang attacking his friend, the appellant's claim  that  the  gang  was
      politically connected to the Awami league was not conceded. It is also
      clear, from the judge's summary of the submissions in  paragraphs  28-
      29, that this issue was very much in  dispute  before  the  First-tier
      Tribunal. The appellant therefore was aware (or  ought  to  have  been
      aware) that the judge would consider, and make an  evaluative  finding
      in respect of, the evidence before her relevant  to  the  question  of
      whether the gang was politically connected.

  37. The documentary evidence submitted by the appellant about  the  attack
      included statements of three witnesses to the attack (statements of D.
      Hossain, M. Ali and H. Ali). None of these  statements  indicate  that
      the gang was politically connected. Rather, they describe  an  assault
      in which a mobile phone was stolen. This evidence, on its  face,  does
      not assist the appellant in establishing that the gang  are  connected
      to the Awami league. It was  a  matter  for  the  appellant  (and  his
      representatives) to decide whether to address (and thereby draw to the
      judge's attention) the content of these three witness statements.  The
      appellant having chosen to not do so (and the issue  not  having  been
      raised by the respondent) it still remained for the judge to  consider
      the statements, as it related to an  issue  in  contention.  In  these
      circumstances, there was  no  duty  on  the  judge  to  "put  to"  the
      appellant that the witness statements were being considered,  or  that
      she  considered  them  inconsistent  with  the   appellant's   witness
      evidence. Such an obligation would be inconsistent with WN.

Ground 3. Error in respect of considering the appellant's ability to
continue studying in Bangladesh

  38. The judge was entitled to take into consideration that  the  appellant
      was able to continue studying in Bangladesh after the attack, as  this
      was relevant to whether he faced a risk from the gang. The  judge  did
      not need to "put this" to the appellant for the reasons given  in  WN.
      This ground lacks merit for the same reason as ground 2.

Ground 4. Error in considering the lawyer's letter.

  39. The appellant relied on a letter  written  by  a  Bangladeshi  lawyer,
      Imrul Hasan, dated 27 August 2017. In his letter, Mr Hasan states that
      he received a petition  from  the  appellant's  mother  to  assist  in
      respect of a threat to the appellant and  his  family  from  "powerful
      terrorists" who are sheltered by the governing political party.

  40. The judge considered Mr Hasan's letter in detail in paragraphs 61 -65.
      She gave it little weight because (a) it is dated 2017  and  therefore
      some years after the attack, (b) Mr Hasan states  that  he  knows  the
      appellant but does not say how, and (c) the  letter  states  that  the
      trial depends on  the  appellant  without  explaining  why  given  the
      existence of three other witnesses.

  41. The grounds challenge the judge's approach to Mr Hasan's letter and
      contend that adverse points were not put to the appellant.

  42. This ground lacks merit because it was open to the judge, having
      considered Mr Hassan's letter, to attach little weight to it for the
      sustainable reasons she gave. Reliance on PJ (Sri Lanka) is
      misconceived. That case concerned the veracity of court documents
      obtained by a local lawyer. In contrast, this case concerns a local
      lawyer (Mr Hasan) stating that he knows that the gang are "powerful
      terrorists", "sheltered by the governing political party" and that
      they "must kill [the appellant] and ruin his social respect including
      his family" if he returns to Bangladesh. Mr Hasan, however, has not
      explained how he has come to know this information about the gang. In
      the absence of an explanation as to how he obtained this information
      about the gang, it plainly was open to the judge to attach only little
      weight to the letter.

Ground 5. Error in considering section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration
(Treatment of Claimants, etc) Act 2004.

  43. This ground has no merit because (a) the judge was entitled to take
      into consideration that the appellant did not claim asylum when he
      arrived in the UK in 2011; and (b) in any event, the judge did not
      attach significant weight to the delay in claiming asylum. In
      paragraph 73 the judge stated that the delay was only a relatively
      minor consideration. Accordingly, even if the judge erred (which I do
      not accept) by treating as relevant the delay in claiming asylum, this
      was immaterial because it did not affect the outcome.

   Ground 6. Error in considering the sur place protection claim.


  44. Mr West did not make any submissions on this ground. He stated that he
      relied on his written submissions.

  45. The judge described, in paragraph 92, the evidence submitted by the
      appellant to support his sur place claim as "weak and confusing" and
      containing "many unresolved issues". Having reviewed for myself the
      evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal, I am satisfied that
      this conclusion was open to the judge. Indeed, based on the
      documentary evidence, it is difficult to see how any other conclusion
      could have been reached. No error of law arises because the judge
      plainly had regard to the documents submitted by the appellant
      purporting to show his sur place activities, evaluated this evidence
      in the context of the background material about Bangladesh, and gave
      clear reasons to explain the conclusion she reached. This ground
      amounts to no more than a disagreement.

Ground 7. Error in considering sufficiency of protection and internal
relocation

  46. The judge adequately explain why she found there to be sufficiency of
      protection and a viable internal relocation alternative for the
      appellant. However, any error would in any event be immaterial as, for
      the reasons given above, the judge was entitled to find that the
      appellant would not be at risk (and would not need state protection)
      in his home area.


Notice of Decision

  47. The appeal is dismissed. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  did
      not involve the making of an error of law and stands.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant or any member of the  appellant's  family.
This direction  applies  both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the  respondent.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.


|Signed                             |                                   |
|                                   |                                   |
|D. Sheridan                        |                                   |
|Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan      |Dated: 20 July 2021                |

