
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07952/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 4th January 2018                      |On the 30th January 2018      |


                                   Before

                      Deputy upper tribunal JUDGE Kelly


                                   Between

                                     M L
                            (anonymity directed)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Aslam, Counsel instructed by Lohaib Fatimi
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Rhys-Davies, promulgated on the 18th September  2017,  to  dismiss  his
    appeal against refusal of his Protection Claim.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who was born on the [ ] 1976.
    The judge accepted (as had the respondent) that the appellant's  father
    and grandfather were influential men within their tribe and that he had
    been employed by the International Medical Corps and USAID between 2001
    and 2003. It was also accepted that  (a)  he  had  thereafter  been  an
    advisor and provider of security services to various  organisations  in
    Kabul and elsewhere, and  (b)  from  2006,  had  built  up  a  business
    employing around 10 people policing the [ ] Customs Post on the  border
    with Pakistan, and that this  had  continued  up  until  the  point  of
    leaving Afghanistan in April 2016. Finally, it was  accepted  that  the
    appellant had stood as a candidate for election to the [ ] Assembly  in
    2014. The judge did not however accept that in doing so he  had  raised
    his profile any higher than the other 500 candidates who had also stood
    for election, or that he had received threatening "night letters"  from
    the Taliban due to his supposed refusal to support their  cause  during
    his election campaign.

 3. The grounds before me can conveniently be summarised as follows:

   1. The judge's findings are contrary to "country information, the country
      guidance case law, and Dr Giustozzi's expert report" [paragraph  8  of
      the grounds];


   2.  The  judge  failed  to  consider  the  possibility  of  an   innocent
      explanation for the fact that the night  letters  bore  two  different
      signatures whilst purporting to be from the same person;


   3. It was wrong for the judge to suggest that the appellant's account  of
      the threats he had received (two warning letters, as well  an  earlier
      telephone call and a visit from local elders)  was  inconsistent  with
      the procedures described by Dr Giustozzi, given that Dr Giustozzi  had
      in fact said that the due process of the Taleban involved the  issuing
      of at least two warnings;


   4. The finding that the Taleban target the family  members  of  suspected
      collaborators is  misconceived  and  contrary  to  background  country
      information;


   5. The finding that the appellant would not have an enhanced local public
      profile during the election campaign was perverse given  the  accepted
      background of him coming from an influential family, his membership of
      the Lagthe Judghman's People's Council, and his association  with  the
      deputy head of  the  intelligence  service  who  had  been  killed  in
      September 2009.


    I take them in turn.

 4. In my judgement, the first ground is  simply  a  general  statement  of
    disagreement with the judge's conclusion  and  does  not  identify  any
    error of law. I therefore turn to the grounds that contain a degree  of
    specificity.

 5. Mr Aslam accepted that the second ground was not his strongest.  Whilst
    it is doubtless incumbent upon a  judge  to  have  regard  to  (if  not
    necessarily accept) any explanation that an appellant may  advance  for
    discrepancies in the evidence upon  which  he  relies,  this  does  not
    extend to an obligation to  speculate  upon  what  possible  'innocent'
    explanations there may be where none  has  been  forthcoming  from  the
    appellant himself. The appellant now seeks  to  rely  upon  explanatory
    evidence for the discrepancy in  question,  notwithstanding  that  this
    evidence was not before Judge Rhys-Davies. It is not however  an  error
    of law for a judge to fail to anticipate evidence that was  not  before
    him. Where fresh evidence arises after the dismissal of an appeal,  the
    appropriate remedy is to place it before  the  Secretary  of  State  in
    support of a fresh claim.

 6. The third ground represents a challenge to what is perhaps the  weakest
    part of the judge's reasoning. It is true, as the grounds  state,  that
    Dr Giustozzi does at one point in  his  report  refer  to  the  Taleban
    issuing "at least" two warnings before taking further action against  a
    suspected collaborator. However, that phrase is used within the context
    of Dr Giustozzi explaining the circumstances in which the Taleban  does
    not give any warning at  all.  However,  where  Dr  Giustozzi  directly
    addresses the issue of what might be described as the  'usual  process'
    adopted by the Taleban towards suspected collaborators, he does  indeed
    refer to the issuing of just two  warnings,  as  the  judge  suggested.
    Nevertheless, given the arguably contradictory statements in the report
    of Dr Giustozzi upon this point, I would have been deeply troubled  had
    the adverse credibility findings of the judge rested entirely upon this
    basis.  As  it  is,  the  judge  gave  other  sustainable  reasons  for
    disbelieving the appellant's account of receiving two warning  letters,
    not least of which is that which I explored in the previous paragraph.

 7. In considering the fourth ground,  it  is  necessary  to  set  out  the
    context within which the judge made  his  findings.  The  Secretary  of
    State had argued that the appellant's account of being at risk of  harm
    from the Taleban was not credible given that (amongst other things)  he
    did not claim that its members had attempted to harm his wife following
    his departure from Afghanistan. This argument was, on the face  of  it,
    supported by the relevant 'Country of Origin Information Report' [COIR]
    which, at paragraph 8.5.6, states that "... AGE's have been reported to
    target family members of individuals with the above profiles,  both  as
    acts of retaliation and  on  a  'guilty  by  association'  basis".  The
    appellant's answer to this argument (quoted  at  paragraph  76  of  the
    judge's decision) was that the Taleban do not normally target women and
    that the absence of any attacks upon her was not therefore relevant  to
    his situation. The judge rejected  that  explanation  because,  in  his
    view, the background country information stated that,  "anti-government
    elements are certainly not squeamish about attacks on women" [paragraph
    76 of the decision]. Mr Aslam argued that the judge had thereby  stated
    the position too widely, drawing attention to various passages  in  the
    background country information  that  suggested  that  attacks  by  the
    Taleban upon women in Afghanistan were confined to those who  were  (a)
    involved in public life, or (b) related to  "government  officials  and
    members of the ANSF". Given that the appellant's wife fell into neither
    of these categories, Mr Aslam argued that the judge was wrong to reject
    the appellant's explanation for why the Taleban had  not  attacked  his
    wife in his absence. I reject that submission. It seems to me that this
    argument is based upon an over-simplistic reading of paragraph 8.5.6 of
    the December 2016 COIR. It does not state that attacks by  the  Taleban
    are confined to  family  members  (including  women  and  children)  of
    "government official and members of the ANSF"; it  merely  states  that
    family members of government officials and  members  of  the  ANSF  are
    particularly at risk from the Taleban. The judge was thus  entitled  to
    conclude that the appellant's decision not to bring his wife and  child
    with him when he left Afghanistan and the  absence  of  any  suggestion
    that they had been harmed in his absence were matters  that  undermined
    the credibility of his claim that he would be at risk of harm from  the
    Taleban upon return to Afghanistan.

 8. The fifth ground  suggests  that  given  such  facts  as  were  agreed,
    including the accepted  influence  and  political  connections  of  the
    appellant's family, it was perverse for the judge to conclude that  his
    candidacy in the provincial elections of 2014 would not have  attracted
    the attention of  the  Taleban.  However,  I  agree  with  Mr  Clarke's
    submission  that  this  argument  fails  to  take  account  of  several
    countervailing factors. Firstly, it was open to the judge  to  conclude
    that the Taleban were not reasonably likely to be interested in any  of
    the candidates unless elected to office, given  that  until  such  time
    they would not have influence beyond that which they already possessed.
    Secondly, there was no evidence  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  had
    subsequently expressed any interest in continuing  with  his  political
    activities after his electoral defeat.   Thirdly,  and  notwithstanding
    their undoubted tribal influence, there was no evidence to suggest that
    either the appellant, his father, or his  grandfather,  had  previously
    come to the attention of the Taleban. It was therefore reasonably  open
    to the judge to conclude that the appellant would  not  have  been  any
    more likely to come to the adverse attention of the  Taleban  than  the
    other 500 people who had stood as candidates in the same election.

 9. In conclusion, the grounds of appeal seem to me to be no  more  than  a
    quarrel with  the  Tribunal's  evidence-based  findings  of  fact,  and
    accordingly  do  not  identify  any  arguable  error  of  law  in   the
    determination of the appeal.

Notice of Decision

10. The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  their  family.  This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to the respondent. Failure to comply  with
this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Judge Kelly                             Date: 28th January 2018

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

