
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/07498/2018
     PA/07484/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham CJC                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2019                                 |On 16 May 2019                |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                                  mr A M K
                                  mr Ar M K
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellants:    Mr H. Samra, Harbans Singh and Co
For the Respondent:    Ms H. Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellants are nationals of Pakistan.  The first Appellant was born
    on 13th April 1974 and his son was born on 5 June 1998.  The Appellants
    claimed asylum following the first Appellant's previous admission as  a
    Tier 2 (Migrant) with the second Appellant as his dependant.  The basis
    of the claim is that family land  had  in  part  been  occupied  by  an
    Islamic terrorist organisation, Lashkar e Jhangvi (LJ) who  are  linked
    to the Taliban.  It was asserted that  they  had  built  a  mosque  and
    madrasa on part of the family land but when  the  first  Appellant  had
    complained to the local police about this, that they had done  nothing;
    that LJ found out the first Appellant had complained and threatened him
    with violence if he did not withdraw that complaint.  As a result,  the
    first Appellant had been made subject to a fatwa by the  Ulema  Council
    for refusing to withdraw the complaint  and  an  FIR  had  been  lodged
    against him by the authorities because it was believed he had  colluded
    with LJ in building the mosque and madrassa  on  his  land  from  which
    terrorist activities were organised.  The second Appellant's  claim  is
    based on that of his father.

 2. The Appellants' asylum applications were refused in decisions  dated  2
    and 3 June 2018. The Appellants appealed against  these  decisions  and
    their appeals came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Ford  for
    hearing on 15 January 2019.

 3. In decision and reasons promulgated on 22  January  2019,  the  appeals
    were dismissed.

 4. Permission to appeal was sought, in time, on the basis that  the  judge
    had misinterpreted several documents and made factual inaccuracies,  in
    particular:

    (i)  in finding that the letter from  the  Regional  Police  Office  of
         Multan did not identify the complaint was wrong and contradictory;

    (ii) in finding the letter was not on letterheaded paper however it was
         stamped and signed and the judge did not place weight on this;

    (iii)    At 60 and 34D in finding that the letter from the City  Police
         Station was illegible when it  was  only  the  signature  that  was
         illegible not the text  itself  and  that  this  was  an  important
         document because it was an FIR issued by the  rangers  against  the
         Appellants;

    (iv) The judge erred in failing to finish her sentence at  the  end  of
         paragraph 6D and 34D;

    (v)  The judge had erred in her  assessment  of  the  letter  from  the
         Pakistan Ulema Council at 6H, finding this is against A1  and  that
         this was a shift in evidence because the fatwa was against A2, when
         it was never either Appellants' account and  never  stated  in  any
         evidence, document or at the hearing that a fatwa had  been  issued
         against A2;

    (vi) In respect of her rejection of the evidence of  the  witness,  the
         judge failed to take account of the fact that the witness had  gone
         to the Appellants' village not in order to  inspect  whether  there
         was a mosque and madrassa but to pay his respects to the parents of
         his friend who had lost their son.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Blundell in a decision dated 15 February 2019 in the following terms

         "Although I initially formed the view that the  grounds  of  appeal
         represented nothing more than  a  disagreement  with  Judge  Ford's
         decision I am just persuaded that there is arguable merit  in  some
         of the points advanced.  It is arguable for example that the  judge
         misunderstood some of the documents she  considered  and  that  she
         based certain findings on a misunderstanding of  the  evidence  (an
         example of which is at 5 of the grounds)."

    Hearing

6.   At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr Samra  on  behalf  of  the
    Appellants went through the documentary evidence.  In respect  of  page
    49, the Judge found that the letter from the  Regional  Police  officer
    does not identify the Appellant: see [6] a and b  but  this  is  wrong.
    She also takes issue with the fact that the letter from the police  was
    not on a letterhead but failed to take account of the fact that it  was
    stamped.

7.   The next challenge is to the Judge's findings at  6d  and  34(b)  where
    the Judge stated that the handwritten text was illegible, however,  the
    stamps are legible and the Judge omitted to complete  the  sentence  at
    6(d) in respect of the envelopes. In this respect, Mr  Samra  submitted
    that  at  pages  50-51  there  is  a  certificate  of  posting  by  the
    Appellants' solicitors to the head of the village, which was then taken
    to the relevant department: see page 52 which is the letter  which  was
    sent; page 61 and the translation at  page  62,  which  refers  to  the
    stamps from the Regional Post Office and the City  Police  Station.  Mr
    Samra submitted that it is  apparent  from  page  62  that  it  is  the
    signature that is illegible, not the documents themselves.

8.   Mr Samra also submitted that there was confusion as to  who  the  fatwa
    was issued against: see page 85 and see [3], [5]; [34](h) and [35].  He
    submitted that the consistent evidence  is  that  a  fatwa  was  issued
    against A1 and not A2 and that the  assessment  of  the  documents  has
    clouded the Judge's assessment of credibility. He  reminded  the  Upper
    Tribunal that the test is that set out in Tanveer  Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT
    00439 in respect of the weight to be placed on the documents. Mr  Samra
    submitted that the stamps are clearly legible, it is the signature that
    is not and it was clear that the documents were posted to  Pakistan  by
    the Appellants' solicitors.  They  were  returned  to  the  Appellant's
    friend and the envelope was provided: see pages 40 and 41, although  he
    was not able to say why the documents  were  sent  back  via  a  friend
    rather than solicitor to solicitor correspondence.  He  submitted  that
    the matter should be re-heard afresh and returned  to  the  First  tier
    Tribunal.

9.   In her submissions Ms Aboni said there was a  brief  Rule  24  response
    stating that the judge had directed herself  correctly.  She  submitted
    the judge had adequately considered all the documents  relied  upon  by
    the Appellants and dealt with them individually at [6] of the  decision
    and reasons.  At [34] the judge addresses all the documents  and  gives
    adequate reasons for rejecting them and why she is unable to place much
    weight  on  them.  The  judge  found  that  the  first  Appellant   was
    inconsistent, correcting his replies  at  interview  and  changing  his
    account and found at [30] that the apparent delay by the authorities in
    being interested in the Appellant has not been explained.

10.  At [34] the judge addressed each of the documents, giving  reasons  why
    she does not find the documents to be  reliable.   Ms  Aboni  submitted
    that the Judge gave adequate reasons for finding those documents do not
    corroborate the Appellants' account.  She submitted the documents  were
    considered in line with the Tanveer Ahmed principles.  There was little
    background evidence to support the Appellants' claims and the judge had
    given adequate reasons for her findings.  There was no material  error.



11.  In reply Mr Samra continue  to  rely  on  the  grounds  of  appeal  and
    asserted that the judge had made a material error of law.   I  reserved
    my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Findings and reasons

12.  I have concluded that the decision of First tier  Tribunal  Judge  Ford
    contains material errors of law, arising from  her  assessment  of  the
    documentary evidence submitted by the Appellants. It is  apparent  that
    there was some confusion by the Judge as to whether a  fatwa  had  been
    issued against the first or second Appellant  given  that  at  [5]  the
    Judge recorded that a fatwa was issued against the second Appellant but
    at [3] and [34](h) she records that it was  issued  against  the  first
    Appellant. She then  goes  on  to  conclude  at  [35]  that  the  first
    Appellant had shifted his account  of  the  fatwa  from  the  scholar's
    council being against him to stating that it  was  against  the  second
    Appellant. However, the first Appellant's consistent evidence  e.g.  at
    Q.20 of his asylum interview, is that a fatwa from  the  Suab  scholars
    had been issued against him and this is recorded by the judge at  [25].
    Nowhere in the decision and reasons has the judge recorded evidence  by
    the first Appellant that a fatwa was issued against  his  son  instead.
    Thus I find any confusion was on the part of the judge  and  that  this
    undermines the safety of her findings and conclusions in respect  of  a
    key document in the case.

13.  I further find that the Judge erred in her assessment of other  of  the
    documents in that the Judge failed to take account at 6 (d) of the fact
    that the documents were stamped, albeit the handwriting  was  illegible
    in the correspondence between the Appellants' solicitors and  the  City
    police station and that envelopes were  provided,  albeit  the  judge's
    finding in respect of the envelopes  is  unclear  as  the  sentence  is
    incomplete.

14.  I also find that the judge erred in  her  assessment  of  the  evidence
    from the witness, FA, whose evidence  was  that  he  had  gone  to  the
    Appellants' village to pay his respects to a friend's family whose  son
    had passed away and whose parents' home was in the same  village  [21].
    The judge disregarded his evidence at [22] on the basis that he had  no
    photographs nor any account of a newly built mosque on the  Appellants'
    land and found his evidence not credible. Her findings in this  respect
    are unsustainable because they are based  on  her  speculative  belief,
    absent any proper evidential foundation, that the  reason  the  witness
    visited the village was to help the  Appellants  rather  than  pay  his
    respects to his friend's parents.



    Notice of Decision

15.  I find material errors of law in the decision of  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge Ford. I set that decision  aside  and  remit  the  appeal  for  a
    hearing de novo before the First tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 13 May 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

