
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07910/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2018                              |On 23 April 2018              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                      v

                                  Mr V M j
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z. Ahmad, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms P. Solanki, counsel instructed by Greater London
Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1.     The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a
    national of Sri Lanka, born on 29 August 1981. He claimed asylum on 7
    February 2017 and this application was refused in a decision dated 2
    August 2017. His appeal to the First tier Tribunal came before Judge
    Robinson for hearing on 15 September 2017 and in a decision promulgated
    on 3 October 2017, the appeal was allowed.

    2.     The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal, in time, to
    the Upper Tribunal on the basis that the First tier Tribunal Judge had
    materially erred in law in failing to give adequate reasons:

         (i)      when considering the documentary evidence from Sri Lanka
         in respect of which he failed to give adequate consideration to and
         make clear adverse findings in respect of the submission on the
         part of the Home Office Presenting Officer, which required such
         consideration given that there are discrepancies between the
         lawyers' letters and the attorney directory and the chain of
         contact between the UK solicitors and the Claimant's representative
         was missing;

         (ii)     in failing at [62] to give adequate reasons for concluding
         that the documents did originate from a Sri Lankan court;

         (iii)    in failing to make a specific reasoned finding as to the
         credibility of the Claimant's claimed detention, interrogation and
         torture in 2009 and November 2015;

         (iv)     in failing to give adequate reasons at [54] for finding
         that the Claimant's account that the authorities came looking for
         his brother is plausible, based on the fact that he had been
         granted refugee status in Canada and given that his brother left
         Sri Lanka in July 2009, it does not follow that he would still be a
         person of interest to the authorities cf. GJ [2013] UKUT 319; and

         (v)      in failing to assess the claim in the absence of any
         evidence that either the Claimant or his brother were Tamil
         activists working to destabilise the unitary Sri Lankan state.

    3.     Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kekic
    in a decision dated 18 January 2018, on the basis that it was arguable
    that when the judge placed weight on the evidence purportedly emanating
    from two lawyers in Sri Lanka, he failed to address adequately or at
    all the concerns raised by the Secretary of State as to the substantial
    similarities in the phraseology of the letters said to be prepared by
    two different lawyers and that it was also arguable that the judge
    failed to give adequate reasons for accepting the claimed detention in
    2009.

    Hearing

    4.     At the hearing before me, Ms Ahmad on behalf of the Secretary of
    State sought to rely on the grounds of appeal. It is the case at [52]
    that the Judge referred to the correspondence submitted but did not
    complete his sentence. It is thus difficult to see what assistance the
    Court was provided with. She sought to rely on the decision in VT
    [2017] UKUT 00368 (IAC) and the fact that there is lawyer to lawyer
    correspondence does not mean it should not be accepted without
    question. There is no proper consideration of the evidence and the
    criticisms made by the Presenting Officer and given that the evidence
    was in dispute the Judge needed to provide reasons in coming to his
    conclusion.

    5.     Ms Ahmad further submitted that the Judge failed to make any
    findings as to the Claimant's detention in 2009, which could have lead
    to a different ultimate conclusion. Ms Ahmad submitted that the errors
    were material given that the Judge needed to provide reasons for his
    findings. Whilst Ms Ahmad sought to rely on the remainder of the
    grounds of appeal, she submitted that these were self-explanatory.

    6.     Ms Solanki sought to rely on a skeleton argument dated 11 March
    2018. In respect of the first ground of appeal she drew my attention to
    the letter from the attorney L. George at page 79 of the Appellant's
    bundle and the letter from attorney K. Poobalasingham at page 9 of
    supplementary bundle. She submitted that, contrary to the assertion in
    the grounds of appeal, the contents do not appear to be the same, as
    the letter from Mr George is much more extensive and the letters are
    not strikingly similarity.

    7.     In respect of the assertion that there has been a lack of
    consideration of the Presenting Officer's points, she sought to rely on
    Shizad [2013] UKUT 00085 (IAC) and the fact that there is a legal duty
    to give a brief explanation on the conclusions but reasons need not be
    extensive if the decision as a whole makes sense. Ms Solanki submitted
    that the arguments being advanced by the Secretary of State are met by
    Shizad. At [33] of the decision the Judge sets those out and did not
    ignore the case put forward by the Presenting Officer. At [50]-[52] the
    Judge has in a detailed way looked at the letter from the British High
    Commission as to the assessment of the genuineness of documents.

    8.     In relation to the other submissions made, Ms Solanki submitted
    that a Judge does not need to make findings on all submissions made by
    the parties which is illustrated by the fact that submissions were made
    by the Appellant's counsel which are recorded at [36]-[39] yet the
    Judge has not felt it necessary to address those points. When one looks
    at the attorneys' letters it is ultimately subjective and what it comes
    down to are criticisms of emails, phone numbers and addresses.

    9.     In respect of the point made about an email or fax chain of
    correspondence, the original documents were sent to the Secretary of
    State and certified copies of the Court files had been received. Ms
    Solanki submitted that, given that the solicitors in the UK are
    officers of the court and provided letters stating that they have sent
    documents to the solicitors in Sri Lanka, that that is enough.

    10.    She further submitted that, in any event, the criticisms raised
    were not of the kind that would have destroyed the credibility of the
    Claimant. What appears to be being suggested is that the Judge has
    failed to apply Tanveer Ahmed, however, certified copies of court
    records were sent and were expressly accepted by the Judge at [60]. The
    Judge correctly applied GJ and UNHCR eligibility guidelines, which are
    relevant to his findings at [58] and [59] . She submitted that these
    were adequate findings for the purposes of finding the documents
    reliable.

    11.    In respect of the decision in VT (op cit) the Judge did not find
    lawyer to lawyer correspondence enough but goes further than this and
    also takes account of the fact that the Claimant's brother is recorded
    to have absconded and this is in the court documents. It was clear the
    Judge had in mind PJ (Sri Lanka) [2014] EWCA Civ 1011 when assessing
    the documents. In VT reason the appeal was dismissed was that
    investigations carried out at the Magistrates Court showed that they
    were not genuine. .

    12.    In respect of the failure to make findings in respect of the
    2009 detention, the Judge made a finding at [63] and accepted the
    Claimant's core account is credible and based this on the objective
    evidence before him. The Claimant's claim is really based on his
    detention and ill-treatment in 2015 and thereafter. At [54] the Judge's
    finding regarding the Claimant's brother was open to him in light of
    the evidence and the court documents regarding the brother.

    13.    In respect of GJ and the implication in the grounds of appeal
    that the Claimant's case would not fall within the guidelines, Ms
    Solinka submitted that it was clear from headnote 6d that the Claimant
    would appear on a stop list because there is an extant arrest warrant.
    She submitted that there were very detailed findings on risk at [64]
    and [69] and a finding that he has been detained previously. In light
    of the court documents, the Claimant would be perceived as someone who
    would be at risk to the State and may be perceived as trying to revive
    the LTTE cf. GJ at 7(a) and 9. She further submitted that arguably he
    also falls within [289] of GJ which was endorsed by the Court of Appeal
    in MP [2014] EWCA Civ 829.

    14.    Ms Ahmad did not seek to reply.

    15.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

    Decision

    16.    I have given careful consideration to the submissions made by
    both parties; to the decision and reasons of First tier Tribunal Judge
    Robinson and to the evidence underlying the appeal, in particular, the
    documents said to emanate from a Sri Lankan court and letters from two
    Sri Lankan attorneys, Mr Poobalasingham and Mr George. I have concluded
    that the decision of the First tier Tribunal is not vitiated by error
    of law. My reasons are as follows:

    16.1.  Whilst Ground 1 of the grounds of appeal on behalf of the
    Secretary of State asserted that the Judge failed to give adequate
    consideration to the submission on the part of the Home Office
    Presenting Officer, as to discrepancies between the Sri Lankan lawyers'
    letters and the attorney directory and the chain of contact between the
    UK solicitors, I do not find that this is borne out in the decision. At
    [33] and [50] the Judge recorded the submission on the part of the
    Presenting Officer that this evidence was unreliable, in part based on
    a letter from the British High Commission dated 3 July 2017, asserting
    that 86.7% of letters claimed to have been written by Sri Lankan
    attorneys were false. The Judge sets out the salient contents of this
    letter at [51] of his decision. However, at [52] the Judge noted that
    no checks had been made in this particular case by the British High
    Commission and that the Claimant had filed additional information from
    the Bar Council list which indicates that the names of the two
    attorneys are genuine and that the Claimant's solicitors had exhibited
    correspondence between themselves and Mr George. At [53] the Judge
    directed himself to "consider the evidence as a whole in accordance
    with the Tanveer Ahmed principles." At [60] the Judge noted that the
    Claimant's solicitors had been in direct contact with Mr George and it
    had been established that he is on the Bar Council list and that
    another attorney, Mr Poobalasingham, had sent certified copies of the
    court records to the Claimant's solicitors. The Judge went on to
    conclude at [61] and [62] that, despite that the fact that "it is
    clearly the case that false documents, including attorneys letters, are
    widely available in Sri Lanka" the "inescapable conclusion to be drawn
    from the documentary material retrieved by two lawyers in Sri Lanka ...
    is that the appellant will be arrested on his return to Sri Lanka as a
    result of perceived links to the LTTE and their activities."

    16.2.  I find that the Judge correctly directed himself in law and that
    he took fully into account the position and evidence submitted by the
    Secretary of State in respect of the assertion that there is a
    prevalence of false attorneys' letters emanating from Sri Lanka, but
    gave clear and adequate reasons for concluding that in this Claimant's
    case, he was satisfied that the attorneys' letters were genuine. In so
    doing, the Judge also took into consideration certified copies of the
    Sri Lankan Court file and arrest warrant in respect of the Claimant. It
    is clear from [62] read with [61] that the Judge's reasons for
    accepting that the Court documents were indeed from Colombo Magistrates
    Court were both adequate and sustainable in light of the evidence as a
    whole and his consideration of this aspect of the appeal which is set
    out at [49]-62]. I find that grounds 1 and 2 of the grounds of appeal
    amount to no more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings of fact
    which were open to him on the evidence before him.

    16.3.  The Secretary of State further asserts that the Judge failed to
    make a specific reasoned finding as to the credibility of the
    Claimant's claimed detention, interrogation and torture in 2009 and
    November 2015. At [63] the Judge noted the background evidence,
    specifically the Home Office Country Information & Guidance report on
    "Tamil Separatism" as to the detention and torture of suspects in Sri
    Lanka. The Judge went on to hold: "I take the view that the appellant's
    account of his arrest, detention and ill treatment is supported by
    documentary evidence on which reliance can be placed and I accept his
    core story on this basis."  I find that it is clear from this finding
    that, in light of the fact that the Judge had considered and accepted
    the veracity of the evidence emanating from the Sri Lanka Court in the
    previous two paragraphs, this was a sufficiently specific and clear
    finding as to the Claimant's account of past mistreatment following his
    arrest and detention in 2009 and 2015. In any event, I accept Ms
    Solanki's submission that the Claimant's case was primarily based on
    his 2015 detention and this is clear from the manner in which the Judge
    assessed his claim.

    16.4.  The Secretary of State further asserts that the Judge failed to
    give adequate reasons at [54] for finding that the Claimant's account
    that the authorities came looking for his brother is plausible, based
    on the fact that he had been granted refugee status in Canada and given
    that his brother left Sri Lanka in July 2009, it does not follow that
    he would still be a person of interest to the authorities cf. GJ [2013]
    UKUT 319. I consider that the Judge dealt with this point adequately at
    [62] of the decision, when he noted that the Claimant's brother is
    named in the court papers, where he has been described as absconding
    and has been granted refugee status in Canada. In any event, in light
    of the Judge's findings as to the Court and other documents from Sri
    Lanka, it is clear that he found and gave sustainable reasons for
    finding that the Appellant would be at risk on return to Sri Lanka in
    his own right.

    16.5.  The final ground of appeal is that the Judge erred in failing to
    assess the claim in the absence of any evidence that either the
    Claimant or his brother were Tamil activists working to destabilise the
    unitary Sri Lankan state. I find that there is no substance in this
    ground of appeal either. At [64] the Judge expressly directed himself
    with regard to the country guidance decision in GJ (post civil war:
    returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319 (IAC) and noted and assessed
    the potential risk factors. At [65] he went on to find, sustainably,
    that the Claimant's mother had forfeited her surety when she appeared
    in court in December 2015; he considered it reasonably likely that the
    authorities are aware that both the Claimant and his brother had sought
    asylum abroad and that, given the nature of the charges brought against
    him it is reasonable to suppose that the Sri Lankan authorities will
    take the view that the Claimant is actively opposing the Sri Lankan
    government from the UK. At [67] the Judge expressly made reference to
    [356] of GJ. It is not the Claimant's case that he is a Tamil activist,
    however, the issue is that the evidence before the Judge, which he
    accepted, gave rise to a reasonable likelihood that he may be perceived
    as such, due to the fact he had been living in the UK since April 2010
    and was accused when interrogated in November 2015 of collecting funds
    abroad for the LTTE [11]. The Judge further found at [69] that the
    existence of an arrest warrant for failure to answer court bail would
    give rise to adverse attention on return at the airport or
    subsequently.

    17.    In addition to my specific findings above, I further draw the
    parties' attention to the recent judgment of the Court of Appeal in MD
    (Turkey) [2017 EWCA Civ 1958 where, in restoring the decision of the
    First tier Tribunal which had been overturned by the Upper Tribunal,
    Lord Justice Singh held inter alia as follows at [26]:

         "26.     The duty to give reasons requires that reasons must be
         proper, intelligible and adequate: see the classic authority of
         this court in Re Poyser and Mills' Arbitration [1964] 2 QB 467. The
         only dispute in the present case relates to the last of those
         elements, that is the adequacy of the reasons given by the FtT for
         its decision allowing the appellant's appeal. It is important to
         appreciate that adequacy in this context if precisely that, no more
         and no less. It is not a counsel of perfection. Still less should
         it provide any opportunity to undertake a qualitative assessment of
         the reasons to see if they are wanting, perhaps even surprising, on
         their merits. The purpose of the duty to give reasons is, in part,
         to enable the losing party to know why she has lost. It is also to
         enable an appellate court or tribunal to see what the reasons for
         the decision are so that they can be examined in case some error of
         approach has been committed."

    18.    I find that the decision of First tier Tribunal Robinson clearly
    enabled the Secretary of State to know why she had lost and his reasons
    were proper, intelligible and adequate.

    Decision

    19.    For the reasons set out at [16] and [17] above, I find that the
    reasons provided by the First tier Tribunal Judge for his findings and
    for allowing the appeal were adequate and sustainable. I find no
    material error of law in the decision, which is upheld. The appeal by
    the Secretary of State is accordingly dismissed.




    Rebecca Chapman

    Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

    22 April 2018
