
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07904/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Employment Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th October 2017                          |On 1st November 2017          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                                    [T N]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Muquit (Counsel), A & P Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against  the  determination  of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Boylan-Kemp MBE, promulgated on  29th  March  2017,  following  a
    hearing at Birmingham, Sheldon Court on 23rd  February  2017.   In  the
    determination, the judge refused the appeal of the Appellant, whereupon
    the Appellant subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen of Sri Lanka, and was born  on  [  ]
    1987.  He appealed against the decision of  the  Respondent  dated  7th
    July 2016 refusing his application for asylum and humanitarian leave.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The Appellant expresses a twofold risk.  First, that  he  would  be  at
    risk of persecution due to his political and imputed political  opinion
    on account of being a supporter of the LTTE whilst in  India.   Second,
    that he has been a supporter of the TGTE in the UK and that his  father
    supported the LTTE.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge recounted how the main thrust of the Appellant's account  was
    that his activities in supporting the LTTE in India have brought him to
    the attention of Q-Branch.  They would have passed  information  on  to
    the Sri Lankan authorities.  That would have put the Appellant at  risk
    upon return to Sri Lanka.  The Appellant gave evidence before the judge
    that in 2009, approximately some twenty days  before  his  accomplices,
    Ragha and Ramanan, were arrested, the Appellant  and  his  father  were
    invited  by  Q-Branch  for  questioning.   The  judge  held  that  "the
    Appellant failed to mention this very  relevant  event  in  either  his
    asylum interview or witness statement".  This, according to the  judge,
    "significantly undermine the credibility of his account" (see paragraph
    21).  The judge thereafter went on to give more detailed  consideration
    to this aspect of the claim (paragraphs 24  to  26).   It  was  wrongly
    rejected (paragraph 27).

 5. Second, consideration was then given by the judge  to  the  Appellant's
    diaspora activities in  supporting  the  "Transnational  Government  of
    Tamil Elam" (TGTE).  The Appellant stated he started  helping  them  in
    2013.  He claimed to regularly attend TGTE meetings.  He had stated  he
    attended various demonstrations.  This included a demonstration on 18th
    May 2016 in Westminster.  He provided a letter from the TGTE dated 20th
    February 2017 (see paragraph 28).  However, the Appellant's  attendance
    at these events "occurred after he had  received  his  refusal  letter"
    (paragraph 29), as pointed out by the Home Office  Presenting  Officer.
    The Appellant's own representatives explained this on  the  basis  that
    the Appellant "had not been thinking but documenting his attendance  at
    any TGTE events" prior to receiving the refusal letter (paragraph  30).
    The judge did not agree.  The judge held that "all of  the  photographs
    are post the refusal decision and appear to have  been  taken  for  the
    sole purpose of bolstering the  Appellant's  asylum  claim"  (paragraph
    31).

 6. Finally, the judge gave due consideration to the country guidance  case
    of GJ (Sri Lanka) [2013] UKUT 00319.  In particular, the judge referred
    to the statement (at paragraph 8) that, "any individual's past  history
    will be relevant only to the extent that it is  perceived  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as indicating a present  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the Sri Lankan Government".  The  Appellant,  concluded
    the judge, did not present a risk to the unitary Sri  Lankan  state  or
    the Sri Lankan government.

 7. The appeal was dismissed.

Grounds of Application

 8. The grounds of application state that the judge  failed  to  adequately
    appreciate  that  membership  of  the  TGTE,  which  is  a   prescribed
    "terrorist" organisation by the Sri Lankan government,  was  enough  in
    itself to put the Appellant at risk of ill-treatment  and  persecution.
    This was the principal activity of note by the  Appellant  in  the  UK.
    Second, that in relation to the risk arising from the Appellant's  long
    residence in India, the judge had failed to give adequate consideration
    to the fact that some returnees  had  been  tortured  and  interrogated
    about their time spent in southern India.

 9. On 21st August 2017 permission to appeal was granted.  On the second of
    these grounds, but not on the first.

Submissions

10. At the hearing before me on 13th October 2017, Mr Muquit, appearing  on
    behalf of the Appellant, renewed the first Ground of  Appeal  as  well.
    He submitted that the normal course by the  Tribunal  is  that  if  one
    ground is admitted but the other is rejected, the notification of  this
    is accompanied  by  a  form  from  the  Tribunal  service  alerting  an
    Appellant to the possibility of making a written  application  for  the
    rejected ground to be reconsidered again.   This  did  appear  to  have
    happened here.  I  indicated  to  Mr  Muquit  that  I  would  give  him
    permission to argue the first ground before me afresh again if this was
    the case.  Accordingly, Mr Muquit argued both grounds.

11. First, he submitted that the Appellant's  diaspora  activities  in  the
    form of his membership of the TGTE placed him at risk of  ill-treatment
    upon return to Sri Lanka.  The judge had  considered  this  matter  (at
    paragraphs 33 to 35) but had wrongly rejected it.

12. Second, that the grant  of  permission,  with  respect  to  the  second
    ground, was subject to the caveat that it was not known whether Counsel
    appearing at the hearing below had actually argued that  activities  of
    Sri Lankans in India would place them at risk. Mr  Muquit  referred  to
    the skeleton argument of Counsel at the time.  He states (at  paragraph
    30) that, "the Appellant is at additional risk  as  a  Tamil  returning
    after several years abroad in the UK following the civil  war,  and  in
    India during the civil war".  In particular, the skeleton argument  had
    drawn attention to the COIS at paragraph 2.3.9.  This reads that,

         "Furthermore Sri Lankan Tamils who sought refuge  in  India  during
         the civil war are returning in greater numbers and with  confidence
         about the  country  situation  in  Sri  Lanka.   However,  tens  of
         thousands of refugees remain in India and there  is  evidence  that
         some returnees were tortured and interrogated about time  spent  in
         southern India".

    Mr Muquit submitted that the judge overlooked the fact that there was a
    risk of torture and interrogation, simply on account of  the  Appellant
    having lived in India during the civil war,  and  this  was  not  least
    because the Home Office itself had  accepted  this  in  the  COIS.   He
    submitted that I should make a finding of an error of  law  and  remake
    the decision on the existing evidence myself at this Tribunal.

13. For her part, Mrs Aboni submitted that permission to appeal should  not
    be granted.  First, in relation to Ground 1 there was no material error
    of law at all in stating that membership of the TGTE did not  for  this
    Appellant create a risk.  All the  Appellant's  activities  undertaken,
    with  respect  to  demonstrations  and  the  like,  were  post  refusal
    activities.  His actions had been self-serving.  He had  only  attended
    these meetings, as clearly found by the judge, in order  to  bolster  a
    reclaim.  Mrs Aboni also applied the logic  in  HJ  Iran  to  make  the
    argument, that  if  the  Appellant  had  not  sincerely  and  genuinely
    attended these meetings and demonstrations, then upon return  he  would
    be under no compulsion to admit to having attended them, given that the
    Sri Lankan authorities did not have knowledge of  his  attendance.   In
    any event, they would know that many people applying for asylum in  the
    west do so on the basis of surplus activities that have  occurred  post
    refusal letter.

14. Second, as far as the  second  ground  was  concerned,  the  judge  had
    rejected the fact that  the  Appellant's  time  spent  in  India  would
    attract risk of ill-treatment.  As the judge had  observed,  "the  main
    thrust of the Appellant's account is that his activities in  supporting
    the LTTE in India  brought  him  to  the  attention  of  Q-Branch  ..."
    (paragraph 19).  Yet this had not  been  mentioned  during  the  asylum
    interview, the judge accordingly concluded that "the  Appellant  failed
    to mention this very relevant event in either his asylum  interview  or
    witness  statement"  such  that  it   "significantly   undermined   the
    credibility of his account" (paragraph 21).

15. In reply, Mr  Muquit  submitted  that  the  Secretary  of  State's  own
    evidence was that if people had spent time in India then it  was  known
    that some returnees had been tortured or interrogated  upon  return  to
    Sri Lanka.  Moreover, the recent decision of UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA
    Civ 85 assisted the Appellant because in that case  the  applicant  had
    been totally discredited, but it was still concluded that he  would  be
    at risk upon return to Sri Lanka.

No Error of Law

16. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.  First, and with respect  to  Ground  1,  namely  that  the
    Appellant had been involved in sur place activities in the UK, such  as
    his  membership  of  a  TGTE,  and  his  attendance  at  meetings   and
    demonstrations  (see  especially  paragraph  28),  the  judge  properly
    concluded that, "it appears  that  the  Appellant  does  not  hold  any
    significant role in the  TGTE  or  in  any  other  post-conflict  Tamil
    separatist organisation; the evidence being that he has attended a  few
    organised events ..." (paragraph 33).   On  his  behalf,  it  has  been
    submitted that the fact that the Appellant's personal Facebook  account
    link to the TGTE Facebook page would place him at risk (paragraph  33).
    The judge rejected this.   It  was  rejected  on  the  basis  that  the
    Appellant could not  be  perceived  as  a  threat  to  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities or the unitary state of Sri Lanka.

17. Second,  insofar  as  the  second  ground  is  concerned,  namely,  the
    Appellant's residence over some years in India, it is  true  that  this
    was expressly put before the judge (see paragraph 30  of  the  skeleton
    argument), and in relation to the COIS at  paragraph  2.3.9.   However,
    what the latter states is that, "Sri Lankan Tamils who sought refuge in
    India during the civil war are returning in greater  numbers  and  with
    confidence about the country situation in Sri Lanka ...".  Of course it
    was recognised, that some tens of thousands of refugees still remain in
    India.  It was also recognised  that  there  was  evidence  that  "some
    returnees were tortured  and  interrogated  about  the  time  spent  in
    southern India" (paragraph 2.3.9).  Nevertheless,  the  judge  rejected
    this on clear grounds.

18. First, that the Appellant had failed to mention that the authorities in
    India took both him and his father in for questioning  when  they  were
    approached by Q-Branch, either in his witness statement or  during  his
    asylum interview.

19. Second, the judge observed that, "I simply do not find his  account  of
    being able to enter and exit  the  country  without  difficulty  to  be
    plausible when set against his account of being a person of interest to
    the Indian authorities" (paragraph  24).   There  may  be  examples  of
    people  who  have  been  tortured  upon  return  from  southern  India.
    However, this is not to say that the Appellant will be perceived in the
    same light, particularly given the way in which the judge has found the
    facts in relation to his particular case, as I have just outlined.

20. Finally, in either case, and whether one is  considering  Ground  1  or
    Ground 2, the judge emphatically concluded (at paragraph 34)  that  the
    country  guidance  case  of  GJ  (Sri  Lanka)  [2013]  UKUT  00319  was
    determinative.  It established  that,  "an  individual's  past  history
    would be relevant only to the extent that it is perceived  by  the  Sri
    Lankan authorities as indicating a present  risk  to  the  unitary  Sri
    Lankan state or the  Sri  Lankan  government."   The  judge  took  into
    account the two photographs of the Appellant which are allegedly on the
    TGTE Facebook page.

21. Nevertheless, the judge held that,

         "As the Appellant is not a person already known to the  Sri  Lankan
         authorities as someone involved in the LTTE, the TGTE or other post-
         conflict Tamil separatism activities, and because of his very  low-
         level of involvement of the Appellant in the TGTE ........., then I
         find that a small number of photos in which is featured on Facebook
         would be insufficient to place him at risk as a result"  (paragraph
         34).

    The judge was entitled to come to that conclusion.   The  reference  to
    the more recent case of UB (Sri Lanka) [2017]  EWCA  Civ  85  does  not
    alter the position.

Notice of Decision

22. There is no material error of law in  the  original  judge's  decision.
    The determination shall stand.

23. An anonymity order is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 31st October 2017
