
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07702/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely via Skype for Business|Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 9 April 2021                      |On 20 April 2021                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     BB
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr Wood
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. The appellant is a male citizen of Mongolia who was born in 1982. His
       wife and two children are  dependent  upon  his  appeal.  He  appeals
       against a decision of the First-tier Tribunal which  was  promulgated
       on 10 March 2020. The First-tier Tribunal dismissed  the  appellant's
       appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  1  August
       2019 refusing him international protection.

    2. Having considered the papers and  having  heard  the  submissions  of
       representatives for both parties at an initial hearing, I  find  that
       the First-tier Tribunal has erred in law such that its decision falls
       to be set aside.

    3. The judge found that  the  appellant's  account  of  past  events  in
       Mongolia was not credible. A summary of the  appellant's  account  is
       given by Upper Tribunal Judge Blundell in the grant of permission  at
       [1]. The appellant relied upon a number of documents  in  support  of
       his appeal. The judge found [17]  that  the  weight  attaching  to  a
       degree certificate was 'undermined' by the fact  it  was  written  in
       identical font and format in Mongolian and English. He overlooked  or
       chose to ignore the explanation provided  by  the  appellant,  namely
       that the certificate had  been  issued  by  the  university  in  both
       English  and  Mongolian.  The  respondent  argues  that  the   degree
       certificate adds very little to  the  appellant's  claim  for  asylum
       which arises from a claimed fear of being falsely accused of a  crime
       committed by an influential Mongolian individual.

    4. Whilst the  document  may  not  itself  touch  on  the  core  of  the
       appellant's claim, it was part of the totality of the evidence  which
       the judge was obliged to consider. The  judge  has  referred  to  and
       applied the principles of Tanveer Ahmed*  [2002]  UKIAT  00439  which
       require a judicial decision maker to assess the evidential  value  of
       documents in the context of  the  whole  evidence.  The  analysis  of
       documentary evidence should  feed  into  the  judge's  assessment  of
       credibility and vice versa. The difficulty here is that, although the
       degree certificate may not materially advance the  appellant's  case,
       the fact that the judge considered it unreliable has  influenced  his
       overall assessment of the appellant's credibility as a witness.  That
       assessment may be vitiated if, as here, the judge has failed to  take
       account of an explanation for apparent anomalies in  a  document.  In
       short, whilst the contents of the document may have added nothing  to
       the  appellant's  claim,  the  judge's  rejection   of   it   without
       considering an explanation for apparent anomalies led the judge  into
       legal error.

    5. Granting permission,  Judge  Blundell  also  drew  attention  to  the
       failure of the judge to consider explanations given by the  appellant
       before 'seizing upon' discrepancies between  the  appellant's  remote
       asylum interview and his later evidence. The judge  was,  of  course,
       not obliged to accept the appellant's explanations but he  should  at
       least have engaged with the explanations if only to  reject  them.  I
       find that ground is made out also.

    6. In my opinion, the judge's  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the
       appellant's account is flawed for the reasons I have given. I  stress
       that what I have said should  not  be  taken  an  acceptance  of  the
       appellant's account only  that  the  particular  assessment  of  that
       account made by the First-tier Tribunal was flawed. The  decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. None of the  findings  of  fact
       shall stand. There will need to be a new fact-finding exercise  which
       is better conducted in the First-tier Tribunal to which the appeal is
       now returned for that Tribunal to remake the decision.




       Notice of Decision

       The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set  aside.  None  of  the
       findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned  to  the  First-
       tier Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the  decision  following  a
       hearing de novo. Both parties  may  rely  on  new  evidence  provided
       copies of any documentary evidence (including witness statements) are
       sent to the other party and the Tribunal no less than 10 days  before
       the next hearing.




       LISTING DIRECTIONS:  Manchester;  first  available  date;  First-tier
       Tribunal to decide if face to face or remote; Mongolian  interpreter;
       not Judge O R Williams; 2 hours.



                                                                      Signed
  Date  9 April  2021
          Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



