
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07360/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 April 2019                              |On 15 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                 MASOOD [A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr O'Ryan
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The appellant was born on 14 October 2018 and  is  a  male  citizen  of
    Iraq. He arrived in the United Kingdom in November 2017. By a  decision
    dated 26 May 2018, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's claim
    for international protection. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier
    Tribunal  which,  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  28  November  2018,
    dismissed the appeal. The appellant now appeals,  with  permission,  to
    the Upper Tribunal.

 2. There are four grounds of appeal. First, the appellant asserts that the
    tribunal gave inadequate reasons for finding that he could exercise the
    option of internal flight within Iraq. The appellant's home area is Tuz
    Khurmatu which  is  close  to  Kirkuk.  The  tribunal  found  that  the
    appellant would be at risk of serious harm in that area. Tribunal  also
    concluded that the  appellant  could  not  reasonably  be  expected  to
    relocate to Baghdad; the appellant is an Iraqi Kurd. Tribunal did  find
    that the appellant could relocate to the IKR. The appellant  challenges
    that analysis. There is 70% unemployment  in  the  IKR;  patronage  and
    nepotism are important factors in securing employment in the  appellant
    had no family members who would be able to assist  him;  the  appellant
    had worked for only two years as a shopkeeper and had no other  skills;
    the appellant was only educated  to  primary  school  level;  appellant
    always lived with his mother and sister in Iraq and had not established
    himself independently; it was  irrelevant  that  the  appellant  had  a
    modest knowledge of the Arabic language.

 3. I do not find that the ground has merit.  The  appellant's  ability  to
    speak Arabic was simply noted by the tribunal as  an  addition  to  his
    skill set. The tribunal's findings that the appellant would be able  to
    contact his family more easily from  the  IKR  was  reasonable  in  the
    circumstances; the tribunal expressly rejected  the  appellant's  claim
    that he had lost touch with his family. Further, the appellant's family
    includes an uncle described  by  the  tribunal  [45]  as  'wealthy  and
    influential'. It was entirely reasonable for the  tribunal  to  conduct
    its analysis on the basis that the appellant would be able  to  receive
    substantive assistance from this uncle. Further, the appellant's single
    status would assist him in using his evident resourcefulness to  obtain
    work, a finding plainly available to the tribunal on the evidence. None
    of the complaints raised by the  appellant  in  Ground  1  succeeds  in
    undermining the tribunal's conclusions on internal flight summarised at
    [61].

 4. Secondly, the appellant challenges the  tribunal's  findings  regarding
    his mother and sister whom the appellant  claimed  had  been  shot  and
    injured by militia. The appellant complains of the tribunal has made no
    firm findings regarding that claim. I find that  the  ground  does  not
    have merit. At [43], the tribunal found that  the  appellant  had  been
    'vague and inconsistent' regarding efforts to contact his mother sister
    and uncle. The appellant claimed that his sister and  mother  had  been
    injured and it is clear from the tribunal's analysis that the  tribunal
    has found that the mother and sister are still alive and living in Iraq
    and capable of offering support to the appellant. It  would  have  been
    helpful had the tribunal made a firm finding regarding  their  injuries
    but what the tribunal has to say regarding the  continued  presence  of
    family members in Iraq is unarguably sound in law.

 5. The third ground of appeal was, in effect,  withdrawn  at  the  initial
    hearing before the Upper Tribunal. Mrs Pettersen, for the Secretary  of
    State, accepted that the tribunal at [50] referred to  the  appellant's
    claim that his father had been involved in the military police and  the
    Ba'ath Party and not other aspects of his claim,  some  of  which  (eg.
    fear of return to his home area) the tribunal had elsewhere accepted as
    valid. In the  light  of  Mrs  Pettersen's  comments,  Mr  O'Ryan,  who
    appeared for the appellant, made no further submissions in  respect  of
    the third ground appeal.

 6. The fourth ground of appeal concerns the tribunal's  findings  at  [12]
    that the appellant's claim that he would be targeted as a result of his
    father's political connections was not a claim which  fell  within  the
    terms of the 1951 Refugee Convention. I agree that the claim, should it
    be accepted, would fall  within  the  Convention  on  the  basis  of  a
    political opinion imputed to  the  appellant  but  the  fact  that  the
    tribunal concluded that, even if that part of the  claim  was  genuine,
    the appellant would not now be at real risk on account of his  father's
    past  political  activities  render  this  ground  of  appeal  entirely
    nugatory.

 7. In the circumstances and for the reasons which I have  given  above,  I
    find that the appellant's appeal should be dismissed. I see  no  reason
    to interfere with the conclusions of the First-tier Tribunal.






Notice of Decision

 8. This appeal is dismissed.






Signed                              Date 11 APRIL 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Lane










