
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07802/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 29th October 2018                 |On 31st October 2018                 |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON



                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                  Miss S.J.

                                (AKA A.F.N.)

                         (Anonymity Direction Made)

                                                                  Respondent



Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms A Patyna, instructed by Camden Community Law
Centre



                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The application for permission to appeal was made by the  Secretary  of
    State but nonetheless, I shall  refer  to  the  parties  as  they  were
    described before the First-tier Tribunal.

 2. The appellant is a national of Ethiopia and her appeal was  allowed  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge N M  Paul's  decision,  promulgated  on  10th
    August 2018, against the decision of the Secretary of State dated  21st
    May 2018.

 3. The appeal was allowed on asylum grounds based on the  appellant's  sur
    place  political  activity  and   association   or   likely   perceived
    association with the Oromo Liberation Front (the 'OLF').

 4. The judge found as follows:

         '20.     Even if it were the  case  that  her  intention  of  being
         involved with these activities  was  entirely  fraudulent  (in  the
         sense that she was only seeking to do it to bolster her claim), the
         fact is that if those activities have, in the eyes of the  relevant
         authorities, flagged her up as a potential activist, then she is at
         risk.

         21.      I have read with care the decision  of  the  Deputy  Upper
         Tribunal Judge in 2012 which, in my view,  was  an  exhaustive  and
         very comprehensive analysis of the  appellant's  case.  Significant
         adverse credibility findings were made. In my view,  it  is  of  no
         help to Dr Trueman (who is not a judge of fact but a commentator in
         relation to general matters) to seek to undermine  that  Tribunal's
         decision by attacking the basis on which it was reached. The appeal
         was in 2012, and his  first  report  was  prepared  after  that  in
         December 2013. I note that no effort was made to seek to appeal the
         Upper Tribunal decision in 2012, or 2013, on the basis that it  was
         flawed. In my view, the findings were  clear  in  relation  to  the
         appellant's credibility, which means that  she  has  not  told  the
         truth about her age; and/or the circumstances  in  which  she  left
         Ethiopia. That judgment clearly must be  read  carefully  alongside
         this decision.

         22.      In relation to the  sur  place  activities,  I  found  the
         position to be rather different. Although  the  appellant  was  not
         cross-examined in any detail about the nature of her  support,  the
         fact is that the photographic evidence, along with  the  letter  of
         support, provide a sufficient basis for showing that she  has  been
         actively involved  and  (whether  deliberately  or  otherwise)  her
         profile by reference to whom she has been  photographed  with,  and
         where she has been photographed, give rise to the fact  that  those
         paying attention to these matters would have identified  her  as  a
         potential activist. Although the position in Ethiopia has  recently
         changed considerably, the country guidance still stands until it is
         altered, and it must (on that basis) follow that  0LF  sympathisers
         and people who have raised their profile in that way,  must  be  at
         risk'.

Application for Permission to Appeal


 5. The application for permission by  the  Secretary  of  State  contended
    that:

         (i)      the judge had failed to provide any adequate  reasons  for
         why they had departed from the upper Tribunal's findings  in  2012.
         The Upper Tribunal previously found that the appellant's sur  place
         activities OLF would not place her at risk on return. The  findings
         cited above at 22 provided no adequate, evidence-based reasons  for
         why the new evidence led to a departure from the previous  findings
         of the upper Tribunal

         (ii)     it  was  not  known  why  the  judge  concluded  that  the
         appellant's activities would now  come  to  the  attention  of  the
         Ethiopian authorities.


         (iii)    reliance was placed on the findings in Budhathoki (reasons
         for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341: judges needed to resolve the  key
         conflicts in evidence and explain in clear and  brief  terms  their
         reasons for preferring one case  to  the  other  so  parties  could
         understand why they had lost.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Chohan on 6th September  2018
    on the basis that the judge may have given inadequate reasons  as  they
    were confined to one paragraph.

 7. A very helpful  Rule  24  response  was  provided  by  the  appellant's
    representative Ms Patyna.

 8. At the hearing, Mr Deller confirmed that the challenge by the Secretary
    of State was not sustainable and  that  he  no  longer  maintained  the
    challenge.

    Conclusions

 9. As pointed out there is no requirement for judges to present or analyse
    every piece of evidence in a case.  The judge had full  regard  to  the
    findings of the Secretary of State's case at [5] of  the  decision  and
    acknowledged the submissions made at [11] to [12].

10. The judge's decision was encapsulated in the paragraphs  I  have  cited
    above.

11. There  were  extensive  media  posts  and  photographs  in  the  bundle
    supporting the appellant's participation  in  the  OLF  and  associated
    demonstrations.   Reference was also made to letters of support.   This
    evidence, the judge accepted, showed the appellant  had  been  actively
    involved in the OLF. The judge also referred  to  'who'  she  had  been
    photographed with and 'where'. That was an important finding. The judge
    identified the  relevant  country  guidance  MB  (OLF  and  MTA,  risk)
    (Ethiopia) [2007] UKAIT 30, and that his findings needed to be seen  in
    that context.

12. The judge's conclusions were in line with the evidence of  Dr  Trueman,
    who relied on the evidence  of  the  regional  security  expert  Gunter
    Schroder that 'a central electronic database  of  suspected  opposition
    activists is kept in Ethiopia' and 'this is accessible to security  men
    who screen the arrivals at Addis Ababa airport'.  Although I raised the
    point, no specific challenge was made to that evidence in  the  grounds
    of application for permission.

13. As set out in Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set  aside)  [2013]  UKUT
    00085 (IAC)

         'Although there is a legal duty to give a brief explanation of  the
         conclusions on the central issue on which an appeal is  determined,
         those reasons need not be extensive if  the  decision  as  a  whole
         makes sense, having regard to the material accepted by the judge'.

14. In the light of the grounds of application for  permission  as  framed,
    and grant, I find that Mr Deller was wholly correct in not  maintaining
    the challenge.

15. For the reasons given, I find there is no material error of law in  the
    judge's decision which incorporated adequately  reasoned  findings  for
    dismissing the appellant's claim. The First-Tier Tribunal decision will
    stand.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed              Helen    Rimington                                  Date
    29th October 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington

