
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07120/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 September 2018                 |On 20 November 2018                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

             THE SECRETARY OF THE STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [R T]
                          (No anonymity order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    No appearance


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For convenience we retain the designations  as  they  were  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, thus, Mr [T] is the appellant,  the  Secretary  of
    State the respondent.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of  Fiji  born  in  1979.   His  immigration
    history since he first arrived in the UK  in  2000  is  convoluted  and
    includes a period from 2005 to 2008  when  he  returned  to  Fiji.   It
    suffices to note that in May 2016 he was served with a decision to make
    a deportation order under section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971.  He
    subsequently made a protection and human rights claim in December 2016.
     In a decision dated 13 July 2017 these claims  were  refused  and  the
    decision to deport was maintained.

 3. He appealed.

    First tier hearing

 4. Following a hearing at Glasgow on 4 April 2018, at which the  appellant
    did not attend  and  was  not  represented,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Kempton dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum  and  human  rights
    grounds but allowed the appeal against the making  of  the  deportation
    order.

 5. She found that the appellant had been convicted on 29 charges from 2000
    until his last conviction in 2016.  His longest custodial sentence  was
    for a period of 11 months in 2011 for dangerous driving.

 6. She went on to consider paragraph 398 of the  Immigration  Rules  which
    reads:

         "398.    Where a person claims  that  their  deportation  would  be
         contrary to the UK's obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human
         Rights Convention and ...


             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in
             assessing that claim will consider whether  paragraph  399  or
             399A applies and if  it  does  not,  the  public  interest  in
             deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors  where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A."

 7. She then set out paragraph 399 which provides that deportation  may  be
    avoided in a family life case in limited circumstances set out therein.

 8. She noted that the appellant has three British citizen children born in
    2002, 2004 and 2007 by two different women.

 9. She found that there was no evidence  of  contact  with  the  children.
    There was no evidence of family or private life.

10. She noted that the appellant had served for a year as a member  of  the
    British  Armed  Forces  being  discharged  in  2001  due  to   a   poor
    disciplinary record, and his claim that he had been diagnosed with PTSD
    after a spell as security personnel in Iraq in 2005/6.  She found  that
    he had not produced evidence  in  support  of  that  claim.   The  only
    medical evidence was from a doctor who saw him when he was detained  at
    Harmondsworth in early 2017 and who noted that he had scars which  were
    consistent with his claim to have been assaulted in Fiji  in  2007  and
    that he was suffering from a depressive episode, poor  sleep,  thoughts
    of self-harm.  He was then on sleeping and anti-depressant  medication.
    There was no mention of him suffering from PTSD.  It  was  inferred  he
    would feel better once he was no longer detained.

11. Her conclusions are at paragraphs 35 and 36:

         "35.     I note that the respondent's view is that the appellant is
         a persistent offender and that it is in the public interest that he
         should be deported.  However, I note that there is no  evidence  of
         further offending since the appellant was dispersed to Glasgow.


         36.      I am  not  satisfied  that  there  is  sufficient  current
         evidence before me to demonstrate that it is in the public interest
         or conducive to the  public  good  to  deport  the  appellant.   If
         persons who serve in the armed forces are  affected  by  what  they
         encounter during  service  or  in  subsequent  civilian  but  quasi
         military roles (as the appellant was in when  in  Iraq),  then,  it
         could be inferred that the state has a  duty  to  look  after  such
         veterans.  Although there is only so much which can be done  if  an
         appellant will not engage with mental health services."

12. The respondent sought permission to appeal which was granted on  2  May
    2018.


    Error of law hearing

13. The appellant did  not  attend  the  hearing  before  us  and  was  not
    represented. There was no explanation for his  non  response.  We  were
    satisfied that notice of hearing  had  been  sent  to  his  last  known
    address on 22 August 2018.

14. We proceeded in his absence.  Mr Govan in his submissions  adopted  the
    grounds, the crux of which was that the judge failed to give any  clear
    reasons as to why the appeal was allowed.  Indeed, it was irrational.

15. We agreed that the decision showed material error of law.

16. At [18] the judge correctly noted the test to be  that  deportation  is
    conducive to the public good and in the public interest because in  the
    respondent's view the appellant is a "persistent offender who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the  law"  unless  exceptions  apply.   If  no
    exception applies there must be very compelling circumstances over  and
    above those set out in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

17. In this case the judge found that no exception  applied,  specifically,
    there was no evidence of family life or private life. She did not go on
    to consider very compelling circumstances.

18. She also found that the appellant's claim to be at risk for  a  Refugee
    Convention reason (imputed political opinion) was not made out.

19. The original grounds of appeal are in vague terms and there was nothing
    before the judge from  the  appellant  to  challenge  the  respondent's
    reasons.  Her  decision  on  the  asylum  claim  is  unassailable.  The
    findings on the lack of evidence of family/private life  and  that  the
    claim under Article 8 fails were clearly  open  to  the  judge  on  the
    evidence before her. There was no evidence  on  which  she  could  have
    found very compelling circumstances.

20. It may be that the judge in the decision,  nonetheless,  to  allow  the
    appeal was influenced by the apparent finding at [35] that he was not a
    persistent offender.  If so, she erred in two respects.

21. First in Chege ("is a persistent offender") [2016] UKUT  187  (IAC)  it
    was held that:

         "A 'persistent offender' is someone who keeps on breaking the  law.
         That does not mean however, that he has to keep on offending  until
         the date of the relevant decision or that  the  continuity  of  the
         offending cannot be broken.   A  'persistent  offender'  is  not  a
         permanent status that can never be lost once it is acquired, but an
         individual can be regarded  as  a  'persistent  offender'  for  the
         purpose of the Rules and the 2002 Act even though he may  not  have
         offended  for  some  time.   The  question  whether  he  fits  that
         description will depend on the overall picture and pattern  of  his
         offending history up to that date.  Each case will turn on its  own
         facts".  [Headnote].

22. In this case, as the judge noted, the appellant had been  convicted  on
    numerous occasions since  his  first  arrival  in  2000.  His  criminal
    history as noted on the PNC record which was before the judge  included
    for the period 2000 until April 2016, 29  offences  which  resulted  in
    convictions: 3 against property; 2 theft and kindred offences; 1 public
    order  offence;  4  offences  relating  to   police/courts/prison;   17
    miscellaneous  offences  (mainly  road   traffic);   2   non-recordable
    offences. His longest custodial sentence was  11  months  in  2012  for
    dangerous driving. His most recent conviction was  in  April  2016  for
    road traffic offences for which  he  was  fined  and  had  his  licence
    endorsed. It appears that he was held  in  immigration  detention  from
    November 2016 until November 2017 when he  was  granted  bail.  He  was
    dispersed to accommodation in Glasgow.

23. The judge materially misdirected herself on the  law  by  concentrating
    solely  on  the  brief  crime  free  period  since  the  appellant  was
    dispersed.

24. Secondly, the  gateway  to  treating  an  individual  as  a  persistent
    offender is the Secretary of State's assessment,  not  the  Tribunal's.
    The judge nowhere considers the implications of this.

25. Further, the judge appears to have found (at [34] and  [36])  that  the
    appellant suffers from PTSD and to have taken that  as  a  factor  that
    assisted his claim.  However, the appellant had presented  no  evidence
    whatsoever to suggest that he has a current medical condition.  In  the
    only medical evidence before her, from 2017, PTSD is not mentioned.  In
    making a finding in the absence of any evidence in support,  the  judge
    further erred.

26. These errors are such that the decision cannot stand.  We set it aside.

27. We remake the decision.  The position is as follows:  As paragraph  398
    states, deportation is conducive to the public good and in  the  public
    interest if  the  appellant  is  a  persistent  offender  who  shows  a
    particular disregard for the law unless exceptions apply.  We find that
    the overall picture and pattern of his offending history,  as  set  out
    above, over a period of 16 years since he first arrived  (less  if  his
    time in Fiji and elsewhere is taken into account) amounts to his  being
    a persistent offender who shows a particular disregard for the law.

28. The appellant's claim for asylum has been dismissed. He has provided no
    evidence of family or private  life.  None  of  the  exceptions  apply.
    There is no suggestion of any very compelling  circumstances  over  and
    above those described in the Rules.  As indicated,  the  appellant  has
    failed totally to present any arguments in support of  his  case  since
    the decision. There is simply no  evidential  basis  for  a  conclusion
    departing from the starting point that his deportation is conducive  to
    the public good and in the public interest.

29.  His appeal is dismissed.


Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal shows the making of material  errors
of law.  It is set aside and remade as follows:  the appeal is dismissed.


Signed                                             Date 16 November 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Conway

