
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07549/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester CJC               |     Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 17 December 2019                   |     On 02 January 2020             |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S K
                         [ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE]
                                                                    Claimant

Representation:

For the claimant: Ms K Smith, instructed by G Manchester Immigration Aid
Unit
For the appellant:     Mr M Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the Secretary of State's appeal against the decision of  First-
    tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  promulgated  20.6.19,  dismissing   on
    protection  grounds  but  allowing  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds,  the
    claimant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of State, dated
    27.7.17, to refuse his  protection  and  human  rights  claims  and  to
    maintain the deportation order of 14.10.15.

 2. As children are involved, it is appropriate to make the above anonymity
    direction.

 3. First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Feeney  granted  permission  to  appeal  on
    14.8.19.

 4. The appeal came before me on 27.9.19. In  my  decision  promulgated  on
    30.9.19, I found such error of law in the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as to require the decision to be set aside and remade  in  the
    Upper Tribunal. I have summarised below my reasons for finding an error
    of law.

 5. The decision was not immediately remade as I acceded to the request  of
    Ms Smith to adjourn the remaking of the decision to enable the claimant
    to  adduce  further  or  updated  evidence  as  his  and  his  family's
    circumstances, and to have an interpreter in Kurdish Sorani assist  the
    appellant and his wife in their oral evidence to the Tribunal.

 6. Thus the matter came back before me  at  Manchester  CJC  on  17.12.19.
    Rather late in the day did the claimant's representatives  comply  with
    my direction issued on 30.9.19 to ensure that all evidence on which the
    claimant sought to rely was  contained  within  a  single  consolidated
    bundle, indexed and paginated, together with any skeleton argument  and
    copies  of  any  authorities  relied  on.  The  bundle  was  apparently
    couriered to the CJC the day before the hearing and was only  retrieved
    and received by me after the hearing had started. I note that there was
    no skeleton argument submitted, or any  authorities.  Neither  was  the
    bundle complete; Ms Smith also wished to rely on the social work report
    of John Cooke, dated 18.3.19,  which  had  not  been  included  in  the
    consolidated bundle.

 7. I confirm that I have carefully considered all the submitted  materials
    and taken them into  account  along  with  the  oral  evidence  of  the
    appellant and his wife, and the  submissions  of  the  representatives,
    before reaching any of my findings, as set out below.

The Relevant Background and Appeal History

 8. The claimant,  an  Iraqi  national,  sought  to  avoid  deportation  on
    protection and humanitarian grounds. He is married to a British citizen
    and is father of two of her three  sons,  also  British  citizens,  the
    eldest of the three children is now 6 years  of  age.  The  deportation
    order followed the claimant's conviction and sentence in 2013 to a term
    of 12 months' imprisonment for offences of using a false  UK  residence
    permit and falsely obtaining state benefits in the sum of �17,383.

 9. As the claimant is a foreign criminal sentenced to concurrent terms  of
    12 and 3 months' imprisonment for offences of using a false  instrument
    with intent and for making false representations  in  order  to  obtain
    benefit, he is liable for deportation unless he can  meet  the  'unduly
    harsh' exceptions set out above under paragraphs 399 and 399A. For  the
    purposes of this appeal, it is accepted that the claimant has a genuine
    and subsisting parental relationship with the three children.

10. His appeal was first heard in October  2017  when  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Swinnerton allowed it on article 8 grounds.  However,  the  Upper
    Tribunal found an error of law in the making of that decision, with the
    result that it was set aside and the appeal remitted to the  First-tier
    Tribunal to remake the decision afresh with no preserved findings. Thus
    it came to be  heard  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  on
    20.3.19, who drafted and signed the decision on 17.6.19,  almost  three
    months after the appeal hearing.

11. It was made clear at the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal  hearing  before
    Judge Cruthers that the protection grounds were  not  pursued.  Neither
    were health grounds nor obstacles to integration in respect of  private
    life pursued. Reliance was placed squarely on family life human  rights
    grounds only. In essence, his claim was  that  returning  him  to  Iraq
    would be 'unduly harsh' and a disproportionate breach of his rights  to
    respect for his family life and that of his immediate family members.

12. At [49] of the First-tier Tribunal decision, Judge Cruthers found  that
    if the tribunal was purely considering the position of  the  claimant's
    wife, it could not properly be said that it would be unduly  harsh  for
    her to remain in the UK without the claimant or to relocate with him to
    Iraq. She was born in Iraq and regularly made return visits  to  family
    in Iraqi Kurdistan, including taking with her one of  her  children  on
    different visits to her own family and to that of the  claimant.  There
    has been no challenge to that conclusion  and  I  have  preserved  that
    finding.

13. However, the appeal was allowed by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  human
    rights grounds, on the basis that it would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    three children to either relocate with the claimant in Iraq, or  remain
    in the UK  without  him.  The  judge  does  not  refer  to  either  the
    Immigration Rules or section 117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002 but it is clear that he  was  considering  the  'unduly
    harsh' exceptions to deportation of a foreign criminal.

The 'Unduly Harsh' Test

14. This case concerns the 'unduly harsh' test set out in  the  Immigration
    Rules. Paragraphs A398 to 399A of  the  Immigration  Rules  provide  as
    follows:

         "Deportation and Article 8

         A398. These rules apply where:

             (a) a foreign criminal liable to deportation claims  that  his
             deportation  would  be  contrary  to  the   United   Kingdom's
             obligations under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention;

             (b) a foreign criminal applies for a  deportation  order  made
             against him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

             (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

             (b) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public interest because  they  have
             been  convicted  of  an  offence  for  which  they  have  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of less than 4 years but
             at least 12 months; or

             (c) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to
             the public good and in the public  interest  because,  in  the
             view of the Secretary of State,  their  offending  has  caused
             serious harm or they are a persistent  offender  who  shows  a
             particular disregard for the law, the Secretary  of  State  in
             assessing that claim will consider whether  paragraph  399  or
             399A applies and, if it  does  not,  the  public  interest  in
             deportation will only be outweighed  by  other  factors  where
             there are very compelling circumstances over and  above  those
             described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a)  the  person  has  a  genuine  and   subsisting   parental
             relationship with a child under the age of 18 years who is  in
             the UK, and

                  (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

                  (ii) the child has lived in the  UK  continuously  for  at
                  least the 7 years immediately preceding the  date  of  the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a) it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in  the
                  country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child  to  remain  in
                  the UK without the person who is to be deported; or

             (b) the person has a genuine and subsisting relationship  with
             a partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled
             in the UK, and

                  (i) the relationship was formed at a time when the  person
                  (deportee) was in the UK lawfully  and  their  immigration
                  status was not precarious; and

                  (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to live  in
                  the country to which the person is to be deported, because
                  of compelling circumstances over and above those described
                  in paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

                  (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  remain
                  in the UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

             (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK  for  most
             of his life; and

             (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

             (c)  there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles   to   his
             integration into the country to which it  is  proposed  he  is
             deported.

15. Virtually identical statutory provisions appear  in  sections  117A  to
    117C of the Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act  2002.  To  all
    intents and purposes, the tests and the exceptions are the same:

         "117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
         determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts -

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
             family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
             Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
         tribunal must (in particular) have regard -

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
             117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
             to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), "the public interest  question"  means  the
         question of whether  an  interference  with  a  person's  right  to
         respect for private and family  life  is  justified  under  Article
         8(2)."

16. Section 117B sets out a number of public interest considerations  which
    are applicable in all cases. It is unnecessary for present  purpose  to
    refer to these in further detail. Section 117C, so far as is  material,
    provides:

         "117C Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1) The deportation of foreign criminals is in the public interest.

         (2) The more serious the offence committed by a  foreign  criminal,
         the greater is the public interest in deportation of the criminal.

         (3) In the case of a  foreign  criminal  ("C")  who  has  not  been
         sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,  the
         public interest requires C's  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
         Exception 2 applies.

         ...

         (5) Exception 2 applies  where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
         relationship with a qualifying partner, or a genuine and subsisting
         parental relationship with a qualifying child, and  the  effect  of
         C's deportation on the partner or child would be unduly harsh."

17. In its submissions to the Upper Tribunal on the error of  law  hearing,
    the Secretary of State relied on the recent case of RA (s117C:  "unduly
    harsh"; offence: seriousness) Iraq [2019] UKUT  123  (IAC),  which  was
    promulgated after the FTT hearing but before the  promulgation  of  the
    decision, which for some unknown reason did not take place until  three
    months after the hearing.

18. In summary, the grounds pursued by the Secretary of State were that the
    judge erred in law in his assessment of the 'unduly harsh' test. It  is
    asserted that the First-tier Tribunal did  not  establish  facts  which
    could surmount  the  threshold  of  'unduly  harsh,'  and/or  that  the
    conclusion was inadequately reasoned.

What Does 'Unduly Harsh' Mean?

19. In KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53, the Supreme Court held that one has  to
    look for "a degree of harshness going beyond what would be  necessarily
    involved for any child faced with the deportation  of  a  parent."  The
    Supreme Court also endorsed what the Upper Tribunal had said as to  the
    meaning of 'unduly harsh' in MK (Sierra Leone) [2015] UKUT 223 (IAC).

20. As stated at [23] of KO, 'unduly harsh'  is  intended  to  introduce  a
    higher hurdle than that of 'reasonableness' under  section  117B(6)  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, taking account of the
    public interest  in  the  deportation  of  foreign  criminals.  'Harsh'
    assumes that there is a level of harshness that may  be  acceptable  in
    the relevant context. 'Unduly'  implies  something  going  beyond  that
    level.

21. At [46] of MK, the Upper  Tribunal  panel  stated,  "By  way  of  self-
    direction, we are mindful that 'unduly  harsh'  does  not  equate  with
    uncomfortable, inconvenient, undesirable or merely  difficult.  Rather,
    it poses a  considerably  more  elevated  threshold.  'Harsh'  in  this
    context, denotes something severe, or bleak. It is  the  antithesis  of
    pleasant or  comfortable.  Furthermore,  the  addition  of  the  adverb
    'unduly' raises an already elevated standard still higher." I note that
     in RA, the Upper Tribunal  decision  disagreed  with  the  'severe  or
    bleak' description of MK.

22. On the facts specific to that particular case, the Upper Tribunal in MK
    found that the test was satisfied:

         "Approached in this way, we have no hesitation in  concluding  that
         it would be unduly harsh for either  of  the  two  seven  year  old
         British citizen children concerned to  be  abruptly  uprooted  from
         their United Kingdom life setting and lifestyle and exiled to  this
         struggling, impoverished and plague stricken west African state. No
         reasonable or right  thinking person would consider  this  anything
         less that cruel."

23. At [40] of MK, the Upper Tribunal panel  also  considered  whether  the
    appellant's deportation would have an unduly harsh effect on either  of
    the two 7-year-old British children, one a biological child, the  other
    a step-child. The panel stated:

         "Both children are at a critical stage of  their  development.  The
         Appellant is  a  father  figure  in  the  life  of  his  biological
         daughter. We readily  infer  that  there  is  emotional  dependency
         bilaterally. Furthermore, there is clear financial dependency to  a
         not insubstantial degree. There is no evidence of any other  father
         figure in this child's life. The  Appellant's  role  has  evidently
         been ever present, since  her  birth.  Children  do  not  have  the
         resilience, maturity or fortitude  of  adults.  We  find  that  the
         abrupt removal of the Appellant from his biological daughter's life
         would not merely damage this  child.  It  would,  rather,  cause  a
         gaping chasm in her life to her serious detriment. We consider that
         the impact on the  Appellant's  step  son  would  be  at  least  as
         serious. Having regard to  the  evidence  available  and  based  on
         findings  already  made,  we  conclude  that  the  effect  of   the
         Appellant's deportation on both children  would  be  unduly  harsh.
         Accordingly, within the matrix of section 117C  of  the  2002  Act,
         "Exception 2" applies."

24. However, in RA, the Upper Tribunal distinguished MK when giving further
    consideration to what is meant by 'unduly harsh', stating,

         "As a result of KO (Nigeria) the position is that,  in  determining
         whether Exception 2  (in  section  117C(5))  applies,  a  court  or
         tribunal is not to have regard to the seriousness  of  the  offence
         committed by the person who is liable to deportation.  Importantly,
         however, the expression 'unduly harsh' sets a high threshold."

25. It is significant that the Upper Tribunal in  RA  also  held  that  the
    endorsement of MK by the Supreme Court did not include the way in which
    the Upper Tribunal applied its formulation to the  facts  of  the  case
    before it and that "the  way  in  which  a  court  or  tribunal  should
    approach section 117C remains as set out in the judgment of Jackson  LJ
    in NA (Pakistan) & Another v Secretary of State [2016] EWCA Civ 662."

26. At [14] of RA, the Upper Tribunal panel rejected the submission that it
    was bound to apply the same alleged test as elaborated in  MK,  to  the
    effect that children aged at or around 7 are "at a  critical  stage  of
    their development". The panel in RA held that MK did not  in  fact  set
    any such precedent or legal test,  but  found  that  the  decision  was
    confined to its own facts, pointing out that the panel in MK  found  it
    to be a  "difficult and borderline  case"  and  involved  "an  exercise
    bereft of bright luminous lines".

27. At [23] of RA, the Upper Tribunal explained that,

         "the expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to  introduce
         a  higher  hurdle  than  that  of  "reasonableness"  under  section
         117B(6), taking account of the public interest in  the  deportation
         of foreign criminals. Further the word "unduly" implies an  element
         of  comparison.  It  assumes  that  there  is  a  "due"  level   of
         "harshness", that is a level which may be acceptable or justifiable
         in the relevant context. "Unduly" implies  something  going  beyond
         that level. The relevant context is that set  by  section  117C(1),
         that  is  the  public  interest  in  the  deportation  of   foreign
         criminals. One is looking for a degree of  harshness  going  beyond
         what would necessarily be involved for any  child  faced  with  the
         deportation of a parent."

28. Distancing itself from MK, at [17] of the decision,  the  panel  in  RA
    held, "It is not enough for the outcome  to  be  "severe"  or  "bleak".
    Proper effect must be given to the adverb "unduly".  The  position  is,
    therefore, significantly far removed from the test of "reasonableness",
    as found in section 117B(6)(b).

29. The facts in RA are themselves not dissimilar to those in  the  present
    case, involving an deportee sentenced to 12  months'  imprisonment  and
    who emanated from Erbil  within  the  IKR  of  Northern  Iraq,  with  a
    qualifying relationship with a partner of Kurdish Iraqi origin and six-
    year-old child,  who  were  both  British  citizens.  However,  in  her
    submissions, Mr Smith  reminded  me  that  the  Upper  Tribunal  warned
    against trawling for factual precedent between cases and it is may  not
    be appropriate to rely on the fact that in RA  the  circumstances  were
    found insufficient to amount to reach the 'unduly harsh threshold.'

30. More recently, in SSHD v  PG  (Jamaica)  [2019]  EWCA  Civ  1213,  Lord
    Justice Holroyde, with whom the other Lord Justices agreed,  considered
    the issue of 'unduly harsh' in relation to a claimant (PG) who fathered
    6 British citizen children and was sentenced to a term of  imprisonment
    of three years four months for drugs offences. The First-tier  Tribunal
    had allowed the appeal,  finding  that  deportation  would  cause  very
    serious  disruption  to  and  interference  with  family   life,   with
    particular reference to a teenage child (R)  with   difficulties  after
    being the victim of a knife crime, so  that  the  consequences  of  his
    removal would be unduly harsh. The judge also considered  it  would  be
    unduly harsh given that the partner (SAT) would be left alone  to  look
    after three boys, referring to emotional and behavioural 'fallout.' The
    Upper Tribunal (Judge Finch) upheld the decision, finding no  error  of
    law.

31. At [39] of the  Court  of  Appeal's  decision,  Lord  Justice  Holroyde
    stated:

         "... I recognise of course the human realities  of  the  situation,
         and I do not doubt that SAT and  the  three  children  will  suffer
         great distress if PG is deported. Nor do I doubt that  their  lives
         will in a number of ways be made more difficult than  they  are  at
         present. But those, sadly,  are  the  likely  consequences  of  the
         deportation  of  any  foreign  criminal  who  has  a  genuine   and
         subsisting relationship with a  partner  and/or  children  in  this
         country. I accept Mr Lewis's submission that if PG is deported, the
         effect on SAT and/or their three children will not  go  beyond  the
         degree of harshness which is necessarily involved for  the  partner
         or child of a  foreign  criminal  who  is  deported.  That  is  so,
         notwithstanding  that  the  passage  of  time   has   provided   an
         opportunity for the family ties between PG,  SAT  and  their  three
         children to become stronger than they were  at  an  earlier  stage.
         Although no detail was provided to this court of the  circumstances
         of what I have referred to as the knife incident,  there  seems  no
         reason to doubt that it was both a comfort and an advantage for SAT
         and the children,  in  particular  R,  that  PG  was  available  to
         intervene when his son was a victim of  crime.  I  agree,  however,
         with Mr Lewis's submission that the knife incident, serious  though
         it may have been, cannot of itself  elevate  this  case  above  the
         norm.  Many  parents  of  teenage  children  are  confronted   with
         difficulties and upsetting events of one sort or another, and  have
         to face one or more of their children going  through  "a  difficult
         period" for one reason or another, and the fact that a  parent  who
         is a foreign criminal will no longer be in a position to assist  in
         such circumstances cannot of itself mean that the  effects  of  his
         deportation are unduly harsh for his partner and/or  children.  Nor
         can the difficulties which SAT will inevitably face,  increased  as
         they are by her laudable ongoing efforts to further  her  education
         and so to improve her earning capacity, elevate the case above  the
         commonplace so far as the effects of PG's deportation  on  her  are
         concerned. In this  regard,  I  think  it  significant  that  Judge
         Griffith at paragraph 67 of her judgment referred to the "emotional
         and behavioural fallout" with which  SAT  would  have  to  deal:  a
         phrase which, to my mind, accurately summarises the effect  on  SAT
         of PG's deportation, but at the same time reflects its  commonplace
         nature."

         "I conclude that, whether considered individually or  collectively,
         the matters relied upon by Judge Griffith were clearly insufficient
         to enable a judge properly to conclude  that  the  effect  of  PG's
         deportation would be unduly harsh for either his children  or  SAT.
         The evidence certainly showed that what might be  regarded  as  the
         necessary  and  expected  consequences  of  deportation  would   be
         suffered by PG's family, but it cannot be  said  to  have  revealed
         harshness going beyond that level. The points made by Mr Rees  were
         fair points as far as they went,  but  they  were  not  capable  of
         taking the case  beyond  the  commonplace.  The  evidence  did  not
         provide a basis on which  PG  could  establish  Exception  2  under
         section 117C(5) of the 2002 Act (and there was no  suggestion  that
         Exception 1 could apply), and accordingly section 117C(3)  required
         his deportation. It follows  that  in  my  judgment  there  was  no
         rational foundation for the decision of Judge Griffith, and both it
         and the decision of Judge Finch must be  set  aside.  I  accept  Mr
         Lewis's submission that there is no ground on  which  it  would  be
         appropriate to remit the matter for a further hearing:  as  I  have
         indicated, I can see only one answer to the  issue  which  must  be
         decided."

32. Lord Justice Hickinbottom added at [45] to [46]"

         "I agree with the analysis and conclusion of Holroyde LJ,  and  his
         proposed disposal.

         "When a parent is deported, one can only have  great  sympathy  for
         the entirely innocent children involved. Even in  circumstances  in
         which they can remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  with  their  other
         parent, they will inevitably be  distressed.  However,  in  section
         117C(5) of the 2002 Act, Parliament has made clear its  will  that,
         for foreign offenders who are sentenced to one to four years,  only
         where the consequences for the children  are  "unduly  harsh"  will
         deportation  be  constrained.  That  is  entirely  consistent  with
         article 8 of the ECHR. It is important  that  decision-makers  and,
         when their decisions are challenged, tribunals  and  courts  honour
         that expression of Parliamentary will. In this case,  in  agreement
         with Holroyde  LJ,  I  consider  the  evidence  only  admitted  one
         conclusion: that, unfortunate as PG's deportation will be  for  his
         children, for none of them will it result in undue harshness."

Was it Unduly Harsh for the Children to go to Iraq?

33. At [50] of the decision, the judge found that it would be unduly  harsh
    to expect the three young children to relocate  to  Iraq.  Reasons  for
    that conclusion  are  set  out  at  [50]-[52].  The  judge  found  that
    relocation to Iraq would involve the loss of most of  their  rights  as
    British citizens. One of the other  two  reasons  given  was  that  the
    oldest child had  limited  but  ongoing  contact  with  his  biological
    father, about once or twice every six weeks. Mr McVeety submitted  that
    the judge speculated about future development of  a  relationship  with
    the biological father. The other, at [52] of the decision, was that the
    standard of education and educational opportunities available  to  them
    in Iraqi Kurdistan "would be well below the opportunities that they are
    likely to have growing up in the UK."

34. In relation to this finding, at [23] of my error  of  law  decision,  I
    observed that:

         "The  mere  fact  that  a  child  has  British  citizenship  cannot
         logically render it unduly harsh to relocate with their mother  and
         the claimant. The cessation of limited contact  with  a  biological
         father once or twice every six weeks might be harsh but  there  was
         insufficient evidence to show that it  would  be  damaging  to  the
         child who would be living with both parents in a loving environment
         with the support of extended family of both parents. It may also be
         possible for visits one way or the other in  order  to  maintain  a
         limited degree of contact with the biological father. Similarly,  I
         am not satisfied that it  was  reasonably  open  to  the  judge  to
         conclude that the prospective  loss  of  educational  opportunities
         available in  the  UK  when  compared  with  that  which  might  be
         available in Iraq would be unduly harsh."

35. However, at the Upper Tribunal continuation hearing,  I  heard  further
    detail about the relationship of the older child  with  his  biological
    father. I accept the evidence that he sees  his  father  on  a  regular
    basis, about every six weeks. I was told in evidence that the  claimant
    and his wife had broached the subject of relocation to  Iraq  with  the
    father and he has refused permission for his child to leave the UK, for
    perhaps obvious reasons, that he would no longer be able to  have  face
    to face contact with his son in the UK. In  the  circumstances,  taking
    account of the best interests of all the children,  I  accept  that  it
    would be unduly harsh for that child to go to live in Iraq. It  follows
    that, regardless of the difficulties or otherwise of  being  raised  in
    Iraq, or being effectively deprived of the benefits  of  their  British
    citizenship, it would also be unduly harsh for the other children to be
    separated from their elder half-sibling. In practical terms, given that
    the claimant and his wife  are  the  de  facto  parents  of  all  three
    children that cannot happen.

36. Further, as Ms Smith pointed out  in  her  submissions  to  me  in  the
    continuation  hearing,  at  [25]  of  my  error  of  law  decision,   I
    specifically found an error of law only in relation to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal conclusion that it would be unduly harsh for the  children  to
    continue to live in the UK without the claimant.

37. In the circumstances, I accept that on the facts of this case, it would
    be unduly harsh for the children, or any of them, to  go  and  live  in
    Iraq with the claimant and his wife.

Would it be 'Unduly Harsh' for the Children to Remain in the UK without  the
Claimant?

38. It follows from the above that I accept that the sole  remaining  issue
    in the remaking of the decision is whether it would be unduly harsh for
    the children, or one or more of them, to remain in the UK  without  the
    Claimant.

The First-tier Tribunal's Consideration of 'Unduly Harsh'

39. At [53] of the FTT decision, the judge considered whether it  would  be
    unduly harsh to expect the children to remain in  the  UK  without  the
    claimant,  giving   his   reasons   in   the   succeeding   paragraphs.
    Unsurprisingly, the judge considered that the  best  interests  of  the
    children were to  remain  in  the  UK  with  the  claimant's  continued
    involvement in their lives  [54].  The  judge  also  reflected  on  the
    situation that the claimant's wife would be left in the UK without him,
    having to raise three young children by herself and unable, because  of
    their young ages, to work to support the family [55]. In the  light  of
    those circumstances, and the other considerations referred to  at  [56]
    to [58] of the decision, the judge concluded that the claimant met  the
    'unduly harsh' test  and  thus  allowed  the  appeal  on  human  rights
    grounds.

40. In respect of that conclusion, at [25] of my error of law  decision,  I
    stated:

         "...Nothing in the  judge's  considerations  distinguished  between
         what might be harsh and what would be unacceptable  as  being  more
         than harsh  and  reaching  the  high  threshold  of  unduly  harsh.
         Frankly, all of the factors relied on to support the conclusion are
         nothing more than the inevitable  consequences  of  deportation  in
         most such cases which result in separation  of  the  deportee  from
         family members. The mere fact that their best interests would be to
         remain and live in the UK with their father cannot be unduly harsh,
         as the natural consequence of deportation  is  that  it  interferes
         with family life and breaks up families. As stated in RA,  "One  is
         looking  for  a  degree  of  harshness  going  beyond  what   would
         necessarily be involved for any child faced with the deportation of
         a parent." I find the judge has failed to identify in  what  degree
         or what  respect  the  consequences  of  the  deportation  of  this
         claimant goes beyond the necessary consequences of deportation of a
         parent. Neither can the speculative economic  effect  of  the  wife
         being left to raise three children by herself, to have  to  survive
         on state benefits and be unable to work, be reasonably regarded  as
         of sufficient weight to amount to being unduly harsh. Single parent
         families may experience some hardships but it is difficult  to  see
         how the family becoming dependent on state  benefits,  where  their
         basic needs will be provided for, can amount to being unduly harsh;
         the children will not be  left  hungry  or  homeless.  It  is  also
         relevant that at  [22]  and  [55]  of  the  decision  the  tribunal
         recorded that the claimant's wife regularly visited her brother and
         his family in Leeds, had an unmarried nephew in  Peterborough,  and
         would be able to interact with other Kurds in her local area. There
         must be many such single-parent families in  similar  circumstances
         and it would  be  astonishing  to  describe  such  a  situation  as
         amounting to unduly harsh by the definition  set  by  the  relevant
         authorities.  Looked  at  from  the  other  way,  if  the   judge's
         assessment was rationally and reasonably justified, it is difficult
         to see how deportation of any person with a  partner  and  children
         could be justified. I take Ms Smith's point that it is necessary to
         consider the cumulative  effect  rather  than  individual  factors.
         However, taken  as  a  whole,  notwithstanding  the  judge's  self-
         direction on KO, I find that the reasoning provided in the decision
         to be inadequate and insufficient to justify  the  conclusion  that
         the  undoubted  and  significant  interference  with  family   life
         outweighs the strong (statutory or Rule-based) public  interest  in
         removing a foreign criminal."

41. Whilst I accept that the determination of what is  or  will  be  unduly
    harsh for the  children  involves  an  evaluative  assessment  for  the
    Tribunal to conduct on the relevant  evidence,  I  was  satisfied  that
    nothing in any of the reasons advanced by the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    support of the conclusion  that  it  would  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
    children to remain in the UK without  the  claimant  demonstrated  that
    there would be any lasting  detriment  to  the  physical  or  emotional
    integrity of the children caused by the removal  of  the  claimant,  or
    would properly amount to unduly harsh.

42. As set out in my error of law  decision,  I  found  that  none  of  the
    reasoning, even taken together in the round, can properly be considered
    to reach the high threshold of being unduly harsh. I found  that,  even
    taking the claimant's case at its highest, on the facts  of  this  case
    the reasoning provided by the First-tier Tribunal for finding it unduly
    harsh for the children to continue  to  live  in  the  UK  without  the
    claimant  was  inadequate  and   ultimately   unsustainable.   In   the
    circumstances, I found that the decision could not stand and had to  be
    set aside to be remade.

Remaking the Decision in the Appeal

43. In remaking the decision in the appeal on the narrow issue  of  whether
    it would be 'unduly harsh' and therefore disproportionate for the three
    children to remain in the UK without the  claimant,  I  have  carefully
    considered all the materials  placed  before  me  in  the  consolidated
    bundle and the social work report, together with the oral evidence  and
    submissions of the two representatives. I note the photographs  of  the
    claimant with the children, have taken  full  account  of  the  witness
    statements, and considered the various reports and articles dealing  in
    general terms with the relationship between parents and children.

44. I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  best  interests  of  the
    children as a primary consideration, pursuant  to  Section  55  of  the
    Borders, Citizenship and Immigration Act 2009. In doing so, I have also
    had regard to the decision of the Supreme Court in ZH (Tanzania) [2011]
    UKSC 4, addressing the weight to be given  to  the  best  interests  of
    children affected by a decision  to  deport  a  parent.  Obviously,  in
    normal circumstances, the best interests of the  children  will  be  to
    have the love and parental  input  of  the  claimant  throughout  their
    lives, assisting in their upbringing and development. I also take  into
    account that live without the claimant may be made more  difficult  for
    his wife and that this would impact on her  parenting  and  ability  to
    care for and look after the children as a  sole  parent.  I  take  into
    account the principles set out in ZH and I  do  not  underestimate  the
    significant  effect  of  separation  and  isolation  on  a  child,   as
    highlighted in the articles in the  claimant's  bundle.  I  acknowledge
    that the best interests of the child must be a primary consideration so
    that the overall well-being of a child must be considered. I accept  in
    general terms that separation is counter-productive to a child's  well-
    being and is not to be considered lightly. However,  whilst  a  primary
    consideration, it is not the only consideration when there are  serious
    public interest considerations in removing the claimant. I accept  that
    in an ideal world the best interests of each of the children  would  be
    to have a continuation of the claimant's full and  meaningful  parental
    involvement.

45. The social work report, drafted on 18.3.19  and  now  somewhat  out  of
    date, observes that the children are all well-cared for and  well-loved
    by the  claimant  and  his  wife.  They  are  described  as  contented,
    comfortable and fulfilled,  living  happy  lives  within  their  family
    environment. It is  not  surprising  that  the  author  of  the  report
    expresses  concerns  for  the  children's   continued   emotional   and
    behavioural development should the claimant be  deported.  It  is  said
    that he is instrumental in supporting his wife to  provide  the  stable
    and nurturing home life the children have so  far  experienced.  It  is
    pointed out that the wife has limited social support networks and would
    struggle to provide the same level of  care  if  she  became  the  sole
    carer. However, there is little or nothing remarkable  in  this  report
    that would not equally apply to any other family in  generally  similar
    circumstances. None of the potential consequences referred to could  be
    described as anything other than those to be  expected  by  separation.
    The report has limited value  in  that  it  fails  to  distinguish  the
    commonplace effects from anything which would be 'unduly harsh.' In the
    circumstances, the report does not demonstrate, either by itself, or in
    conjunction with other evidence,  that  there  would  be  unduly  harsh
    effects on the children, either directly, or indirectly  through  their
    mother, by the claimant's deportation. However, I have taken the report
    and its contents fully into account in the context of the assessment of
    the whole of the evidence.

46. In additional to the documentary material put before me, I  also  heard
    direct oral evidence from both the claimant and his wife,  through  the
    Kurdish Sorani interpreter.

47. As stated above, I heard and accept the evidence that the  elder  child
    has a subsisting relationship with his biological  father,  seeing  him
    about every 6 weeks. Otherwise, he is parented by both the claimant and
    his wife in the same way as the other two children.

48. In essence, the remaining oral evidence was to the  effect  that  since
    November 2019 the claimant's wife has worked in a hairdressing salon 16
    hours a week, divided into approximately four hours on each of the days
    from Monday to Thursday, usually starting at 10 am and finishing  at  2
    pm. At times, the hours may be flexible, depending on customers' needs.
    Whilst she is out at work, the claimant looks after the three children,
    including by taking the elder child, 6 years of  age,  to  school.  The
    other two children, boys, were born in 2017 and 2018  respectively  and
    are too young to yet have any notion of their environment  outside  the
    family home. The claimant does not work.

49. When each was asked in cross-examination whether there was  any  reason
    why the wife could not give up work to look after the children herself,
    neither appeared willing to answer the question directly,  even  though
    the question was rephrased and repeated. In summary, the claimant said,
    eventually, only that it would be very difficult for her and life would
    be hard, as there would be no one to look after the children. She  also
    said that it would be very difficult if the claimant is deported as she
    could not live without him and suggested that if one  of  the  children
    became ill and had to go to hospital there would  be  no  one  to  look
    after the other children. When the question  was  pursued,  she  became
    tearful and maintained that she wanted to settled down in the  UK  with
    the claimant. Mr Diwnycz then sensibly  curtailed  any  further  cross-
    examination.

50. In their oral evidence, neither the claimant nor  his  wife  identified
    any particular or compelling reasons why she could not look  after  the
    children on her own if he were deported, even if she  had  to  give  up
    work to do so. Taken at the highest, all they could speak of  was  that
    there was no one to look after the children if she  worked  or  had  to
    take a child to hospital. There were no special features  of  the  bond
    between the claimant and any or all of the children, or  any  physical,
    medical, psychological, or emotional needs that only the claimant could
    meet, or which could only be met with his presence and participation in
    the UK. There was nothing identified other than the normal and expected
    consequences one might expect from deportation. That is the  nature  of
    deportation; it breaks up families. Whilst it  will  be  difficult  and
    emotionally upsetting for the claimant's  wife  and  perhaps  also  the
    children, to greater or lesser degree, and might well be  described  as
    hard or even approaching harsh, there was nothing in the  evidence  and
    submissions made to me that even began  to  identify  anything  in  the
    effect of the claimant's deportation on  the  children  that  could  be
    properly described as 'unduly harsh' in the  sense  identified  in  the
    authorities highlighted and analysed above. In fact, there  is  nothing
    on the facts of this case  that  demonstrate  anything  more  than  the
    'commonplace' referred to by Lord Justice Holroyde. The fact  that  the
    wife may not be able to go out to work, or that there  may  be  no  one
    else to look after the children if one is taken ill and has  to  go  to
    hospital cannot elevate the circumstances to being 'unduly harsh.'

51. Inevitably, the wife will be distressed by the claimant's  removal  and
    face the challenge of being a single parent; unfortunately, a situation
    faced by many thousands of parents in this country. Whilst one may have
    sympathy for her situation, or that of the children  without  a  father
    figure in their lives, I am satisfied that none of the matters  I  have
    addressed above, nor those set out in the oral or documentary evidence,
    or in the submissions of Ms Smith can possibly meet  the  threshold  of
    'unduly harsh' but  are  no  more  than  the  'necessary  and  expected
    consequences' of deportation. In the circumstances, the decision of the
    respondent was not disproportionate to the private and family  life  of
    the claimant and more particularly  his  wife  and  the  children  when
    balanced against the strong public interest in his deportation from the
    UK. In the final analysis, there  can  be  only  one  outcome  to  this
    appeal, its dismissal.

Decision

52. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should  be
    set aside.

     I set aside the decision.

     I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal.




     Signed


         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup




