
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07164/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard Remotely at Manchester CJC     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Heard On: 27th October 2020          |On: 30th October 2020                |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE


                                   Between

                                     AS
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


For the Appellant:     Ms R. Moffatt, Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood
For the Respondent:    Mr A. Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Iran  born  in  2001.  He  appeals  with
    permission against the 29th January 2020  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Lucas) to dismiss his appeal on asylum grounds.

    Anonymity Order

 2. This appeal concerns a claim for protection made when the Appellant was
    a minor.  Having had regard to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 and the Presidential Guidance Note No 1  of  2013:
    Anonymity Orders I therefore consider it appropriate to make  an  order
    in the following terms:

         "Unless and until  a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
         Appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his
         family.  This  direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  both  the
         Appellant  and  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply  with   this
         direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings"

    Background and Matters in Issue

 3. The basis of the Appellant's claim to protection was that he has a well-
    founded fear  of  persecution  in  Iran  for  reasons  of  his  imputed
    political opinion. The Appellant is a Kurd from Sardasht, a town in the
    border province of West Azerbaijan. He claims that  he  made  a  living
    smuggling goods in and out of Iraq and that  he  came  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Etelaat who suspect  him  of  smuggling  alcohol,  and
    banned political materials, into Iran.  The Etelaat are  said  to  have
    evidence of the same, recovered during a raid on the  Appellant's  home
    in September 2018.  The Appellant says that both alcohol and  materials
    were brought by him into Iran at the  behest  of  his  uncle,  whom  he
    believes to be an activist for the banned Kurdish group the KDPI.

 4. The Respondent accepted that if the account were  true,  the  Appellant
    would be entitled to protection: HB (Kurds) CG [2018] UKUT 00430 (IAC).
     The Respondent was not however satisfied that the Appellant  had  told
    the truth.   The Respondent set out at  paragraph  38  of  her  refusal
    letter what appears to be fairly confusing -  or  confused  -  evidence
    given by the Appellant about whether his uncle had a job and  where  he
    lived. The Respondent  drew  adverse  inference  from  this  confusion.
    Further adverse inference is drawn from what the Respondent found to be
    discrepancies in the Appellant's evidence about how much he was paid by
    his uncle for bringing goods in from Iraq, how many people  might  have
    attended his uncle's KDPI meetings, whether the Appellant ever actually
    set eyes on the banned materials later found by the Etelaat agents, and
    the circumstances on the night of the raid.

 5. Asylum having been refused, the  Appellant  lodged  an  appeal.   Those
    representing him prepared a bundle which included:

      i) A report by country expert Professor Bluth  of  the  University  of
         Bradford. Dr Bluth's evidence went to the overall  plausibility  of
         the account in the context of conditions known by  Prof.  Bluth  to
         exist in the province of West  Azerbaijan  [see  for  instance  his
         5.4.20], and  further  provided  commentary  on  what  Prof.  Bluth
         considered the risk to an individual such as the Appellant might be
         if returned to Iran;

     ii)  A  supplementary  witness  statement  by  the  Appellant  offering
         commentary and explanation for the matters raised  in  the  refusal
         letter;

    iii) A skeleton argument by Counsel which  further  sought  to  address,
         point by point, the issues raised in the refusal letter.

 6. The First-tier Tribunal found the claim to be implausible  and  lacking
    in detail, and agreed with the Respondent that the evidence did contain
    inconsistencies.  The Tribunal rejected the claim that the  Appellant's
    uncle was a member of the KDPI because  it  considered  it  implausible
    that he would tell his nephew if this was the  case.   The  Appellant's
    evidence that he carried KDPI materials was supposition at best because
    on his own account he is illiterate and the leaflets were in any  event
    wrapped up.  The evidence that the  Appellant's  sister  witnessed  the
    raid on the Appellant's home from her own, some 100 metres away,  is  a
    fabrication since it is just  implausible  that  she  would  from  that
    distance be able to see the Etelaat  removing  the  leaflets  from  the
    house.  Setting that aside it is left unexplained why  the  Appellant's
    uncle, who owned the house, would send his nephew away whilst remaining
    in Iran himself.

 7. The Appellant now challenges the First-tier Tribunal's findings on  the
    grounds that the Tribunal:

      i) Failed to take proper account of the expert evidence, in particular
         in its findings on the plausibility of the  account  in  which  the
         Tribunal apparently supplanted the reasoned views of an  expert  on
         Iran with its own view about what might be plausible in Sardasht;

     ii) Failed  to  take  material  matters  into  account/failed  to  make
         reasoned findings, in particular the  Tribunal  simply  adopts  the
         negative conclusions  reached  by  the  Respondent  without  giving
         consideration to the rebuttal evidence offered by the Appellant, or
         submissions made by Counsel on his behalf;

    iii) Failed to make findings, in particular in respect of the  assertion
         that the  Appellant  left  Iran  illegally,  and  his  claim  under
         paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration Rules;

     iv) Made  errors  of  fact  in  its  assessment  of  the  evidence,  in
         particular in its finding that the Appellant lived with  his  uncle
         and that his uncle intended to remain in Iran  -  the  evidence  on
         both matters was to the contrary.

 8. Permission was granted on all grounds by First-tier Tribunal  Kelly  on
    the 3rd March 2020.

 9. Before me Mr Tan for the Respondent accepted that each of  the  grounds
    were made out. The plausibility findings were not  reasonably  open  to
    the Tribunal, particularly where the Tribunal  had  given  no  apparent
    consideration to the views expressed by the  country  expert  that  the
    Appellant's general  account  was  wholly  plausible.  The  credibility
    findings were further infected by material error of fact as set out  in
    ground (iv).   Mr Tan invited the Tribunal to set the decision of Judge
    Lucas aside and to remit the matter to the First-tier  Tribunal  to  be
    determined de novo. The matter is therefore settled by consent.

    Decisions

10. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains  errors  of  law  such
    that it must be set aside.

11. The decision in the appeal is to be remade in the First-tier Tribunal.

12. There is an order for anonymity.


                                                                       [pic]
                                                  Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce
                                                           27th October 2020
