
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/07669/2018 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Heard Remotely at Manchester Piccadilly IAC   |Decision & Reasons           |
|On 21 August 2020                             |Promulgated                  |
|                                              |On 26 August 2020            |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     TH

                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)



For the appellant:     Mr C Bates, Senior Presenting Officer

For the Respondent:    Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel, instructed by  Sutovic  &
Hartigan



This  has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has   been   consented   to by
the parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to
face hearing was not held because it was  not  practicable  and  all  issues
could be determined in a remote hearing.  The order  made  is described at
the end of these reasons.


1. For the purposes of this  decision  I  will  continue  to  refer  to  the
   parties as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


2. The appellant is a Pakistani national born on 6.7.65.


3. The Secretary  of  State  has  appealed  with  permission  to  the  Upper
   Tribunal against the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated
   31.10.19, dismissing the appellant's asylum and  humanitarian  protection
   claims but allowing the appeal on articles 3  and  8  ECHR  human  rights
   grounds.


4. The general background  is  that  the  appellant  came  to  the  UK  from
   Pakistan in 2006 on a 6-month visit visa but overstayed. He has  dwarfism
   (achondroplasia), a congenital condition also referred to  as  restricted
   growth syndrome, as a result of which he has  shortened  arms  and  legs,
   with other associated medical conditions, all of which are fully reported
   and summarised in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal. Owing  to  his
   medical needs, the appellant was transferred to  a  care  home  in  2011,
   where he remains. He claimed international protection on the  basis  that
   on return he would face persecution, harassment  and  ill-treatment,  and
   that he would face destitution such that his rights under articles 3  and
   8 would be infringed.


5. In September 2019, the respondent informed  the  appellant  that  it  was
   proposed  to  grant  him  discretionary  leave  outside  the  Rules  and,
   therefore, invited him to withdraw  his  protection  claim.  However,  he
   insisted on pursuing that claim, asserting that on return to Pakistan  he
   would have no support,  would  be  unable  to  afford  necessary  medical
   treatment, and would be discriminated against, so that he was entitled to
   protection as a member of a particular social group (PSG).


6. The protection claim was  dismissed,  both  on  asylum  and  humanitarian
   protection grounds. However, the First-tier Tribunal found  that  as  the
   appellant would be unable to obtain employment  to  support  himself  and
   would be bed and/or housebound, this would affect his ability  to  engage
   with wider society so that there were very significant obstacles  to  his
   integration on return, outweighing the  public  interest  in  immigration
   control, thus allowing the appeal on  human  rights  grounds  under  both
   articles 3 and 8 ECHR.


7. The respondent's grounds submit that in allowing the appeal on article  3
   non-medical grounds, the  judge  has  materially  erred  in  law.  It  is
   submitted that as the criteria for non-medical article  3  claim  is  the
   same as for protection under the Refugee Convention, which the First-tier
   Tribunal Judge refused, there was no logical basis on which the article 3
   claim could have succeeded.


8. Permission was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes  on  24.12.19,
   considering that in the light of the decision of the Court of  Appeal  in
   SSHD v Said [2016] EWCA Civ 442, it is arguable that the judge  erred  in
   allowing the appeal on article 3 grounds. Judge Landes stated, "It is  my
   understanding that the allowing of the appeal on Article  3  grounds  (as
   opposed to simply on Article 8 grounds) may  make  a  difference  to  the
   length of leave which is granted under the respondent's policy."  In  the
   circumstances, any error in this regard would be material.


9. In response, the appellant has submitted a Rule 24 Reply, dated  20.4.20,
   drafted by Ms Fitzsimons, which I have read and taken into account.


10. The appeal to the Upper Tribunal is limited to the narrow issue  of  the
   decision allowing the appeal on article 3 ECHR non-medical  grounds.  The
   decision to allow the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds is not  challenged
   by the respondent. Neither has there been any  cross-appeal  against  the
   dismissal of the appellant's asylum and humanitarian protection claims.


11. I have carefully considered the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  in
   the light of the written and oral submissions made to me and the  grounds
   of application for permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal.


12. At [127] the judge found that  the  appellant  did  not  meet  the  high
   threshold required for a medical article 3 claim. Whilst  in  a  decision
   post-dating the First-tier Tribunal appeal hearing, the Supreme Court  in
   AM (Zimbabwe) concluded that the threshold should that  in  Paposhvili  v
   Belgium [2016] ECHR, the judge found that the appellant still  could  not
   meet even that lowered threshold.


13. Neither did the judge accept that the circumstances the  appellant  will
   face on return were sufficient to  meet  requirements  for  international
   protection. At [114] the judge accepted that the appellant is  likely  to
   be the victim of discrimination and the subject of  unpleasant  unwelcome
   attention from other but concluded that that treatment would  not  be  of
   such severity as to amount to persecution. At [115]  the  judge  accepted
   that the appellant had complex medical needs and at [117]  that  he  will
   face challenges and difficulties securing a level of care  equivalent  to
   that  which  he  receives  in  the  UK.  Nevertheless,  none   of   these
   circumstances  were  found  sufficient  to  qualify   for   international
   protection. The judge found at [116] that he has a family home to  return
   to and family emotional and practical support available to him. At  [120]
   the judge was also satisfied that the appellant would be able  to  obtain
   the medication he needs.


14. The Article 3 non-medical claim was considered between [119]  and  [124]
   of the decision. At [120] the judge found that the  practical/social  day
   to day care with which the appellant is currently provided "to enable him
   to live with some measure of  dignity  and  comfort"  would  unlikely  be
   available to him. At [121] the  judge  found  he  needs  help  with  many
   aspects  of  everyday  life  and  receives  round  the  clock  care  with
   specialist equipment. At [123] the judge concluded that appropriate  care
   is not likely to be available to the appellant and, therefore,  than  his
   ability to live with any sense of dignity are remote.


15. However, it is  not  clear  that  the  judge  has  applied  the  correct
   standard or burden of proof to the article 3 issue, or on what basis  the
   appeal was allowed under article 3. Although accepting at [122] that  the
   appellant had brothers and sisters in Pakistan,  the  judge  the  stated,
   "but I do not know where they live and what their domestic and  financial
   circumstances are as far as being able and willing to offer the appellant
   any help." That finding appears somewhat contradictory to that  at  [116]
   of the decision and the judge appears to have forgotten here that  it  is
   for the appellant to prove his case, not for the respondent  to  disprove
   it. A similar concern might be raised in relation to the finding at [123]
   that the judge "did not discount"  a  deterioration  in  the  appellant's
   mental health, whilst finding that at the date of the last medical report
   there was no evidence he was suffering from any mental health issues. The
   judge concluded "It is reasonable to assume that if the appellant were to
   develop mental health issues, then in the absence of effective  treatment
   the quality of his life  would  further  deteriorate"  relying  there  on
   factor in respect of which the judge had found no evidence.


16. At [124] the judge found that without the ability to work and given  the
   extremely limited funds from others sources that might  be  available  to
   the appellant, "the risk of destitution cannot be ruled out."  Again,  it
   is not clear that the judge is applying the correct standard  and  burden
   of proof suggesting that the risk of something  happening  could  not  be
   ruled out rather than that the appellant had established the risk to  the
   correct standard of proof required.


17. Finally, at [124], the judge concluded that in the absence of  the  type
   of care the appellant needs to function,  the  conditions  in  which  the
   appellant would find himself living would be so  poor  as  to  amount  to
   inhuman or degrading treatment and a violation of his article 3 rights.


18. From [129] of the decision, it is clear that  the  judge  reasoned  that
   because the appellant would not be able to obtain employment on return to
   Pakistan and will be bed and/or housebound, this would  adversely  affect
   his ability to engage with wider society and render him unable to provide
   for himself. The judge did not there make specific reference to article 3
   but appeared to be relying on very significant obstacles  to  integration
   under paragraph 276ADE(1(vi) and  article  8  ECHR  grounds  outside  the
   Rules. As stated above, the respondent accepted the article 8 findings.


19. However, in relying on Said, the respondent complains that the  findings
   summarised above were insufficient to  justify  allowing  the  appeal  on
   article 3 grounds. At [18] of Said the Court of Appeal held that,


         "to succeed in resisting removal on article 3 grounds on the  basis
         of suggested poverty or deprivation on return  which  are  not  the
         responsibility of the receiving country  or  others  in  the  sense
         described in paragraph 282 of Sufi and Elmi,  whether  or  not  the
         feared deprivation is contributed too by a medical  condition,  the
         person liable to deportation must show  circumstances  which  bring
         him within the approach of the Strasbourg Court  in  the  D  and  N
         cases."


20. Mr Bates argued that the expert evidence relied on the  judge  supported
   the finding of very significant obstacles to integration but not  article
   3. He pointed out that in relation to  alleged  discriminatory  treatment
   the appellant would received on return to Pakistan the judge  found  this
   was insufficient to reach the threshold for international protection, and
   that the claim under article 3 medical grounds was also dismissed.


21. In essence, Ms Fitzsimons sought  to  navigate  a  very  narrow  passage
   between the Refugee Convention on the one hand  and  the  high  threshold
   required for an article 3 medical claim on the other. She submitted  that
   the judge accepted the expert evidence that the  appellant's  non-medical
   needs would not be  met  on  return  to  Pakistan  and  argued  that  the
   circumstances on return did not equate to simply destitution arising from
   living conditions.  She  pointed  to  the  expert  opinion  that  persons
   experiencing the same degree  of  'debility'  as  the  appellant  and  in
   particular those with visible and stigmatising disabilities, "would  face
   extraordinary and life threatening  social,  economic  and  health-system
   specific challenges" in accessing necessary medical care. At [12] of  her
   skeleton argument, Ms Fitzsimons submitted that "the Appellant's case  is
   one that relates to disability, and the evidence  from  Dr  Varley  shows
   that the abject circumstances faced by disabled people like the Appellant
   are in part a  consequence  of  deliberate  societal  discrimination  and
   exclusion, rather than simple poverty."


22. Much of the skeleton argument and Ms Fitzsimons  submissions  amount  to
   an attempt to reargue the  appeal  by  recharacterising  the  appellant's
   claim in a rather different way to how the judge framed the article 3 non-
   medical conclusions. Ms Fitzsimons accepted that the  N  threshold  could
   not be met but argued that due  to  disability  the  appellant  would  be
   excluded from employment and face a  hostile  environment.  She  accepted
   that this had been found not to be sufficient to meet the  threshold  for
   persecution but argued that the types of harm identified  by  the  expert
   were different, because they arise  from  she  described  as,  "engrained
   discriminatory attitudes  of  society  in  Pakistan."  It  is  difficult,
   however, to see how this can be distinguished from persecution.  At  [24]
   of the decision, the judge noted that the respondent  had  accepted  that
   people who have physical disabilities such as  dwarfism  are  subject  to
   harassment and discrimination, but that  treatment  was  insufficient  to
   amount to  persecution  or  a  breach  of  article  3  ECHR,  with  which
   conclusion the judge  agreed.  It  is  also  difficult  to  see  how  the
   circumstances relied on are the responsibility of the state or others  as
   Ms Fitzsimons appeared to suggest.


23. I am satisfied that all the points made by Ms Fitzsimons  are  and  were
   more appropriately relevant to persecution of the appellant as a PSG, and
   did not in fact reflect the basis of the judge's findings  on  article  3
   which clearly pointed to a conclusion based on destitution.  However,  it
   is clear from Said that the living conditions arising from  circumstances
   of poverty or deprivation such as the judge identified or anticipated  as
   would result in destitution are insufficient to meet the  high  threshold
   required under article 3 ECHR. Further, for the reasons given, I  am  not
   satisfied the judge has applied the correct burden and standard of  proof
   in the article 3 considerations.


24. In the premises, I find that the decision is flawed  for  error  of  law
   and cannot stand but must be set aside and remade. For  the  reasons  set
   out above, I am satisfied that the  difficult  circumstances  facing  the
   appellant on return, which have  been  found  not  to  amount  to  either
   persecution or sufficient to meet an article 3 medical claim,  but  which
   do amount to very significant obstacles to integration, as the respondent
   has always agreed, are insufficient to meet the high  threshold  required
   under an article 3 non-medical claim. It  follows  that  the  appellant's
   appeal must be dismissed on article 3 ECHR grounds.


Decision


      The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
      error of law;


      I allow the Secretary of State's appeal to the Upper Tribunal;


      I set aside the decision in the appeal in relation to article  3  ECHR
      grounds only, preserving the findings and  conclusions  on  article  8
      ECHR grounds;


      I remake the decision by dismissing the appeal on asylum, humanitarian
      protection, and article 3 ECHR grounds, but  allowing  the  appeal  on
      article 8 ECHR grounds only.


      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    24 August 2020




Anonymity Direction

I am satisfied, having had  regard  to  the  guidance  in  the  Presidential
Guidance Note No 1 of 2013: Anonymity Orders, that it would  be  appropriate
to make an order in accordance with  Rules  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in the following terms:

    "Unless and until a tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant
    is granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of  his  family.  This  direction
    applies to, amongst others, both  the  appellant  and  the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings."



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:    24 August 2020





