
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07044/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 15th October 2018                 |On 24 October 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                  ADAMA [T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Enuezie of Chancery West Law Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant appeals against a decision  of  Judge  M  R  Oliver  (the
    judge) of the First-tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated  on  27th  July
    2018.

 2. The Appellant is a male citizen of the Ivory  Coast  born  10th  August
    1963.  According to the Respondent's records he arrived in  the  UK  in
    January 2000 and  claimed  asylum.   He  failed  to  attend  an  asylum
    interview and therefore his  claim  for  international  protection  was
    refused on 18th January 2005.

 3. The Appellant remained in the UK.  He  formed  a  relationship  with  a
    French citizen.  They met in the UK in February 2000.  They have a son,
    born in the UK on  3rd  July  2001.   He  is  a  French  citizen.   The
    Appellant's relationship with his son's mother ended in 2005.

 4. On 31st October  2013  the  Appellant's  representatives  made  further
    submissions contending that he would be at  risk  if  returned  to  the
    Ivory Coast.  On 7th  March  2017  the  Appellant,  now  without  legal
    representation, made further submissions relying upon Article 8 of  the
    1950 European Convention on Human Rights (the 1950 Convention)  and  in
    particular making reference to his relationship with his son,  and  his
    private life.

The Respondent's Decision

 5. The application for leave to remain in the UK was refused on 16th March
    2018.  In  brief  summary  the  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk if returned to the Ivory Coast and therefore
    he was not entitled to  asylum  or  humanitarian  protection,  and  his
    return would not breach Article 3 of the 1950 Convention.

 6. With reference to Article 8 the Respondent noted the Appellant  claimed
    to have a parental relationship with his son.  The Respondent  accepted
    that the son is under 18 years of age, and had resided continuously  in
    the UK for in  excess  of  seven  years.   It  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant, although he did not live with his son, undertook a  role  in
    his son's life.

 7. The Respondent considered EX.1(a) and accepted that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the son to leave the UK.  However, the  Respondent
    did not accept that EX.1(a) was satisfied, finding at paragraph  68  of
    the refusal decision, "it is not  considered  that  you  have  provided
    enough evidence to substantiate that you live together with your  child
    as a family unit or that you have a genuine and subsisting relationship
    with your child".

 8. The Respondent considered the Appellant's private life  with  reference
    to paragraph 276ADE(1) not accepting that the Appellant  could  satisfy
    any of the provisions therein.

 9.  The  Respondent  did  not  accept  that  there  were  any  exceptional
    circumstances which would justify granting leave to remain pursuant  to
    Article 8 outside the Immigration Rules.

The First-tier Tribunal Hearing

10. The Appellant appealed with reference  to  Article  8.   There  was  no
    appeal against refusal of asylum or humanitarian protection, and it was
    not contended that Article 3  was  engaged.   It  was  noted  that  the
    Respondent had accepted that the Appellant played a role in  his  son's
    upbringing, but the Respondent had then made a  contradictory  finding,
    finding that there was no genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
    between the Appellant and his son.

11. It was contended that the Appellant  satisfied  the  Immigration  Rules
    contained in  Appendix  FM,  had  a  genuine  and  subsisting  parental
    relationship with his son, and as the Respondent accepted it would  not
    be reasonable to expect the son to leave the UK, the appeal  should  be
    allowed.

12. The judge heard  oral  evidence  from  the  Appellant,  and  two  other
    witnesses, [GT], a friend of the Appellant, and [ST],  the  Appellant's
    brother who has leave to remain in the UK.

13. The findings made by the judge are  contained  at  paragraph  18.   The
    judge found that the Appellant's claim to remain in the UK was based on
    his family relationship with his son, and found that the Appellant  had
    no right to remain in respect of his private life.

14. The judge rejected the Appellant's claim to be his son's primary carer.
     The judge noted that the son had not given evidence but  had  gone  on
    holiday to Paris.  The judge also noted  that  the  Appellant's  former
    partner did not attend the hearing and doubted the claim that  she  was
    in hospital and noted she had only submitted a brief four  line  letter
    in support of the Appellant.  The judge concluded;

         "While I accept that the Appellant has a real relationship with his
         son, it is in my judgment a relationship that can continue  without
         his continued presence in the United Kingdom.  His son  can  remain
         here.  The Appellant has no right  to  remain  in  respect  of  his
         private life".

15. The judge dismissed the appeal  on  asylum  grounds  and  human  rights
    grounds.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

16. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    The grounds are lengthy and will only be very briefly summarised  here.
    The Appellant relied upon five grounds.

17. In the introduction to the grounds the  Appellant  contended  that  the
    only  issue  between  the  Appellant  and  Respondent  is  whether  the
    Appellant has a genuine and subsisting parental relationship  with  his
    son.  It is accepted that his son is  under  18  years  of  age  and  a
    qualifying child by reason of having resided in the UK for in excess of
    seven years.

18. The Appellant's contention was that if he had a genuine and  subsisting
    relationship with his son then  the  appeal  would  succeed  under  the
    Immigration  Rules  and  with  reference  to  section  117B(6)  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 (the 2002 Act), but if  he
    did not have a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  then  the  appeal
    would fail.

19. The first ground contends that the judge erred by failing  to  consider
    section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.

20. The second ground contends that the judge erred by failing to undertake
    any assessment of the best interests of the Appellant's son, and failed
    to take into account the views of the Appellant's son.

21. The third ground contends that the judge erred in  misrepresenting  the
    Appellant's claim, which was not that he was the primary carer  of  his
    son, but that he has direct  access  to  his  son  and  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with him.

22. The fourth ground contends that the judge  erred  in  failing  to  have
    regard to the Appellant's private life.

23. The fifth ground contends that the judge erred in failing to take  into
    account relevant evidence, that being  a  witness  statement  from  his
    former partner running to 27 paragraphs, and a witness  statement  from
    his son running to 28 paragraphs.

Permission to Appeal

24. Permission to appeal on Grounds 1, 2, 3 and 5  were  granted  by  Judge
    Kelly on 24th August 2018 and I set out below, in part,  the  grant  of
    permission;

         "2.  Given that the Tribunal appears  to  have  accepted  that  the
             Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
             with his son [18] it is arguable that the failure to  consider
             section 117B(6) of the Immigration, Asylum and Nationality Act
             2002 adversely affected the outcome of the appeal (Ground  1).
             Permission to appeal on this and related grounds (2, 3 and  5)
             is accordingly granted.

         3.   However, whilst it is arguable that the Tribunal erred in  not
             giving  reasons  for  the  conclusions  stated  in  the  final
             sentence of paragraph 18, it is not arguable that the  matters
             advanced in Ground  4  would  have  sufficed  to  establish  a
             private life claim in any event.  Permission to appeal on  the
             fourth ground is accordingly refused".

25. The Appellant renewed his  application  for  permission  to  appeal  in
    relation to Ground 4, and permission  to  appeal  on  that  ground  was
    granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Smith on 19th September 2018.

The Upper Tribunal Hearing - Error of Law

26. Ms Pal had not seen the grant of permission issued  by  Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Smith and was provided with a copy.  Ms  Pal  conceded  that  the
    judge had erred in law as contended in the grounds.   I  therefore  did
    not need to hear from Mr Enuezie on that point.

27. I found that the judge had materially erred in law.  The judge did  not
    engage with the issues.  There was no adequate consideration of whether
    the Appellant satisfied the requirements of R-LTRPT which contains  the
    requirements for limited leave to remain as a  parent.   There  was  no
    consideration of EX.1(a) and no finding as to whether the Appellant has
    a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his  son.   It  was
    unclear whether this was accepted by the judge when he made the finding
    that the Appellant had "a real relationship with his son".

28. The judge erred in law in failing to consider paragraph  276ADE(1),  in
    particular subsection (vi) and in failing to consider section  117B  of
    the 2002 Act.

29. For the reasons given above the decision of the FtT was set aside.

30. Having set aside the FtT decision I was invited by the  representatives
    to re-make the decision without a further hearing, which I  agreed  was
    appropriate.

Re-making the Decision

31. No further evidence was called.  I was asked to  re-make  the  decision
    based upon the evidence that had been before the FtT.

32. For the avoidance of doubt I clarified  with  the  representatives  the
    evidence  that  was  on  the  Tribunal  file.   This  amounted  to  the
    Respondent's bundle with Annexes A-M, the Appellant's skeleton argument
    which is undated but which  contains  65  paragraphs,  the  Appellant's
    bundle comprising 80 pages, and witness statements made by  [ST]  dated
    2nd July 2018, [GT] dated 4th July 2018, [FD]  dated  26th  June  2018,
    [KT] dated 26th June 2018, and the Appellant dated 26th June 2018.

33. On behalf of the Appellant I  was  referred  to  paragraph  63  of  the
    Respondent's refusal  decision  in  which  it  was  accepted  that  the
    Appellant played a role in his son's life.  I was referred to paragraph
    68 of that decision in which it was  conceded  that  it  would  not  be
    reasonable to expect the son to leave the UK.  It  was  submitted  that
    the issue to be decided was whether the Appellant  had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting parental relationship with his son, and I was asked to  find
    that the evidence submitted proved that he did.  I was  asked  to  find
    that the judge in making a finding  that  the  Appellant  had  "a  real
    relationship with his son", in effect meant to conclude that this was a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

34. I was asked to find that EX.1(a) was therefore satisfied, and there was
    no public interest in removing the Appellant from the UK.

35. Ms Pal submitted that the result of the appeal depended upon whether it
    was found that the Appellant had a genuine and subsisting  relationship
    with his son.

36. I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

37. There has  been  no  challenge  on  behalf  of  the  Appellant  to  the
    conclusion by the FtT that the appeal cannot succeed with reference  to
    asylum, humanitarian protection or Article 3.  The findings made by the
    FtT on those issues are preserved.

38. I am asked to consider this appeal with reference to Article 8  of  the
    1950 Convention.  I find that Article 8 is engaged on the basis of  the
    family life established between the Appellant  and  his  son,  and  the
    Appellant's private life that he has established since his  arrival  in
    the UK in January 2000.

39. In considering Article 8 I adopt the balance sheet approach recommended
    at paragraph 83 of Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016] UKSC 60, and  in  so  doing
    have regard to the guidance given at paragraphs 39 to 53.

40. The burden of proof lies on the Appellant  to  establish  his  personal
    circumstances in this country, and to establish  why  the  decision  to
    refuse his human rights  claim  interferes  disproportionately  in  his
    private and family  life  rights  in  this  country.   It  is  for  the
    Respondent to establish the public interest  factors  weighing  against
    the Appellant.  The standard of proof is  a  balance  of  probabilities
    throughout.

41. I take into account the guidance at paragraph 48 of Agyarko [2017] UKSC
    11 in that if it is found that an Appellant cannot satisfy the relevant
    test under the Immigration Rules but refusal of the  application  would
    result in unjustifiably harsh consequences, such that refusal would not
    be proportionate, then leave may be granted outside the  rules  on  the
    basis of exceptional circumstances.

42. In relation to the factual matrix,  it  is  not  in  dispute  that  the
    Appellant is a citizen of the Ivory Coast.  He arrived  in  the  UK  in
    January 2000 and has resided here since that date.   I  find  that  the
    Appellant had a relationship with a French citizen which ended sometime
    in 2005.  He has a son from that relationship born in  the  UK  on  3rd
    July 2001.  The son has lived in the UK since birth and  therefore  has
    acquired considerably more than seven years' continuous residence.  The
    Appellant's former partner and his son have permanent residence in  the
    UK although neither are British citizens.

43. Although this is an appeal against refusal of a human rights claim, the
    appropriate starting point is to ascertain whether  the  Appellant  can
    satisfy the relevant Immigration Rules.

44. Section R-LTRPT contains the requirements for limited leave  to  remain
    as a parent and is set out below;

         R-LTRPT.1.1   The requirements to  be  met  for  limited  leave  to
                    remain as a parent are -

                    (a)    the applicant and the child must be in the UK;

                    (b)    the applicant must have made a valid  application
                        for limited or indefinite  leave  to  remain  as  a
                        parent or partner; and either

                    (c)    (i)  the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                             under  section  S-LTR:  Suitability  leave   to
                             remain; and

                        (ii)   the applicant meets all of the  requirements
                             of section ELTRPT:  Eligibility  for  leave  to
                             remain as a parent, or

                    (d)    (i)  the applicant  must  not  fall  for  refusal
                             under S-LTR: Suitability leave to remain; and

                        (ii)   the  applicant  meets  the  requirements  of
                             paragraphs  E-LTRPT.2.2-2.4.  and  E-LTRPT.3.1-
                             3.2.; and

                        (iii)  paragraph EX.1. applies.

45. The Appellant's case is that he satisfies E-LTRPT.2.2,  2.3,  2.4,  and
    3.1-3.2

46. I find that E-LTRPT.2.2 is satisfied because the  applicant's  son  was
    under 18 years of age at the date of application, is living in the  UK,
    is settled in the UK, and has lived in the UK continuously for at least
    the seven years immediately preceding  the  application  and  paragraph
    EX.1 applies.

47. I find that E-LTRPT.2.3(b) is satisfied because the son normally  lives
    with his mother who is settled in the UK, and who is not the partner of
    the Appellant, and the Appellant is not eligible to apply for leave  to
    remain as a partner.

48. I find that E-LTRPT.2.4 is satisfied.  The Appellant does not have sole
    responsibility for his son although he did in fact at paragraph  19  of
    his further submissions dated 7th March 2017 claim to  be  the  primary
    carer of his child from whom he was inseparable.  The Appellant's  case
    is based upon having direct access to his son as agreed with his  son's
    mother with whom the son normally lives, and he has  provided  evidence
    that he is taking and intends to continue to take an active role in his
    son's upbringing.

49. The immigration status requirements are set out in E-LTRPT.3.1 and 3.2.
     The Appellant is not in the UK  as  a  visitor  or  with  valid  leave
    granted for six months or less.  He is not  on  immigration  bail,  and
    although he has no leave to remain, I  find  that  EX.1  applies.   The
    evidence to prove that the Appellant has direct access to his  son  and
    is taking and intends to continue to take an active role in  his  son's
    upbringing is contained in the Appellant's witness  statement,  and  in
    the witness statements of his son and his son's  mother.   The  witness
    statement of [FD] confirms that she separated  from  the  Appellant  in
    2005.  She describes the Appellant as a good father and  confirms  that
    in any matters involving their son, the Appellant has always played  an
    active part in the decision making  progress.   They  decided  together
    which primary and  secondary  schools  the  son  should  attend.   [FD]
    confirms that she has never taken any decision as to her  son's  future
    without involving the Appellant who has always shown a  keen  interest.
    The Appellant and his son have physical contact with each other four or
    five times a month and also  have  telephone  contact.   The  Appellant
    takes his son to the mosque every Friday and enrolled him  for  Islamic
    classes.  This evidence is confirmed by the Appellant's son.

50. In order to satisfy the Immigration Rules the Appellant must prove that
    EX.1(a) is satisfied which is set out below;

         EX.1. This paragraph applies if

             (a)  (i)      the  applicant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
                      parental relationship with a child who -

                      (aa) is under the age of 18 years, or was  under  the
                           age of 18 years  when  the  applicant  was  first
                           granted leave on the basis  that  this  paragraph
                           applied;

                      (bb)     is in the UK;

                      (cc)     is a British citizen or has lived in the  UK
                           continuously  for  at  least  the   seven   years
                           immediately preceding the  date  of  application;
                           and

                  (ii)     taking into account their  best  interests  as  a
                      primary consideration, it would not be reasonable  to
                      expect the child to leave the UK;

51. There is no dispute that the son is under 18, is in  the  UK,  and  has
    lived in the UK continuously for in excess of seven years.

52. I must decide whether  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    parental relationship with his son.  I note the  Respondent's  guidance
    on this point issued on 22nd February 2018, and contained at pages  69-
    71 of the Appellant's bundle.  I must consider whether the Appellant is
    playing a genuinely parental role in his son's life and he must have  a
    subsisting role in personally providing at least an element  of  direct
    parental care to his son.  The Appellant is not the  primary  carer  of
    his son, and accepts that to be the case.  The  primary  carer  is  the
    son's mother with whom he lives.  There is no doubt that the  Appellant
    and his son are biologically related, and I find  that  they  regularly
    see one another.  In addition to the evidence given by  the  Appellant,
    his son, and the son's mother, there is a letter from the Imam  of  the
    mosque attended by the Appellant, which confirms that the Appellant and
    his son attend the mosque together.

53. It is not the case that the Appellant has only established contact with
    his son recently.  The evidence indicates that there has  been  regular
    physical contact following the separation of  the  Appellant  from  his
    son's mother.

54. The evidence confirms, on a balance of probability, that the  Appellant
    and his son have  a  close  relationship,  frequent  contact,  and  the
    Appellant does play an active role in his son's life.  I  am  satisfied
    that the Appellant has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
    with his son.

55. It is conceded by  the  Respondent  at  paragraph  68  of  the  refusal
    decision that it would not be reasonable to expect the son to leave the
    UK.  That concession has not been withdrawn, and  I  therefore  make  a
    finding that it would not be reasonable to expect the son to leave  the
    UK.  In making that finding I have taken into account the  guidance  in
    MA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA Civ 705 that in considering the  question  of
    reasonableness, I must focus not on the position of  the  child  alone,
    but must have regard  to  the  wider  public  interest,  including  the
    immigration history of the Appellant.  At paragraph 49 of MA (Pakistan)
    it is stated that when considering section  117B(6)  the  fact  that  a
    child has been in the UK  for  seven  years  would  need  to  be  given
    significant weight in the  proportionality  exercise  for  two  related
    reasons, first because of its relevance to determining the  nature  and
    strength  of  the  child's  best  interests,  and  second,  because  it
    establishes the starting point that  leave  should  be  granted  unless
    there are powerful reasons to the contrary.

56. I also take into  account  the  guidance  in  SR  (subsisting  parental
    relationship, s117B(6)) Pakistan [2018] UKUT 00334 (IAC) which confirms
    that the question of whether it would not be  reasonable  to  expect  a
    child to leave the UK does not necessarily require a  consideration  of
    whether the child will in fact or practice leave the UK.  The issue  to
    be considered is would it be reasonable "to expect" the child to  leave
    the UK.

57. With reference to the Immigration Rules, so far as they relate  to  the
    requirements for leave to remain as a parent,  I  conclude  that  these
    rules are satisfied.

58. I consider paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)  in  relation  to  the  Appellant's
    private life.  To succeed the Appellant must  prove  on  a  balance  of
    probabilities  that  there  are  very  significant  obstacles  to   his
    integration into the Ivory Coast.  On this point I follow the  guidance
    in Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) in which it was found  that  mere
    hardship,  mere  difficulty,  mere  hurdles,  mere  upheaval  and  mere
    inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the  test
    of very significant obstacles in paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration
    Rules.

59. With reference to integration I follow the guidance  in  Kamara  [2016]
    EWCA Civ 813 at paragraph 14 in which it is stated;

         "The idea of integration calls for a broad evaluative  judgment  to
         be made as to whether the individual will be enough of  an  insider
         in terms of understanding how life in the  society  in  that  other
         country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to
         have a reasonable opportunity to be accepted there, to be  able  to
         operate on a day-to-day basis in  that  society  and  to  build  up
         within a reasonable time a variety of human relationships  to  give
         substance to the individual's private or family life".

60. The Appellant is 55 years of age.  He has lived the greater part of his
    life in the Ivory Coast.  He is a citizen of that country.   He  speaks
    the language.  There are no relevant medical issues that could  not  be
    treated in the Ivory Coast.  Although the  Appellant  has  been  absent
    from the Ivory Coast since 2000, I do not find that he has proved  that
    there would be very significant obstacles to his integration  into  the
    Ivory Coast.  The evidence that he has submitted does not discharge the
    burden of proof.  The Appellant gave evidence to the FtT  that  he  did
    not have relatives in the Ivory Coast but this was contradicted by  his
    brother, who confirmed that they have siblings who remain in the  Ivory
    Coast.  There therefore would be some family support.

61. I have regard to the considerations contained in Section  117B  of  the
    2002.  Subsection  (1)  confirms  that  the  maintenance  of  effective
    immigration control is in the public interest.   I  attach  significant
    weight to this.  Subsection (2) confirms  that  it  is  in  the  public
    interest that a person seeking leave to remain can speak English.   The
    Appellant has not demonstrated his ability to speak English.

62. Subsection (3) confirms that it is in the public interest that a person
    seeking leave to remain is financially independent.  The  Appellant  is
    not financially independent.

63. Subsections (4) and (5) confirm that little  weight  should  be  placed
    upon a private life established when  a  person  has  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully or with a precarious immigration status.  The Appellant  has
    only ever had a precarious immigration status.  I  must  attach  little
    weight to the private life that he has established.

64. Section 117B(6) is set out below;

         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation,  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -

             (a)   the  person  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting   parental
                  relationship with a qualifying child, and

             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom.

65. The above is a similar test to  that  contained  in  EX.1(a).   It  has
    already  been  established  that  the  Appellant  has  a  genuine   and
    subsisting parental relationship with his son who is a qualifying child
    and it would not be reasonable to expect the son to  leave  the  United
    Kingdom.  The Appellant is not liable to  deportation.   Therefore  the
    public interest does not require his removal.

66. I find that if the Appellant was relying upon private  life  alone  his
    appeal would be dismissed.  That however is not  the  case.   The  main
    issue is his relationship with his son.  I find  it  significant,  when
    considering the public  interest,  that  the  Appellant  satisfies  the
    relevant Immigration Rules in relation to leave to remain as a  parent.
    Even if those rules were not satisfied, the Appellant would satisfy the
    statute, that being section 117B(6).

67. Having conducted a balancing exercise, notwithstanding that  there  are
    matters adverse to  the  Appellant  such  as  his  inability  to  speak
    English, which no doubt  hampers  his  integration,  and  his  lack  of
    financial independence, the fact  that  he  satisfies  the  Immigration
    Rules, and section 117B(6) means that this appeal should be allowed  as
    the Respondent's decision is disproportionate.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contained an error of  law  and  was
set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on human rights grounds with reference  to  Article  8
of the 1950 Convention.

There has been no request for anonymity  and  I  see  no  need  to  make  an
anonymity direction.


Signed                              Date         17th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal I have considered whether to make a fee  award.
 I make no fee award.  The appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
considered by the Tribunal that was not before the initial  decision  maker.



Signed                              Date         17th October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall











