
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA070282016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 15 May 2017                           |On 07 June 2017                   |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               TT (Sri Lanka)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel instructed by S Saatha & Co
For the Respondent:    Ms K Pal, Specialist Appeals Team


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals to the Upper Tribunal from the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Watt sitting at Hatton Cross on 13  December
    2016) dismissing his appeal against the decision of  the  Secretary  of
    State to refuse his protection claim on the asserted ground that he was
    of ongoing interest to the Sri Lankan authorities  on  account  of  his
    previous involvement in the LTTE.

Relevant Background Facts

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth  is  [  ]
    1988.  He arrived in the UK from Sri Lanka on  3  November  2009  on  a
    valid student visa.  The appellant's  visa  expired  in  2011.   He  is
    recorded as having claimed asylum on 3 December 2015.   He  attended  a
    substantive asylum interview on 24 June 2016.  He had been born in  Sri
    Lanka, but he had moved from Sri Lanka to Tamil Nadu in India when aged
    nine with his family.  His father was a member of  the  LTTE,  and  the
    family's displacement to India came about because of the civil war.

 3. He studied to year 12 in India, and then he had come as  a  student  to
    the UK and had studied for a  period  of  one  year.   After  his  visa
    expired, he had continued working using  the  same  national  insurance
    number.

 4. The reason why he was claiming asylum was because he was being searched
    for in Sri Lanka and India.  His life would be in danger if he returned
    to one of those countries.  In April 2016 his mother had telephoned him
    to tell him that the authorities in Sri Lanka had been to his uncle  in
    Sri Lanka and that the authorities in India had been to see his father,
    asking about his whereabouts.  They were looking for him  because  they
    accused him of having helped the LTTE.

 5. The appellant explained that his father had sent him, his siblings  and
    his mother abroad in 1997 for their safety.  His father had carried  on
    working for the LTTE.  In the period leading up to 2007, his  role  was
    to bring LTTE fighters and members illegally from India  to  Sri  Lanka
    both ways, and he was also transporting goods via sea.  He did not take
    part in any fighting.  In 2007 his father was arrested by the Q  Branch
    when he came to India.  Since his arrest and  subsequent  release,  his
    father had been reporting at a police station weekly in India.

 6. The appellant's first encounter of the Sri Lankan authorities had  been
    in in 2005, when he and his  brother  were  returning  to  India  after
    visiting their father in Sri Lanka.   They  were  stopped  by  the  Sri
    Lankan Navy.  They were taken to a big ship and questioned  along  with
    others.  They had their fingerprints and photographs taken.  They  said
    that they were on a fishing trip, and they were allowed to go.

 7. As a result of his father being put on a weekly reporting condition  in
    2007, his father was not able to continue his work for the LTTE and  so
    he was not able to generate an income  for  the  family.   He  and  his
    brother were sympathisers with the LTTE from boyhood,  but  they  could
    not carry on doing what their father had been doing for the  LTTE.   So
    the LTTE told them to  do  some  work  for  the  LTTE  in  India.   The
    appellant received a phone call and an address.  When he went  to  this
    address, he was given a parcel.  The person who gave him a parcel  gave
    him another address where he would deliver the parcel.  He was  helping
    the families of LTTE fighters in India by arranging  accommodation  for
    them, and also helping injured fighters to  get  medical  treatment  in
    India.  As well as undertaking this  activity  for  the  LTTE,  he  was
    attending college and he was doing a part-time job.

 8. In July 2009 he was arrested by Q Branch in  India  because  they  were
    aware of his links to the LTTE and the fact that he was  helping  them.
    Someone had tipped them off.  He had tattoos on his right  forearm  and
    left shoulder which were LTTE tattoos.  The police saw his tattoos when
    they were torturing him, and were thus able to confirm that he had been
    working for the LTTE.  After  two  days  in  local  detention,  he  was
    transferred to Mumbai.   He  was  tortured  there  as  well,  and  they
    informed the Sri Lankan Army.  Two Sri Lankan Army officers turned  up.
    They questioned him, and found that his fingerprints had been taken  in
    2005.  Thus they confirmed that he had been in Sri Lanka illegally,  so
    the case against him became stronger.  When his uncle heard  about  his
    detention, he paid 5 lakhs  for  his  release.   The  officer  who  had
    received the bribe said that it would  be  too  dangerous  for  him  to
    remain in India because the Sri Lankan Army had already  been  informed
    about him.  They advised his uncle to send him abroad.

 9. He was asked why he had transited in Sri Lanka  -  rather  than  flying
    directly from India to the UK - if he was wanted by the authorities  in
    Sri Lanka.  He answered that the agent bribed officials  in  Sri  Lanka
    just as he bribed officials at the departure airport in India.  He  was
    asked how he knew that the Sri Lankan authorities were still interested
    in him. He said that at Tamil New Year his mother had  told  him  about
    his uncle being asked about him, and about how in India the authorities
    had been looking for him as well.

10. The Interviewing Officer put to the appellant that it  was  implausible
    that the authorities would be interested in him seven years later, when
    he was not a member of the LTTE and when he had only been  involved  in
    basic low-level activities.  The appellant answered that he was  not  a
    helper of any high profile, but the authorities assumed  that  he  was,
    because of his father's activity.

11. On 1 July 2016  the  respondent  gave  her  reasons  for  refusing  the
    appellant's protection claim.  He  said  that  he  had  been  arrested,
    detained and tortured by the Indian authorities in 2009 in relation  to
    his LTTE  activities.   He  provided  photographs  pertaining  to  show
    injuries sustained in detention.  This part of his claim was internally
    consistent, but it was not corroborated by external evidence.   He  had
    not claimed asylum in the UK until December 2015, four years after  his
    leave to remain had expired and over six years after he arrived in  the
    UK.  His personal circumstances had not  changed  substantially  during
    his time in the UK so as to justify  such  a  long  delay  in  claiming
    asylum.  The majority of events that he relied on for  his  claim  took
    place before he arrived in the UK in 2009.  So he had not sought asylum
    at the earliest possible time.  Therefore his general  credibility  was
    considered to be damaged, and so it was not accepted that he  had  been
    acting for the LTTE  or  that  he  had  been  tortured  by  the  Indian
    authorities on that account.

12. With regard to the assessment of future fear, reference was made to the
    Country Information & Guidance report on  Sri  Lanka  dated  May  2016,
    which said that the LTTE in Sri Lanka had not held any  military  power
    or political authority since the end of  the  civil  war  in  2009.   A
    person  being  of  Tamil  ethnicity  would  not   in   itself   warrant
    international protection.  Neither, in  general,  would  a  person  who
    evidenced his past membership or connection to the  LTTE,  unless  they
    had or were perceived to have a significant role in relation  to  post-
    conflict Tamil separatism, or they appeared  on  a  stop  list  at  the
    airport.   However,  there  was  evidence  that  the  security   forces
    continued to detain individuals  who  they  suspected  of  having  LTTE
    connections, and  each  case  should  be  considered  on  the  evidence
    provided.

13. The objective evidence suggested that only high profile LTTE membership
    or diaspora activities would place a person at risk.  Taking his  claim
    at its highest, his claim of being involved in the LTTE was  not  at  a
    level which would make him of interest to the Sri Lankan authorities.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

14. Both parties were legally represented before Judge Watt.  As the  Judge
    noted at paragraph [9] of his subsequent decision, the evidence  before
    him included a psychiatric report and a medical report dealing with his
    scars.

15. In his scarring report. Dr Martin identified a raised  keloid  scar  on
    the lateral aspect of the appellant's left  shoulder,  and  two  raised
    keloid scars on the anterior aspect of the mid-right of the appellant's
    right forearm.  The appellant told Dr Martin that he  had  two  tattoos
    that had been burnt with a hot implement.   Dr  Martin  said  that  the
    appearance of scars was typical of the side effects from a procedure to
    remove tattoos.  It was possible that  the  scarring  could  have  been
    caused by  side  effects  from  voluntary  tattoo  removal  procedures.
    Several tattoo-fading  treatments  were  often  required  in  order  to
    achieve satisfactory results.   The  scars  were  consistent  with  the
    appellant's account of torture, but it was impossible  to  discard  the
    possibility that they could have  been  caused  by  voluntarily  taking
    treatment to remove unwanted tattoos.

16. Dr Dhumad, Consultant Psychiatrist, produced a  report  on  9  December
    2016 based on an interview which had taken place by teleconference on 1
    December 2016.   In  his  opinion,  the  appellant's  presentation  was
    consistent with a diagnosis of moderate depressive  episode.   He  also
    suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder.  He was currently on anti-
    depressant  medication,  and  he  had   received   five   sessions   of
    psychological therapy.  In his opinion, his condition was very unlikely
    to progress further without a safe resolution  of  his  fear.   In  his
    opinion, the appellant was fit to attend Court and give oral  evidence.
    However, he was depressed, anxious and his concentration was poor which
    was likely to be  worse  if  he  was  to  be  cross-examined.   So,  he
    recommended extra time and breaks to help him participate  meaningfully
    in the proceedings.

17. He had  considered  the  possibility  that  he  might  be  feigning  or
    exaggerating  his  mental  illness.   He  had  carefully  examined  his
    symptomatology and his emotional reactions during the interview, and he
    considered the findings of other professionals that  had  treated  him.
    His clinical presentation was consistent with a diagnosis of depression
    and PTSD.  In his experience, it  was  extremely  to  feign  full-blown
    mental illness (as opposed to individual symptoms).

18. The appellant gave oral evidence, and  he  was  cross-examined  by  the
    Presenting Officer.  He was asked why he had not mentioned  the  tattoo
    removal during torture in his asylum interview.  He said  that  he  had
    only answered the questions that he was asked.

19. In the subsequent decision at paragraph [20], the Judge  said  that  he
    was not impressed by the evidence given by the appellant.  He hesitated
    when giving answers to questions.  He also seemed to give glib  answers
    as excuses when cross-examined.

20. In his conclusions, the Judge made extensive reference to GJ and Others
    (post-civil war: returnees) Sri Lanka CG [2013] UKUT 00319, and to  the
    findings on risk categories made by the Tribunal at paragraph [356].

21. In paragraph [28], the Judge said that the problem he had in this  case
    was the credibility of the appellant.  He stated that his father was  a
    member of the LTTE, but he gave no evidence about the rank or role  his
    father had in the LTTE.  There was also no other evidence to  show  his
    father's rank or importance in the organisation. In his evidence to the
    Tribunal he said that part of the torture he  received  was  that  they
    tried to remove the LTTE tattoos that he had on his shoulder  and  arm.
    But this had not been mentioned in his asylum interview.  He  noted  Dr
    Martin's  opinion  that  it  was  impossible  to  fully   discard   the
    possibility that these scars could  have  been  caused  by  voluntarily
    taking treatment to remove unwanted tattoos.  He noted that  the  scars
    appeared to be specifically where the tattoos were.

22. At paragraph [33], he said that he must take into account  as  damaging
    the credibility of the appellant his admitted failure to make an asylum
    application until six years after he had arrived in the United Kingdom,
    despite claiming that he was subjected to torture because of  his  LTTE
    sympathies in 2009.

23. He noted that the first indication which the  appellant  had  that  the
    authorities in India were looking for him was in April  2016  from  his
    mother.  But in his mother's statement, she said that the Q  Branch  of
    the Sri Lankan intelligence had been harassing them by  visiting  often
    on the pretext of an investigation, even after her  son  had  left  the
    country.  The Judge held that this statement from his mother  suggested
    that  not  only  the  Indian  authorities,  but  also  the  Sri   Lanka
    authorities, had been visiting her home since 2009 when  the  appellant
    left.

24. The Judge concluded, at paragraph  [36],  that  he  did  not  find  the
    appellant to be credible or reliable.  Accordingly, he did  not  accept
    that he carried out work for the LTTE or was  tortured  either  by  the
    Indian authorities or the Sri  Lankan  authorities  in  2009.   In  the
    circumstances, he did  not  find  that  there  would  be  any  risk  of
    persecution if he were returned to Sri Lanka.

The Application for Permission to Appeal

25. Mr Paramjorthy of Counsel settled the  application  for  permission  to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal.  He submitted that  in  paragraphs  [28]-
    [35] the Judge  had  considered  various  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    evidence, but had not made any findings in relation to  those  aspects,
    but had instead made "unilateral statements".  At paragraph  [36],  the
    Judge had not provided any clear rationale for any adverse  credibility
    findings  made  against  the  appellant.    He   submitted   that   the
    determination was unsustainable, as it was devoid of any rationale  for
    the rejection of the  appellant's  credibility  and  asserted  risk  on
    return.  There was an absence of clear findings of fact.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

26. On 27 March 2017, First-tier Tribunal Judge Page granted permission  to
    appeal for the following reasons:

         It is arguable that the Judge may have erred in law by  failing  to
         make findings on material evidence, as this application is  argued,
         because the decision of the Judge runs to a  few  paragraphs  where
         the determination is only  5  pages  long.   There  is  arguably  a
         paucity of reasoning in the decision to ground the  complaint  that
         the Judge has made no findings of fact  on  material  evidence.   I
         remind myself that it is not my task at  the  permission  stage  to
         make findings on the merits, but given the paucity of reasoning  in
         the decision and its brevity, the grounds of appeal  are  no  doubt
         capable of further amplification on appeal.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

27. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Ms  Benfield  sought  to  amplify  the  grounds  of  appeal.   She
    submitted that the Judge had failed  to  engage  with  the  psychiatric
    report,  and  had  failed  to  make  a  finding  on   the   appellant's
    vulnerability.  He failed to consider  how  the  appellant's  diagnosed
    medical condition might have affected his ability to give evidence, and
    so had unfairly formed an adverse view about  the  appellant's  general
    credibility from his performance in cross-examination.

28. On behalf of the Secretary of State, Ms Pal submitted that Ms Benning's
    error of law  challenge  went  outside  the  scope  of  the  permission
    application, which was confined to an asserted inadequacy of reasoning,
    not a failure to engage with the psychiatric report.

Discussion

29. Although not raised in the permission application, Ms Benning has drawn
    attention to a matter which could be said  to  be  encompassed  by  the
    reasons given by Judge Page for granting permission to appeal, namely a
    failure to make  findings  on  "material  evidence".   The  psychiatric
    report is material evidence, and the Judge has not engaged with  it  at
    all.

30. With regard to the error of law challenge on grounds of  inadequacy  of
    reasoning, it is not the case that the decision is completely devoid of
    any reasoning.  However, the  Judge's  highly  elliptical  and  oblique
    approach is not suitable for deciding an  asylum  claim,  where  it  is
    particularly important that the judicial decision-maker should  clearly
    explain to the losing party why he or she has lost.  Although the Judge
    refers to the guidance given by the Tribunal in  the  Country  Guidance
    authority of GJ & Others, the Judge does not explain how  this  Country
    Guidance impacts upon (a) the appellant's account  of  ongoing  adverse
    interest in him or (b) upon his asserted risk on return.

31. Although the failure to apply the Country  Guidance  authority  to  the
    appellant's case may be to the appellant's advantage,  it  is  still  a
    failure to make a finding on a material matter, and it underscores  the
    fact that the reasoning to support the conclusion reached by the  Judge
    is not good enough.  According, the decision is unsafe and so  it  must
    be set aside in its entirety.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the decision is set aside in its entirety.

Directions
This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal at Hatton Cross for a  de
novo hearing on all issues (Judge  Watt  incompatible),  with  none  of  the
findings of fact made by the previous Tribunal being preserved.





Signed                              Date 5 June 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge
















