
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07738/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                             |Decision Promulgated       |
|On 16th October 2018                            |On 19th October 2018       |
|                                                |                           |

                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     AS
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr T Hussain, instructed by Lei Dat & Baig
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Lloyd promulgated 9.2.18, dismissing her appeal  against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated 28.7.17,  to  refuse  her
    claim for international protection.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge  Bennett  refused  permission  to  appeal  on
    7.3.18.  However,  when  the  application  was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission on 18.5.18.

Error of Law

 3. For the reasons set out below, I found no material error of law in  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal such as to require  it  to  be  set
    aside.

 4. The appellant claims to be at risk in both South Africa and Zimbabwe as
    a member of a Particular Social Group (PSG) as a gay woman. She claimed
    to be in a relationship with Ms N, also gay.  The  judge  rejected  the
    factual claims, including the claim to have been attacked in  Zimbabwe,
    but went on in any event to find that even if the appellant is gay  and
    even if she is in a relationship with Ms N, she  is  of  South  African
    nationality and  there  is  no  well-founded  risk  of  persecution  or
    mistreatment on return and could live openly as a gay woman  and  could
    continue her relationship with Ms N, who is able to visit South Africa.
    The judge also found that on the basis of relocation there was no  risk
    on returning to Zimbabwe even had she been attacked there.

 5. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Bruce found  it  arguable  that
    the judge overlooked material elements of the evidence in  relation  to
    WhatsApp  messages.  It  was  also  arguable  that   there   were   not
    "intelligible reasons" for rejecting the evidence of Ms N in respect of
    the claimed relationship, and that "the findings at  paragraph  103  do
    not amount to a reasoned proportionality assessment."

 6. I do not understand the last sentence of the grant of permission and Mr
    Hussain was unable to assist, given that [103] is not a proportionality
    assessment. The grounds themselves  do  not  challenge  the  article  8
    proportionality assessment.

 7. Whilst I accept that on the evidence highlighted in the grounds at [94]
    the judge misstated the tone of the WhatsApp messages as  friendly  and
    not intimate in tone. It is clear that the  messages  contain  intimate
    sentiments.

 8. I reject the submissions of Mr Hussain that the judge's findings as  to
    the nature of the appellant's relationship with Ms N  as  friendly  but
    not in a relationship are unreasoned. However,  in  the  light  of  the
    error in relation to the WhatsApp messages this finding is undermined.

 9. However, the difficulty with the appellant's case on appeal, as pointed
    out in Mr Tan's submissions and frankly acknowledge by Mr  Hussain,  is
    that there is no appeal against the finding that the  appellant  is  of
    South African nationality; that there is no risk  to  LGBT  persons  in
    South Africa; and that the relationship with Ms  N  could  continue  in
    South Africa. Further, there was no appeal against the finding that the
    appellant was not attacked in Zimbabwe but in any event  as  she  could
    relocate there was no risk on return to Zimbabwe. Neither was there any
    appeal against the article 8 proportionality assessment.

10. It follows that even if I found for the appellant in  respect  of  each
    ground of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, there remains no basis for  the
    Upper Tribunal to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  as
    the outcome of the appeal would have been exactly the same, a dismissal
    of the international protection and human rights claims.

11. In the circumstances, I find no material error of law in  the  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal sufficient to require it to be set aside.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

     I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.
     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated



Anonymity

I have  considered  whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  any
anonymity direction. No submissions were made on the issue.  The  First-tier
Tribunal did not make an order  pursuant  to  rule  13(1)  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure Rules 2014. Given the  circumstances  of  this  case,  I  make  an
anonymity order.


Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  each  appellant  is
granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify that appellant or  any  member  of  her  family  or  her
partner.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellants  and  to   the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.





Fee Award         Note: this is not part of the determination.

In the light of my decision, I have considered whether to make a  fee  award
pursuant to section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts  and  Enforcement  Act
2007.

I have had regard to the Joint Presidential Guidance  Note:  Fee  Awards  in
Immigration Appeals (December 2011).

I make no fee award.

Reasons: No fee is payable and thus there can be no fee award.

     [pic]
     Signed

         Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

     Dated


