
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07124/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 18 February 2019                  |On 12 March 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVEY


                                   Between

                                    [B B]
                         (ANONYMITY ORDER NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Brown, counsel instructed by Parker Rhodes
                    Hickmotts Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms R Pettersen, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant, a national of the Democratic Republic of Congo, date  of
    birth 20 June 1988, appealed against the Respondent's  decision,  dated
    31 May 2018, to refuse a protection/Humanitarian Protection claim.  His
    appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis (the Judge), who on
    19 July 2018, dismissed his appeal.  Permission to appeal  was  granted
    on 10 August 2018 and the Respondent made a  Rule  24  response  on  28
    September 2018.

2.   The gravamen of the complaint was that the Judge's reasoning failed  to
    address elements of the evidence and/or gave inadequate reasons why the
    Appellant's credibility was rejected.

3.   Ms Pettersen argued that essentially the  Judge  had  done  enough  and
    that paragraphs [D41 and 42] show why  the  judge  concluded  that  the
    Appellant was not a reliable witness of fact as to the  extent  of  his
    involvement in a company  called  'Exposure'  whose  offices  were  the
    subject of attack in Kinshasa at the material time.

4.   In addition, it was said  that  the  Judge  has  failed  to  adequately
    reason why it was rejected that  the  Appellant  was  involved  in  the
    management and running of Exposure, that being  a  basis  on  which  he
    identified the likelihood of his identity and job  within  the  company
    being known to the authorities, making him readily identifiable and  at
    risk.   In addition, the Appellant had argued his  involvement  in  the
    production of or distribution of  leaflets  perceived  as  against  the
    authorities in the DRC and that the distribution of them posed in their
    own right a risk because the leaflets contained a logo for Exposure and
    the company address would be identifiable.

5.   I agreed with Mr Brown that  there  are  aspects  of  this  case  which
    through the process of hearing the appeal on error of law grounds raise
    the concern that the decision was not a document which  could  be  read
    and stand as an entire document.  Rather  if  the  Judge  did  consider
    matters he did not address them in  the  decision  or  if  he  did  not
    consider them it undermined the reasoning  which  the  Judge  gave  for
    concluding that the Appellant was not reliable as to the  claimed  need
    for protection.  I concluded that there was substance in these grounds.




DECISION

The Original Tribunal's decision on the  protection  claim  and  the  claims
under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR do  not  stand.  The  matter  will  have  to  be
reconsidered in the First-tier Tribunal

All grounds may be argued.  No findings of fact are to stand  at  a  renewal
hearing.

DIRECTIONS

(1)  Relist in the First-tier Tribunal, Bradford.

(2)  Two hours' time estimate.

(3)  List before any Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hillis.

(4)  French interpreter required.

(5)  The Appellant is the sole witness at  present  but  if  any  additional
    witnesses are to be called, particulars of their nationality and status
    in the UK, if they are foreign nationals, must be  given  to  the  Home
    Office in advance of the hearing.

(6)  Any additional papers and material relied upon to be served  not  later
    than ten clear working days before the further hearing.

(7)  Any further directions required  application  should  be  made  to  the
    Resident Judge at Bradford for either a CMRH or a PTR.

ANONYMITY

No anonymity order is made at this stage.

Signed                                  Date 26 February 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davey

