
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07516/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th April 2018                            |On 4th May 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LEVER


                                   Between

                                   MR A I
                            (ANONYMITY RETAINED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Adophy of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The Appellant, born on [  ]  1967,  is  a  citizen  of  Pakistan.   The
    Appellant had made a protection claim which had  been  refused  by  the
    Respondent on 25th July 2017.  The Appellant had appealed that decision
    and his appeal was heard by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Howard  on
    20th December 2017.  The judge dismissed his appeal on all grounds.

 2. Permission to appeal was applied for on behalf of the Appellant on 12th
    February 2018.  Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge on 21st February 2018.  It was noted that the judge  had
    referred to the Appellant and  his  partner  being  married  which  was
    contrary to the witness statements and it was said that  if  the  judge
    had erred on that point, that may have affected his remaining  findings
    in the balancing exercise and therefore the matter was arguable.

Submissions on behalf of the Appellant

 3. It was submitted by Mr Adophy that the judge  had  misdirected  himself
    regarding the marriage and there was a misdirection under Section 55 of
    the Borders Act 2009 in respect of the best interests of a  child.   It
    was further said that because there had been no  consideration  of  the
    case  under  Article  15(c),  then  there  had  not  been  any   proper
    proportionality assessment under Article 8 and therefore that in itself
    was an error of law.  It was also said that when looking  at  the  five
    stage test of Razgar at paragraph  38  the  judge  had  stopped  at  an
    earlier stage and objective evidence had not been  considered.   I  was
    referred to Home Office guidance in respect of the rights  or  lack  of
    rights of a child in this respect.

Submissions on behalf of the Respondent

 4. It was conceded that  the  judge  may  inadvertently  referred  to  the
    parties as being married rather than simply  being  in  a  partnership.
    However, it was noted that the evidence had been put on the basis  they
    intended to marry and indeed,  it  was  submitted  that  on  return  to
    Pakistan the Appellant's partner could if she wished join him there and
    they could get married.  The Home Office guidance was referred  to  and
    put in its context by Mr Avery.  It was  noted  that  when  considering
    Article 8 it did not appear that the judge had looked at  Section  117A
    to D of the 2002 Act.

 5. At the conclusion of submissions I reserved my decision to consider the
    evidence and submissions in this case.  I  now  present  that  decision
    with my reasons.

Decision and Reasons

 6. The Appellant is a citizen of Pakistan.  The judge had at paragraph  17
    noted that the Appellant was Muslim whilst his  partner  was  not.   He
    noted the Respondent had accepted  that  they  were  in  an  interfaith
    relationship.  Although it appears at the hearing the Respondent sought
    to query the veracity of that relationship, the judge found  no  notice
    of that challenge had been provided and in any  event,  he  found  that
    theirs was a genuine relationship and that [M] is their child.

 7. Further, at paragraph 18 the judge said:

         "The Appellant's asylum claim is predicated on the notion that as a
         Muslim man in a genuine relationship with an Indian national, Hindu
         woman, if returned to Pakistan to live together  as  man  and  wife
         they would be persecuted due to  the  interfaith  nature  of  their
         relationship".

    That  paragraph  does  not  suggest  the  judge  operated   under   the
    misapprehension that they were married.  It is the case that thereafter
    he has referred to the  Appellant  and  Ms  [S]  both  as  being  in  a
    relationship and also as married, or his wife.   That  appears  more  a
    lack of precision rather than  any  constant  misunderstanding  of  the
    parties' position.  Moreover, the gravamen of the  situation  was  less
    the formality of the parties being married but rather they  were  in  a
    committed and genuine relationship, as found by the judge, had a  child
    and most significantly theirs was an interfaith relationship.

 8. He considered the evidence presented and insofar as it was necessary to
    make factual findings he did so, providing an adequacy of reasoning and
    found in general  terms  a  lack  of  credibility  in  the  Appellant's
    account.

 9. The judge had  considered  the  country  material.   He  had  noted  at
    paragraph 31 that the Appellant's material, and perhaps  in  particular
    the skeleton argument, rather missed  the  point,  focusing  on  honour
    killings rather than interfaith marriages.  He further stated  that  if
    the Appellant was returned, the Appellant had adduced no evidence  that
    Ms [S] would not  be  able  to  join  him  in  Pakistan.   Indeed,  the
    Respondent's refusal letter and the  Home  Office  guidance  were  both
    documents before the judge.  They did not disclose any risk or bar that
    crossed the applicable threshold in such cases.

10. In terms of Article 8 the judge had  looked  at  the  position  of  the
    child.  Whilst he had not specifically referred to Section  55  of  the
    Borders Act 2009 he had said at paragraph 38(1) "their  child  is  very
    young and entirely dependent on her parents.   She  is  not  a  British
    citizen.  For the reasons set out above I am not satisfied  the  family
    cannot travel to Pakistan together".

11. He was entitled to reach that conclusion based on the evidence adduced.
     The issues raised by Mr Adophy relating to problems faced by the child
    are in the context of a child not knowing  his  father  or  having  his
    father's name.  That does not apply in this  case.   Reference  to  the
    killing or abandonment of young children born  out  of  wedlock  is  by
    natural  and  proper  inference  a  reference   of   ill-treatment   or
    abandonment undertaken by the mother and/or parent.  That  is  not  the
    case here.

12. In terms of Article 8 the judge noted that Ms [S]  was  not  a  British
    citizen, had no right to remain in the UK and neither  did  the  child.
    There was no evidence they could not  go  to  Pakistan  together  as  a
    family.  There was no evidence presented of private life enjoyed by the
    Appellant.  To that extent the judge  found  no  breach  of  family  or
    private life by removal and therefore he did not reach the final  stage
    test of Razgar.  To that extent,  it  is  arguable  he  need  not  have
    considered Section 117A to D of the 2002 Act.

13. However, even if the judge erred in not  considering  the  final  stage
    test of Razgar on the issue of proportionality and/or  Section  117  of
    the 2002 Act, it was not a material error because  the  facts  of  this
    case would inevitably have led him to the same conclusion.   Indeed,  a
    placement of Section 117 into the balance would have  weighted  matters
    even further against the Appellant than those considered by the judge.

14. He was therefore entitled to conclude that the  Appellant  was  not  in
    need of international protection nor that a return of the Appellant  to
    Pakistan would place the United Kingdom in breach of its  international
    obligations.  In terms of Article 8 he had taken the  view  that  there
    was no bar to family life continuing in Pakistan and the Appellant  had
    disclosed no evidence of any merit regarding his private  life  in  the
    UK.  This is not a case in terms of  Article  8  where  the  judge  was
    looking at a partner and/or child that were themselves British citizens
    but in fact individuals who had  no  right  to  remain  in  the  United
    Kingdom and it would appear that the relationship between the Appellant
    and Ms [S] had been entered into and continued at a time when both  had
    at the very least precarious status in the  UK.   As  indicated  above,
    even though the judge took the view he need not proceed  to  the  final
    stage test of Razgar, he had nevertheless looked at the  core  interest
    of the very young child and drawn a conclusion in terms of that child's
    best interest which he was entitled to make.  Had he taken  a  somewhat
    different approach and reached the final stage test of Razgar, then  he
    was bound to consider Section 117 of the 2002 Act and it  is  difficult
    to see how in all the circumstances of this case a proper assessment of
    all of the factors would have led the judge to any different conclusion
    than that which he reached.

Notice of Decision

15. There was no material error of law made by the judge in this case and I
    uphold the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Anonymity retained.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever





TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.




Signed                              Date


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Lever
