
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07682/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Head at Newport                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 September 2017                    |On 31 October 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAVIDGE

                                   Between
                                     KH
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: S Caseley, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal Project
For the Respondent: Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS




Introduction

 1. Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008

 2. The Respondent is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify  them  or  any  member  of  their
    family.  This direction applies both  to  the  Respondent  and  to  the
    Appellant.  Failure  to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Introduction

 3. The appellant appeals with permission the decision  of  the  First-Tier
    Tribunal, Judge Fowell, promulgated 10th of February 2017, in which  he
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on  international  protection  grounds
    finding that she was not Eritrean as claimed, but Ethiopian. The  judge
    concluded there was no evidence that the appellant would be at risk  on
    grounds of her Pentecostal Christianity on return  to  Ethiopia.  Judge
    Fowell then went on to allow the appeal  on  Article  8  ECHR  grounds,
    finding that in the  context  of  the  appellant's  vulnerability,  and
    against the background of historical abuse, and the length of time that
    she had been out of Ethiopia, the poor position of women  in  Ethiopian
    and the week  state  protection,  lacking  any  education  and  without
    accommodation or resources there would be very significant obstacles to
    the appellant reintegrating there. He thought her  circumstances  would
    be close although not reaching the article 3  threshold.  He  found  it
    compelling that her mental vulnerability arose at least  in  part  from
    the  treatment  experienced  in   the   United   Kingdom.    In   those
    circumstances,  the  judge  found  that  the  interference   with   the
    appellant's private life unnecessary on public policy grounds.

 4. The appellant sought to appeal the decision on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had placed undue weight on the  appellant's  inability  to  speak
    Tigrynian "fluently" given that nationality is not defined by language,
    and failed to give adequate weight to the  positive  matters  that  the
    judge had found in the appellant's favour.

 5. So far as the approach to the embassy was concerned the  grounds  point
    out that the letter had been written by the appellant solicitors not by
    her and asserted that it was wrong for the judge not to give weight  to
    the appellant's confidence and desire to  assist  in  establishing  her
    nationality by instructing her solicitors to approach the embassy.

 6. Judge Fowell should have given greater weight to the  positive  answers
    given about the country because in the light of the  appellant's  post-
    traumatic stress disorder her ability to "learn" such  information  was
    impaired.

 7. Permission was granted in the Upper Tribunal on the basis  that  whilst
    the  written  grounds  did  not  clearly  establish  argueability   the
    challenge to  the  judge's  conclusion  on  nationality  required  full
    exploration in the context of an oral hearing.

The hearing at the Upper Tribunal

 8. There was no application to adduce further evidence.

 9. Ms Caseley made a written application to amend the  grounds  to  assert
    that the judge should have taken into account the country guidance case
    of ST square brackets 2011] UKUT 00252 (IAC) which concluded that those
    who were deported during the  (border  war)  would  face  a  number  of
    difficulties   and   either   obtaining   or   re-acquiring   Ethiopian
    nationality.

10. Mr Kotas objected to that amendment on the basis that it was  late  and
    represented an entirely new argument which was not  before  the  First-
    tier Tribunal.

11. I took the view that as  it  was  a  country  guidance  case  going  to
    disputed Eritrean nationality I would hear  the  argument.  Ms  Paisley
    took me to  paragraph  69.  In  summary,  her  argument  was  that  the
    difficulties in obtaining documentation from the  Ethiopian  government
    meant that no adverse conclusion should  follow  from  the  appellant's
    inability to do so. The appellant had no Ethiopian documents. She  left
    Ethiopia when she was 7.

12. Ms Caseley argue that it  was  irrational  of  judge  Fowell  to  place
    reliance on the question of language, it was not unrealistic  that  she
    would not speak Tigrinya given that she left when she was  very  young,
    she had none Amharic speaking made, and her parents were  working.  The
    judge's consideration that by the age of 5 she  could  be  expected  to
    have learnt any significant amount of Tigrinya  was  speculative,  only
    open to him on the basis of expert evidence. He should have taken  into
    account that as a result of her life history, and traumatic events, she
    might have lost her language ability. The judge has  failed  to  accord
    the appellant the benefit of the doubt and did not  take  into  account
    the medical report when considering whether or not the appellant  would
    have been in the  position  to  learn  information  about  Eritrea  the
    purposes of the claim.

13. Mr Kotas addressed me. He relied on the rule 24 response. The judge had
    dealt with the case fairly and reached conclusions open on the evidence
    and the submissions were but  a disagreement.

Discussion

14. The judge begins by correct self direction as to the standard of  proof
    and the position of the appellant as a vulnerable witness based on  age
    and the diagnosis of post-traumatic stress disorder. He records that he
    limited questions to the matters pertinent to the nationality dispute.

15. The judge considered a medical report from Dr Battersby in some detail.
    The report identified that the appellant  is  diagnosed  with  moderate
    complex PTSD, unrelated to any persecution from which  she  is  seeking
    protection.  The  judge  noted  that  it  was  accepted  that  she  had
    experienced domestic slavery in the United Kingdom, the judge found the
    appellant's account of her mother dying at the age of 9, and  the  very
    difficult experiences she had endured since, as set out in the  medical
    report, explained her disjointed account. The judge  concluded  to  the
    lower standard that the appellant found herself as an orphan  in  Sudan
    at a very young age.

16. The judge took a  holistic  view  of  the  evidence.  He  accepted  the
    appellant's explanation in respect of some  of  the  disputed  matters,
    such as the claim that she had told the arresting officers that she was
    Ethiopian, gave a false name and date of birth, contradictions  in  the
    names of her parents, a reference to "Combi Sudan", and  the  provision
    of inconsistent dates of 2002 with 2012  in  respect  of  her  father's
    death. of recording error, including mixing up her claim  with  another
    asylum seeker, finding a recording error, allowing that her  claim  may
    have been mixed up with another asylum  seeker's.   The  judge  saw  no
    reason to reject the appellant's claimed age, and rejected the  "Merton
    compliant" report relied upon by the respondent, finding her to be born
    in 1997, as she claimed, rather than in 1995 as she had been assessed.

17. The judge noted that the appellant had given a false name  in  Hungary,
    where she had claimed asylum, and that  she  had  travelled  through  a
    number of safe countries before arriving in the United Kingdom, however
    he noted that if her  account  were  true  she  was  not  fleeing  from
    immediate persecution so that it would be understandable that she would
    not necessarily stop in the 1st safe country that she came to.

18. The appellant  had  demonstrated  some  knowledge  of  Eritrea  and  in
    particular of Assab. The respondent argued that given that she had  had
    9 months prior to her interview she had the opportunity of learning the
    information which she had provided, none of which was exceptional.  The
    judge noted that this was the high point of the evidence of  her  being
    Eritrean, but found the inability to speak Tigrinya and the absence  of
    any proper effort to obtain confirmation of  her  lack  of  citizenship
    qualification from the Ethiopian Embassy, more significant.

19. In respect of language the judge noted  the  appellant  did  not  speak
    Tigrinya, but spoke Amharic. The judge  noted  that,  contrary  to  the
    interviews, the appellant was now  saying  that  she  could  understand
    Tigrinya, just not speak it. The judge noted that  there  had  been  no
    such claim in her earlier interviews, and it had not been tested and no
    language  evidence  presented.  The  judge  concluded  that  it   could
    reasonably be expected that she would have acquired the language of her
    parents,  both  Tigrinya  speakers.  The  judge  did  not  accept   her
    explanation she did not use Tigrinya because her  mother  worked  as  a
    chef and employed a maid, and so had little interaction with  her.  The
    judge found the explanation undermined by the fact that  the  appellant
    was an only child. The judge also found her account of living for 3  or
    4 years in Eritrea, where Tigrinya is widely spoken, undermining of the
    inability  to  speak  Tigrinya.  The  judge  rejected  the  appellant's
    explanation that she did not use Tigrinya on  deportation  to  Ethiopia
    because she had lived in Assab along  with  many  other  deportees  who
    continued to use Amharic. The judge found that it was plausible  enough
    that in the circumstances she described would  speak  Amharic  but  not
    that she would not have acquired a command of Tigrinya.

20. The judge considered the evidence of the appellant's efforts to act  in
    good  faith  and  take  all  reasonable  practical  steps  to   acquire
    documentation to enable her to return to Ethiopia,  in  line  with  the
    expectations set out in the case of MA (Ethiopia) v  SSHD  (2009)  EWCA
    civ 289. He found that  the  appellant,  who  had  not  approached  the
    embassy in person but whose solicitors had written about 2 weeks before
    the hearing, had not made a  proper  effort,  through  the  appropriate
    authority, to get to the bottom of her nationality.

21. The judge reminded himself of the correct  answers  the  appellant  had
    given in her asylum interview about Eritrea before concluding that  the
    appellant had failed to establish that there was any real likelihood of
    her being from Eritrea, recording that he had borne in mind  the  lower
    standard, and that he had put to one side many of the  criticisms  made
    of her account.

22. I deal briefly with the ST point. Paragraph 69 to which I was taken  is
    under the heading: "The approach to refugee claims based on deprivation
    of nationality". The case concerned an allegation  that  the  Ethiopian
    authorities deprived Ethiopian nationals who they  perceived  as  being
    ethnic Eritreans and who remained in Ethiopia during the war, of  their
    nationality. I find it adds nothing to  the  appellant's  case  because
    although concerning the treatment of the Ethiopian government of ethnic
    Eritreans, the factual matrix is not similar to the position here.  Nor
    does  the  case  give  succour  to  an  argument  that  the   Ethiopian
    authorities did not respond to the  solicitor's  letter  because  of  a
    history of  persecution.  The  point,  as  identified  by  reading  the
    decision of Judge Fowell,  is  that  her  efforts  were  too  scant  to
    constitute a proper attempt. The letter only sent 2  weeks  before  the
    hearing, or the instructions to send the letter, was  the  entirety  of
    the evidence of the appellant's efforts. In  those  circumstances,  the
    response of the Ethiopian government is not the issue.

23. Ms Caseley was also critical of Judge Fowell  on  the  basis  that  the
    respondent's point that the appellant  could  have  learnt  information
    about Eritrea was perverse because the medical evidence showed that she
    would not be able to learn in that way.

24. The judge deals with the medical evidence in detail between  [22]-[27],
    and notes medical advice  that  the  appellant  suffers  post-traumatic
    stress disorder and that her evidence might be affected by: "Avoidance,
    patchy  memory  and  impaired  concentration  may  lead   to   apparent
    inconsistencies, omissions or lack of detail." In the  event  from  the
    details consideration of her evidence set out in the judge's  decision,
    and the submissions recorded, it does not appear that such difficulties
    obtained.

25. The medical evidence does not address the point about learning  country
    information.  The argument put forward now was available on the day but
    it was not made. It exceeds the medical evidence. Dr Battersby had  the
    refusal letter in which the point that the appellant could have  learnt
    such information was made. If the point was so obviously clear,  as  Ms
    Caseley submits, that it was perverse for anyone  to  contemplate,  one
    could have expected it  to  have  been  covered.  The  submission  also
    overlooks that the judge plainly recognised the  positive  implications
    of the appellant giving correct answers. He identifies it as  expressly
    positive evidence in the credibility assessment because he describes it
    as such at [71].

26. I find no merit in Ms Caseley's submission that  the  judge  failed  to
    give adequate  positive  weight  to  the  other  matters  that  he  had
    concluded in her favour. Given the detail of his decision in respect of
    all matters it cannot be said that he did not hold the entirety in  his
    mind before making his final assessments. As I have set  out  above  he
    reminds  himself  of  that  before  he  reaches  the  overall   adverse
    conclusion. The reality is that it was open to him find other  evidence
    outweighed the positive.

27. Turning to the ground that too much reliance is placed on the  question
    of language, I also find no merit here. There is  nothing  perverse  in
    the judge placing reliance on the question of language in  an  Eritrean
    case. He has not strayed into  the  area  of  expert  evidence,  or  of
    speculation. Contrary to  the  grounds,  the  judge  does  not  require
    "fluency". The grounds fail to read the decision as a whole. The  judge
    found, as he was entitled to conclude that living with 2 parents,  both
    native Tigrinya speakers, until the age of 5, and thereafter  with  one
    until the age  of  9,  and  having  spent  3  or  4  years  in  Eritrea
    subsequently, a facility in the language would have developed.  AS  per
    the country information, it is not the  appellant's  ability  to  speak
    Amharic which undermines her claim but rather,  the  judge  finds,  the
    inability to speak Tigrinya, in the context of the background claimed.

28. The  judge  has  provided  a  very  carefully  considered  and  written
    determination. He plainly had the medical  evidence  uppermost  in  his
    mind. In respect of each dispute he carefully weighed  the  points  for
    the appellant, identifying evidence which supports her account. This is
    not a judge who has gone all one way, he has accepted  the  appellant's
    explanation on several matters.

29. As the grant of permission notes, this was a judge who was faced with a
    difficult task in making a finding of fact as to nationality  on  scant
    evidence. He was bound to make what he could of that evidence and reach
    a conclusion. Having had the opportunity of  oral  elaboration  of  the
    grounds  I  have  concluded  the  judge  was  entitled  to  reach   his
    conclusion.

Decision

30. The decision of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the  appeal  on
    international protection grounds, but allowing the appeal on article  8
    ECHR grounds, reveals no material error of law and stands.





Signed                          Date 27 October 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Davidge
