
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07049/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow Upper Tribunal      |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 30 May 2019                       |On 10 June 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                   BAO [L]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Counsel, instructed by Maguire
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of China whose appeal was dismissed by First-
    Tier Tribunal Judge Clough in a decision  promulgated  on  13  December
    2018.  Grounds of application were lodged  and  ultimately  granted  by
    Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley in a decision dated 20 March 2019.  Thus,
    the matter came before me on the above date.

 2. Mr Winter relied on his grounds.  The Judge had failed to  provide  any
    reasons as to why there was  said  to  be  a  discrepancy  between  the
    appellant's description of the injuries he said  he  sustained  between
    the asylum interview and his statement; as a result the  appellant  was
    prejudiced.

 3. Secondly, the Judge had failed to provide any reasons for  the  adverse
    credibility findings at paragraphs 12 and 13.  Furthermore,  the  Judge
    erred in law at paragraph 14 when relying on the advanced  surveillance
    system on Chinese railways as indicating that it was not credible  that
    he would have been able to leave the country as he had claimed.   There
    was no evidential basis to arrive at such a finding.

 4. I was asked to set the decision aside and to remit the  appeal  to  the
    First-Tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing.

 5. For the Home Office  Mr  Govan  accepted  there  was  a  difficulty  in
    paragraph 11 when the Judge said that the  appellant's  description  of
    his mistreatment by the police at the checkpoint differed from that set
    out in his asylum interview but the  Judge  had  taken  this  from  the
    refusal letter.  Furthermore, what the Judge had written  in  paragraph
    14 was wrong.  The Judge had found that he had left China by boarding a
    train from Beijing to Moscow and did not experience any  problems  from
    the authorities.  The Judge said, "this  is  not  credible"  given  the
    advanced surveillance system on Chinese railways but this  finding  was
    wrong because there was not  such  a  system  in  place  at  the  time.
    Notwithstanding the difficulties in the decision I was asked to dismiss
    the appeal.

 6. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 7. Judge Clough rejected the core of the appellant's  account  because  of
    discrepancies in his claim concerning his arrest.  The Judge says  that
    the appellant's description of his mistreatment by the  police  at  the
    checkpoint in his witness statement differs from that set  out  in  the
    asylum interview.  The Judge said the details of his injuries differed.

 8. At no point does the Judge set out what the discrepancies were  and  in
    what way the injuries are said to have differed.  The Judge  was  bound
    to give  clear  and  adequate  reasons  for  finding  that  there  were
    discrepancies and the Judge has manifestly failed to do that.   Not  to
    give adequate reasons on an issue of materiality is an  error  in  law.
    For the sake of completeness, having looked at  the  witness  statement
    and the asylum interview, it is not easy to  see  that  the  Judge  was
    correct in her assertion that there were discrepancies.

 9. At paragraph 12 the Judge says it was not credible that  the  appellant
    would have been charged with offences involving theft or  housebreaking
    but gives no reasons for that finding.  Furthermore,  at  paragraph  13
    the Judge found that it was not credible the appellant's  mother  would
    have been able to  obtain  the  appellant's  release  from  custody  on
    medical grounds by paying 3,000 Yuan but no reasons are given for  that
    finding either.  It was accepted by Mr Govan that the Judge's reasoning
    in paragraph 14 on the advanced surveillance system on Chinese railways
    is also wrong.

10. While the  Judge  makes  further  findings  regarding  the  appellant's
    credibility (primarily based on the proposition that  he  knew  nothing
    about claiming asylum) the Judge  has  rejected  the  appellant's  core
    account without giving adequate or satisfactory reasons.   Plainly  the
    decision is unsafe and the appeal will have to be heard again.

11. The decision of the First-Tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-Tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent of  the  judicial  fact  finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-Tier Tribunal.

Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

13. I set aside the decision.

14. I remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.


Signed   JG Macdonald  Date  4th June 2019

J G Macdonald
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge

