

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/07631/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                         | Decision & Reasons promulgated  |
|On 28 July 2017                           | On 29 August 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                    MMSA

                         (Anonymity DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms S Khan  (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mr M Diwnycz     (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal from  a  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Row hereinafter "the Judge") whereupon he
dismissed the claimant's appeal against the Secretary  of  State's  decision
of 13 July 2016 refusing international protection.

2.    This decision is an unusually brief one because there  was,  in  fact,
no dispute between the representatives before me as to  what  I  should  do.
Before coming to that, though, I shall set out  something  of  the  relevant
background.

3.    The claimant is a national of Libya.   His  wife  and  four  children,
also nationals of Libya, have been treated as dependents upon his claim  for
international protection which he made on 13 January 2016.

4.    The basis of the claim was that the claimant, if he were  to  have  to
return to Libya, would be at risk of persecution or serious harm due to  his
history as a supporter of the previous Gaddafi regime.   Additionally,  even
if his actual support was not known, it was argued he would be perceived  as
a supporter of that regime.  It was also contended that he  could  not  take
advantage of an internal flight alternative in Tripoli.  It is  relevant  to
note that he is from Sirte in  Libya.   He  relied  upon  an  expert  report
prepared by Dr A George which offered support for various  aspects  of  his
account.

5.    The claimant had appealed to the First-tier Tribunal  concerning  the
rejection  of  his  claim.   His  appeal  was  heard  on  8 December 2016.
The Judge decided that low level supporters of the Gaddafi regime were not,
in general terms, at risk.   The Judge  also  decided  that  relocation  to
Tripoli would be available and would not be unduly harsh.   The Judge  also
rejected arguments based upon Article 8 of the European Convention on Human
Rights (ECHR).

6.    When permission was  sought  four  separate  grounds  of  appeal  were
relied upon.  It was contended that  the Judge  had  erred  in  failing  to
adequately consider the expert report  of  Dr. George;  had  erred  in  his
consideration of the prospects  of  relocation  to  Tripoli;  had  erred  in
assessing the safety of the claimant and his family's travel to  Libya;  and
with respect to Article 8 had applied an incorrect  legal  test  under  the
Immigration Rules (specifically paragraph 276ADE)  and  had  conducted  an
incomplete assessment as to what would be  in  the  best  interests  of  the
claimant's dependent children.

7.    Mr Diwnycz (a senior and experienced Home Office Presenting  Officer)
did not seek to oppose the grounds of appeal before me.  Accordingly, it  is
not necessary for me to say very much about  them  save  that  I  do  accept
the Judge erred in failing to properly and fully consider  the  content  of
the report  of  Dr. George  and  in  failing  to  adequately  consider  the
prevailing difficulties from a humanitarian perspective in Tripoli prior  to
deciding relocation would not be unduly harsh.

8.    Ms Khan urged me, my having indicated I would set aside  the Judge's
decision, to go on to remake the decision in  the  claimant's  favour  given
current Country Guidance concerning Libya.  Mr Diwnycz said that he was in
agreement with that  course  of  action.   So,  again,  there  was  not  any
disagreement between the parties.

9.     In  the  circumstances,  and  noting  Mr Diwnycz's  stance,  it  is
appropriate for me to re-make the decision in  the  claimant's  favour  with
respect to his claim for international protection and I do so.

10.   In consequence of the above, and  in  remaking  the  decision  in  the
Upper Tribunal, I allow the appeal of the claimant against the Secretary of
State's decision of 13 July 2016.  I do so on asylum grounds  and  on  the
basis of actual and perceived political opinion.

11.   I have continued an anonymity direction which was made by  the  First-
tier Tribunal.  Nothing was said before me regarding anonymity but  I  have
concluded it would be appropriate, in these circumstances  to  continue  the
status quo.


Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error  of
law and is set aside.
I re-make the decision and  in  so  doing  I  allow  the  claimant's  appeal
against the Secretary of State's decision of 13 July 2016.
I do so, on asylum grounds and, on the basis of the same facts and the  same
considerations, on human rights grounds under Article 3 of the ECHR.



Signed:                      Date:  29 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies to both the claimant and the Secretary of State.  Failure to  comply
could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed:                      Date:  29 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee award is made.



Signed:                      Date:  29 August 2017

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

