
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07246/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 November 2017                          |On 11 December 2017           |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON

                                   Between

                               KT (Sri Lanka)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani,
     Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal dismissing the appellant's protection claim, but allowing  her
    human rights claim under Article 8 ECHR.   The  appellant  opposes  the
    Secretary of State's appeal, and cross-appeals from the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal dismissing her  protection  claim.  The  First-tier
    Tribunal made an  anonymity  direction,  and  I  consider  that  it  is
    appropriate that the appellant continues to enjoy anonymity  for  these
    proceedings in the Upper Tribunal.

Relevant Background

 2. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka, whose date of birth  is  [  ]
    1992.  She was granted entry clearance as a student, on  a  visa  which
    was valid from 8 October 2013 until 10 November 2015.  She  arrived  in
    the United Kingdom on 13 October 2013, and returned to Sri Lanka on  21
    June 2014.  She came back to the UK a month  later,  on  21  July  2014
    using her own national passport, which was endorsed  with  her  student
    visa.  On 8 November 20134, she claimed asylum.

 3. Her claim was that, on 9 July 2014, she had visited St Mary's Church in
    Jaffna, where she  had  taken  photographs  of  the  church  using  her
    Smartphone.  In front of the church there was an Army camp called  "512
    Camp".  While she  was  taking  photographs,  soldiers  from  the  camp
    accosted her.  They accused her of taking photographs of the  camp  and
    they took her phone off her.  They accused her of  being  LTTE  and  of
    spying on them.  She was taken inside the camp, where she was  detained
    for  7  days  and  interrogated.   She  was  beaten  and  abused.   Her
    fingerprints were taken, and there came a point when she was forced  to
    sign a white sheet of paper.  She was blindfolded, and taken out of the
    room and put into a vehicle.  She was pushed out of  the  vehicle  near
    her home. She walked home and saw her parents, who  introduced  her  to
    two agents who facilitated her escape.  It turned out that  her  father
    had paid money to the agents with which they had bribed the Army so  as
    to procure her unofficial release.

 4. On 29 June 2016, the Secretary of State gave her reasons  for  refusing
    to recognise the appellant as a refugee.  She had said that the  church
    was next to the army camp  and  it  was  on  Station  Road.   Objective
    evidence had been obtained which was contradictory to her claims.   The
    objective evidence showed that St Mary's Church was on  Katheral  Road.
    The objective evidence had confirmed that there was a camp known as 512
    in Jaffna, but no objective evidence could be sourced  to  substantiate
    her claim that this camp was located near St Mary's Church.

 5. It was noted that, during her screening interview, she was asked if she
    had ever been detained as  a  suspected  terrorist  or  any  combatant,
    whether charged or not.  She said 'no' to this.   This  was  considered
    inconsistent with her claim that she was held as a  suspected  spy  for
    the LTTE.

 6. The remainder of her account was internally consistent, but not all the
    criteria of 339L were met, and hence the benefit of the doubt would not
    be afforded her.  Among other things,  she  was  asked  at  her  asylum
    interview to provide evidence  in  relation  to  her  claim,  yet  this
    evidence had yet to be submitted and no  satisfactory  explanation  had
    been received regarding the absence of  medical  evidence.   Also,  her
    claim that St Mary's Church was next to 512 Camp  ran  counter  to  the
    available specific and general information, as previously highlighted.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

 7. The appellant's appeal came before Judge Obhi sitting at Sheldon  Court
    in  Birmingham  on  7  February  2017.   Both  parties   were   legally
    represented.  The Judge received oral evidence from the  appellant  and
    from "J", who the Judge described as the appellant's boyfriend.  J  was
    also a Sri Lankan national, and he had been recognised as a refugee.

 8. In her substantive asylum interview, the appellant had  said  that  the
    soldiers had found photographs of her attending Memorial Day in the  UK
    in May 2014 with her boyfriend.  In  cross-examination,  Ms  Owen,  the
    Presenting Officer, asked the appellant  if  she  had  any  photographs
    taken by her boyfriend or by friends of the Memorial Day event that she
    had attended with her boyfriend in 2014, "and the photographs of  which
    were on her  phone  showing  her  boyfriend  present".   The  appellant
    replied that she did not have any such photographs.

 9. J said that he had been granted asylum on the basis that he was part of
    the Tamil diaspora working against the Sri Lankan Government.  He  said
    that he was at the Memorial Day event in May 2014, but he did not  take
    any photographs.  They were all on the appellant's phone,  as  she  had
    her phone with her.

10. At paragraph [25] of her subsequent decision, the Judge said  that  she
    considered carefully the account that the  appellant  had  given.   She
    claimed that there were about 100 people in attendance  at  the  church
    festival, and she was taking photographs with her camera of the church.
     This was a church she visited infrequently.  It  was  not  her  normal
    church.  The respondent  carried  out  a  search  on  Google  Maps  and
    struggled to find it.  She had been told by  Ms  Matthews  that  Google
    Maps were unreliable and they only listed businesses and not places  of
    religious worship or other things: "I am not sure that is correct.  The
    appellant has produced no evidence to show that to be the case. Nor had
    she produced any other evidence of the existence of the Church  or  the
    proximity of the army camp to the church.  In fact, it is quite easy to
    search for army camps on Google Maps and then to search for churches in
    the vicinity, and this would provide very  reliable  information  about
    such places.   The  fact  that  the  appellant  has  not  rebutted  the
    assertion of the respondent with her own reliable  evidence  undermines
    her claim."

11. The Judge held that it was implausible that she would be  arrested  and
    no one would check what she had actually taken  photographs  of  before
    she was detained and tortured.  The soldiers who arrested her would not
    have found any photographs of the camp on  the  phone.   The  appellant
    further claimed that she attended a celebration of  Memorial  Day  with
    her boyfriend, and that photographs of that  event  were  also  on  her
    phone.  She stated that, as a result, there was another reason for  the
    authorities to claim that she was a threat to them and to view her with
    suspicion:  "However no one else has taken any photos  of  that  event.
    It seems remarkable that no photos were taken of her by  her  boyfriend
    or by anyone else, so there is no evidence of the fact  that  she  even
    attended that event."

12. At paragraphs [26]-[29], the Judge  addressed  the  Medical  Foundation
    report by Dr Mary Beyer addressing both  scarring  on  the  appellant's
    body and also her psychological presentation.

13. At paragraph [27], she noted that Dr Beyer  did  not  have  a  specific
    psychiatric qualification.  At paragraph [28], she said that there were
    difficulties with her report.  The first was that she had  not  carried
    out an assessment which appeared to be  consistent  with  the  Istanbul
    Protocol and that she did not consider other  probable  causes  of  the
    injuries that she had observed.  She attributed the  self-harm  to  the
    appellant's claimed experiences but she had not considered that, in the
    light of her ability to self-harm, the other injuries could possibly be
    self-inflicted, or inflicted by proxy.

14. Further, Dr Berry appeared to accept without any question  the  account
    given to her by the appellant.  She had not set out the  likelihood  of
    the injuries being inflicted in the way claimed, and gave  an  outright
    opinion accepting  that  they  were  attributable  to  the  explanation
    provided.  Of greater concern was the speculation in relation to L10  -
    the appellant had not provided an explanation for this injury,  but  Dr
    Beyer had provided a likely cause.

15. Secondly, in relation  to  the  psychological  trauma  and  psychiatric
    presentation, Dr Beyer was not (in her respectful opinion) qualified to
    provide an opinion in relation to Post Traumatic Stress Disorder.

16. At paragraph [29], the Judge said that the medical report was  of  less
    value than the reports she had seen in other cases, and did not  assist
    her particularly.  In the absence of a more  reliable  medical  report,
    looking at the account overall,  she  had  to  find  that  it  was  not
    reasonably likely that  the  appellant  had  accurately  described  her
    experiences.  If she had been  the  victim  of  an  assault,  then  the
    circumstances she had described were not the cause of it.  She was  not
    satisfied that she was arrested for taking photographs of a church next
    to an army camp; or that she was seen as a threat to the  single  state
    because of the discovery of photographs of her boyfriend on her phone.

17. For the reasons given in paragraphs [30]-[32], the Judge held that  the
    appellant did not face a future  risk  on  return  to  Sri  Lanka,  and
    accordingly she was not satisfied  that  the  appellant  qualified  for
    recognition as a refugee.

18. At paragraphs [34] and [35], the Judge turned to address an alternative
    claim under Article 8 ECHR.  She found that  the  appellant  was  in  a
    relationship with J, who had been granted refugee  status  until  2022.
    She was satisfied that there  were  insurmountable  obstacles  to  them
    continuing their relationship in Sri Lanka, due to his refugee  status.
    Although the appellant did not meet the requirements of Appendix FM and
    Rule 276ADE, she was satisfied that this was a case  in  which  "it  is
    possible" that  the  appellant  would  succeed  if  her  claim  was  to
    considered outside the Rules, in accordance with the Razgar test.

19. The Judge went on to apply the Razgar test in paragraph [35].  She  was
    satisfied that the appellant had family life with her boyfriend in  the
    UK, and private life in respect of her studies.  If she was required to
    leave the UK, there would be a significant interference with her family
    life.  The Judge was satisfied that, on this occasion, the  appellant's
    private rights superseded the general public  interest.   Although  she
    did not find her asylum claim to be credible, "I do think that applying
    for permission to return as the dependant or partner of a  refugee  may
    pose some difficulty for her."  Thus, she suggested that  granting  the
    appellant discretionary leave  in  these  circumstances  would  be  the
    appropriate course, and hence she was allowing the appeal under Article
    8 ECHR, while refusing the appeal in respect of the Refugee Convention,
    humanitarian protection and Article 3 ECHR.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal on the Article 8 Finding

20. On 12  July  2017,  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Cruthers  granted  the
    Secretary of State permission to appeal against the decision  of  Judge
    Obhi to allow the appellant's appeal  under  Article  8  EHCR  for  the
    following reasons:

         In my  assessment,  the  grounds  on  which  the  respondent  seeks
         permission to appeal are arguable.   Specifically,  I  consider  it
         arguable that the Judge may not have  sufficiently  considered  the
         relevant requirements of the Immigration Rules or part  5A  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration &  Asylum  Act  2002  (or  the  principles
         explained in Chen (Appendix FM - Chikwamba - temporary separation -
         proportionality) IJR [2015] UKUT  00189  (IAC),  circulated  on  20
         April 2015 and/or the Supreme  Court's  judgment  in  MM  (Lebanon)
         before proceeding to allow this appeal on an Article 8  basis.   It
         has to be worth noting that, throughout  the  relationship  between
         the appellant and J, it has been described  as  a  relationship  of
         boyfriend/girlfriend.

The Reasons for the Grant of Permission to Appeal on  the  Protection  Claim
Findings

21. On 12 September 2017, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara granted the appellant
    permission to appeal against the dismissal of her  appeal  against  the
    refusal of her protection claim and her claim under Article  3,  as  it
    was arguable that the Judge's credibility findings  and  "view  of  the
    medical evidence" were unsafe, for the reasons set out in paragraphs 3-
    6 and 11-12 of the grounds.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

22. At the error of law hearing, Mr Bandegani mounted a robust  defence  of
    the Judge's decision on the Article 8 claim.  The Judge had misdirected
    herself at paragraph [3] of the decision, in stating that the appellant
    had only been living with J for six months.  In  fact,  they  had  been
    cohabiting for three years.  Nonetheless, her decision on the Article 8
    claim was fully sustainable on the facts which she had found.   It  was
    irrelevant that the Judge had not made express reference to the  public
    interest considerations arising under section 117B of the 2002 Act.

23. With respect to the cross-appeal on the protection claim, Mr  Bandegani
    mounted an equally robust assault on the  Judge's  adverse  credibility
    findings in paragraph [25] of her decision.   He  submitted  that  they
    displayed a totally irrational approach to the  appellant's  narrative,
    and to the surrounding evidence.

24. With regard  to  the  Judge'  approach  to  the  medical  evidence,  Mr
    Bandegani withdrew the ground of appeal contained in paragraphs  12-15.
    This was that the Judge had artificially separated the medical evidence
    from the rest of the  evidence,  and  had  reached  conclusions  as  to
    credibility without reference to that medical evidence, contrary to the
    guidance given by the Court of Appeal in Mibanga -v- SSHD  [2005]  EWCA
    Civ 367.

25. However, he developed the criticism contained in  paragraph  6  of  the
    grounds,  which  was  that  the  Judge  had  misdirected   herself   in
    criticising the doctor for not considering the possibility of self-harm
    by proxy.  Dr Bandegani supported this criticism by  reference  to  the
    Court of Appeal decision in KV (Sri Lanka) -v-  SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
    119.

26. Mr Bandegani further submitted that the Judge's finding that  Dr  Beyer
    was not qualified to diagnose PTSD was irrational, in the light of  the
    contents of the Home Office Asylum Policy Instruction on  Medico  Legal
    reports from the Helen Bamber Foundation  and  the  Medical  Foundation
    Medico Legal Report Service, version 4.1, published in July 2015.

27. On behalf of the Secretary of State,  Ms  Fijiwala  submitted  that  no
    evidence had been provided to rebut the contentions put forward in  the
    refusal letter with regard to the absence of objective evidence to show
    that there was a church next to 512 Camp, and so  the  Judge's  adverse
    credibility findings were reasonably open to her on the  evidence,  for
    the reasons which she gave.  With respect to the Judge's  treatment  of
    the medical evidence, she submitted that the Judge had  not  discounted
    it.  She had accepted Dr Beyer's diagnosis of PTSD.  The Judge had  not
    said in paragraph [29] that she was placing no weight on the report  of
    Dr Beyer.

Discussion

28. Two crucial elements in the appellant's account of past persecution are
    firstly that she had been taking photographs of a church in such  close
    proximity to Army Camp 512 that soldiers at the camp suspected that she
    was taking photographs of the camp,  not  the  church;  and,  secondly,
    having inspected her  Smartphone,  the  soldiers  found  stored  on  it
    photographs of J at a Memorial Day event which he had recently attended
    with the appellant.

29. The Judge was not bound to take Ms Matthews' word for  it  that  Google
    maps were unreliable, and did not list  places  of  religious  worship.
    Moreover, in broad terms it was open to the Judge to attach significant
    weight to the fact that the appellant had not brought forward objective
    or independent evidence from any source to show that there was a church
    by the name of St Mary's (or indeed by any other  name)  next  to  Camp
    512, in circumstances where the respondent had been able to  find  Camp
    512, but had not been able to find a church by the name  of  St  Mary's
    next to it.

30. I also consider that it is open to the Judge to attach  adverse  weight
    to a point highlighted by  Ms  Owen  for  the  Home  Office  in  cross-
    examination, which  was  that  there  was  no  supporting  photographic
    evidence to show that the appellant had attended the Memorial Day event
    at which she had claimed to have photographed her boyfriend, so  as  to
    have incriminating photographs stored on her phone which could be  seen
    by the soldiers at the camp.

31. On the other hand, the Judge's declaration in the middle  of  paragraph
    [25] that "it is quite easy to search for army camps on Google Maps and
    then to search for churches in  the  vicinity"  is  vulnerable  to  the
    criticism that the declaration is not supported by any reasoning or  by
    any specific evidence  on  the  point  which  is  admissible.   If  the
    assertion is based on research on Google Maps conducted by  the  Judge,
    then such research would have been improper.  Assuming that  the  Judge
    did not carry out her  own  research,  then  on  the  face  of  it  the
    assertion is based on speculation. The respondent did not claim to have
    located Camp 512 using Google Maps.

32. With regard to the medical evidence, the  Judge  rightly  gave  anxious
    scrutiny to the report of Dr Beyer.  In  broad  terms,  the  degree  of
    weight which she chose to give to the report was a matter  of  judicial
    discretion, and she was not bound to give the report decisive weight on
    the question of the appellant's overall credibility.

33. However, I  am  persuaded  that  the  Judge  materially  erred  in  her
    assessment of the  expert  evidence  in  two  respects.   Firstly,  her
    criticism of Dr Beyer for  not  following  the  Istanbul  protocol  was
    unfair, as it was to a significant extent based on  the  false  premise
    that Dr Beyer should have  considered  in  respect  of  each  scar  the
    possibility of the scar being inflicted by proxy ("SIBP").  Giving  the
    leading judgment of the Court in KV, Sales LJ said  at  paragraph  [92]
    that if an applicant for asylum has scarring and maintains that it is a
    result of torture, it should  appear  from  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision whether she accepts their account or not.   If  she  does  not
    accept it, she should explain why she rejects it or is  unpersuaded  by
    it, including by saying (if this is her reason) that she considers that
    the injuries could have been self-inflicted or the result of SIBP.  The
    question of self-infliction or SIBP will then appear  to  be  an  issue
    between the appellant and  the  Secretary  of  State,  and  the  expert
    witness will know that there is something about which they should  give
    any relevant evidence which they properly can, within their  expertise.
    Sales LJ continued in paragraph 93:

         Self-infliction of wounds, or wounding by  SIBP,  is  generally  so
         unlikely that the Secretary of State should raise it as  an  issue,
         if it is to be part of her reason to reject an account of torture.

34. There was  no  presenting  feature  in  this  case  that  raised  self-
    infliction by proxy as a more than fanciful possibility by  way  of  an
    explanation for the scarring on the appellant's  body  observed  by  Dr
    Beyer.  Thus, the Judge had no  legitimate  basis  for  attaching  less
    weight to her report because she had  not  specifically  addressed  the
    possibility of SIBP.

35. The appellant volunteered to Dr Beyer that some of the scars were self-
    inflicted by her in her  traumatised  state,  following  the  rape  and
    sexual abuse to which she had been subjected while she was in detention
    at Camp 512.  The Judge criticised Dr Beyer  for  failing  to  consider
    whether the other injuries could possibly be self-inflicted.

36. Mr Bandegani took me through the section of the report where  Dr  Beyer
    deals with the causation of the scars, and I do not consider  that  the
    Judge's criticism is sustainable.  For instance, with respect to L6 and
    L7, the Judge said that the character of the  lesions  makes  self-harm
    very unlikely.  With respect to L8 and L9, Dr Beyer said that the high-
    pigmented  marks  were   highly   consistent   with   the   appellant's
    attribution; that accidental  injuries  at  that  site  would  be  very
    unusual and self-harm most unlikely.  With respect  to  L10,  the  long
    oblique linear scar across the  back  of  the  upper  left  thigh,  the
    appellant asserted that it was inflicted during the episodes of  abuse.
    Although she could not give details of the  implement  used,  Dr  Beyer
    opined that the  injuries  were  typical  of  violent  sexual  assault,
    resulting from restraining positions.  Injuries  on  the  back  of  the
    upper thighs were very unusual as the result of  accidents  "and  would
    not be related to self-harm." In short, Dr Beyer considered whether the
    other scars were self-inflicted.

37. Secondly, the API produced by Mr Bandegani states at paragraph 3.2 that
    both  Foundations  (the  Helen  Bamber  Foundation  and   the   Medical
    Foundation) are accepted  by  the  Home  Office  as  having  recognised
    expertise in the assessment of physical, psychological, psychiatric and
    social  effects  of   torture.    Clinicians   and   other   healthcare
    professionals from the Foundations are objective and unbiased.  Reports
    prepared by the Foundations should be accepted as having been compelled
    by  qualified,  experienced   and   suitably-trained   clinicians   and
    healthcare professionals: "No report of its contents  should  be  given
    little weight on the grounds that the writer, whether a GP, consultant,
    other  clinician  or  healthcare  professional,  is  not   sufficiently
    qualified to write it.  In particular, in  relation  to  mental  health
    conditions, the report will be accepted  by  the  Home  Office  whether
    completed by a  GP,  clinical  psychologist,  consultant  psychiatrist,
    other healthcare professional or other expert with extensive experience
    in this field."

38. The Judge acted reasonably in not taking the API into  account,  as  it
    was not drawn to her attention. But since it is Home Office  policy  to
    accept that Dr Beyer has the requisite expertise to make a diagnosis of
    PTSD, the line taken by the Judge gave rise to procedural unfairness. I
    am unable to accept Ms Fijiwala's submission that the appellant was not
    prejudiced because the Judge nonetheless accepted Dr Beyer's  diagnosis
    of PTSD.  On the contrary,  the  Judge  held  that  Dr  Beyer  was  not
    competent to make a diagnosis of PTSD in  order  to  justify  her  non-
    acceptance of this diagnosis.

39. For the above reasons, I find that the appellant  has  shown  that  the
    decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing her appeal  against  the
    refusal of her protection claim is unsafe, and that it  should  be  set
    aside in its entirety.

40. I am also not persuaded that the decision of the Judge on the Article 8
    claim is sustainable, having regard to her primary findings of fact and
    her failure to have any regard to the  public  interest  considerations
    arising under section 117B of the 2002 Act.

41. On the facts found by the Judge, the relationship between the appellant
    and J did not have the necessary status  to  enable  the  appellant  to
    apply for leave to remain on family life grounds under Appendix FM  or,
    indeed, to enable the appellant to return to  Sri  Lanka  in  order  to
    apply for entry clearance as a family member of J.  On the facts  found
    by the Judge, J was neither a spouse, nor a fianc�e, nor a partner. For
    the finding that they had cohabited for six months meant that they  had
    not cohabited in a relationship akin to a marriage for a period of  two
    years.  Thus, the decision to allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds was
    inadequately reasoned, and the decision must be set aside and remade.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing  the  appellant's  appeal
against the refusal of her protection claim,  but  allowing  her  appeal  on
Article 8 grounds, contained errors of law such that the  decision  must  be
set aside in its  entirety  and  remade.   The  respective  appeals  of  the
appellant and the Secretary of State to the Upper Tribunal are allowed.

Directions for Disposal
The appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in  Birmingham
for a de novo hearing on all issues, with none of the findings  of  fact  of
the previous Tribunal being preserved, save for the uncontroversial  finding
that  there  are  insurmountable  obstacles  to  family  life  between   the
appellant and J being carried on in Sri Lanka, as J is a recognised  refugee
from Sri Lanka.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date  9 December 2017


Judge Monson

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge



