
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07918/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 10 December 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                              UT JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     P S
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                        DETERMINATION AND REASONS (P)

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, and a Sikh.  The  respondent
    does not dispute his nationality and religion.

 2. The respondent refused the appellant's claim  by  a  decision  dated  7
    August 2019, on the grounds that his account was not credible;  TG  and
    others (Afghan Sikhs persecuted) CG [2015] UKUT 595 did not  support  a
    risk to him as a Sikh in Afghanistan; state protection  was  available;
    and, alternatively, he did not have to return to Kunduz  or  Jalalabad,
    where he claimed to be at risk, and could reasonably relocate to Kabul,
    where a small minority of Sikhs remained.

 3. FtT Judge Steer, for similar reasons, dismissed the appellant's  appeal
    by a decision promulgated on 29 November 2019.

 4. Deputy UT Judge Hall heard the appellant's appeal to the UT on 18 March
    2020, and allowed it by a decision promulgated on 6  April  2020.   The
    adverse credibility findings of the FtT had not  been  challenged,  and
    were preserved.  The SSHD conceded  error  in  respect  of  failure  to
    consider whether the appellant could safely  return  to  Jalalabad,  or
    relocate to Kabul, and failure to consider the most  recent  background
    evidence, post-dating country guidance.  There  was  to  be  a  further
    hearing before the FtT to remake the decision, by  way  of  submissions
    only.

 5. The pandemic intervened.  Parties have since  agreed  to  the  decision
    being remade on the basis of written submissions.

 6. A transfer order has been made to enable another UT judge  to  complete
    the decision.

 7. The appellant's submission dated 10 June 2020 is on these lines:

      i) The situation has deteriorated significantly since  TG,  with  only
         some 550 Sikhs now left in Afghanistan.

     ii) TG showed sufficient protection at governmental level, but  not  at
         local police level.

    iii) TG held that  those  without  access  to  independent  income  were
         unlikely to be able to  relocate,  because  of  depleted  community
         support mechanisms.

     iv) The evidence from the European Asylum  Support  Office  (EASO)  now
         shows general risk due to indiscriminate violence in Nangarhar [the
         province  of  which  Jalalabad  is  the  capital].   Such  risk  is
         heightened for a Sikh.

      v) Based on evidence from Professor Magnus Marsden, the remaining Sikh
         community in Kabul offered scarce opportunity for employment.

     vi) The appellant would have no independent source of income or  direct
         family support in Kabul.

 8. The SSHD's submission dated 12 June 2020 is on these lines:

      i) On retained findings, the appellant, on return, would  have  access
         to a home, with his parents and a brother, and to  an  income.   He
         would be able to find employment.  The Taliban would have no motive
         to pursue him.

     ii)  There  is  no  risk  in  the  appellant's   home   in   Jalalabad.
         Indiscriminate violence there does not reach the  level  to  engage
         protection.

    iii) There is no general risk to Afghan Sikhs, on authority of TG.

     iv) The respondent's CPIN, May 2019, based on European  Asylum  Support
         Office (EASO) information, shows no grounds to depart from TG.

      v) AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan CG  [2020]  UKUT  130  holds  that
         there is no general risk in Kabul.

 9. The appellant's response is dated 24 June 2020:

      i) The SSHD has not responded to the evidence that  82%  of  the  Sikh
         population in Afghanistan  in  2015  has  since  left,  or  to  the
         evidence of the level of indiscriminate violence in Nangarhar.

     ii) The CPIN notes evidence of an attack on Sikhs in Jalalabad in  2015
         and, more seriously, in Kabul in 2020.

    iii) The  evidence  in  the  CPIN,  and  as  a  whole,  shows  "an  ever
         increasingly marginalised community unable to protect  itself  from
         targeted and indiscriminate attacks".

10. Having considered the submissions summarised above, and the evidence on
    which they are based, I conclude that the appellant would be at risk of
    persecution if returned to Afghanistan, in  Jalalabad,  in  Kabul,  and
    elsewhere,  against  which  risk  there  is  no  legal  sufficiency  of
    protection, and which cannot be avoided anywhere in the country.

11. The evidence as a whole, and particularly as cited at [12 - 16] of  the
    appellant's  response,  supports  the   proposition   that   Sikhs   in
    Afghanistan form "an ever increasingly marginalised community unable to
    protect itself from targeted and indiscriminate attacks".

12. The position, based on the evidence at  the  time  of  TG,  was  little
    better than marginal for any Afghan Sikh.  All subsequent  evidence  is
    that matters have got significantly worse.  On the evidence of a letter
    from the British Embassy dated 4 February 2019, there is only  a  small
    remnant of the community, made up of those too impoverished to flee.

13. The criteria set  out  in  TG  for  a  fact  sensitive  assessment  are
    satisfied, when read with the most recent background information.   The
    appellant has no realistic prospect of security at a  local  level,  of
    employment, or of support from the Sikh community.

14. I would not go so far as to hold that the evidence shows entitlement to
    protection  for  anyone  in   Jalalabad,   or   elsewhere,   based   on
    indiscriminate violence; but that level is reached for  the  appellant,
    based on the additional element of being a Sikh.

15. The decision of the FtT has been set  aside.   The  decision  which  is
    substituted is that the appeal, as originally brought to  the  FtT,  is
    allowed.

16. The FtT made an anonymity  direction.   It  is  doubtful  whether  that
    should  continue,  but  as  parties  have  not  addressed  the  matter,
    anonymity is maintained at this stage.

        Hugh Macleman

      UT Judge Macleman
            23 November 2020





                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email.





