

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07352/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 2nd July 2019                     |On 22nd July 2019                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SKG
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Howard of Fountain Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mrs H Aboni Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.



                            FINDINGS AND REASONS

    1. In a decision promulgated on 21  February  2019  the  Upper  Tribunal
       allowed the Secretary of State's appeal against  the  decision  of  a
       judge of the First-Tier Tribunal who  allowed  the  appeal  on  human
       rights grounds.




Background

    2. The appellant is a national of Eritrea born on 10 January 1979  whose
       claim for international protection was  rejected  by  the  First-Tier
       Tribunal against which the appellant was not  granted  permission  to
       appeal.

    3. The appellant is the subject of an order for his deportation from the
       United Kingdom following his conviction at Shrewsbury Crown Court  on
       18 September 2007 for possessing a false identity document for which,
       on 25 February  2008,  the  appellant  was  sentenced  to  12  months
       imprisonment. The  immigration  history  shows  various  applications
       being made; the most recent resulting  in  a  decision  to  refuse  a
       protection and human rights claim dated 21 July  2017  which  is  the
       decision subject to this appeal.

    4. The appellant has six dependants being his wife TT born on 1  January
       1985, and children RK born on 7 June 2006, LK  born  on  28  December
       2007, SK born on 2 December 2009, and twins EK  and  JK  born  on  24
       April 2011.

    5. Following the error of law finding the following directions were made
       by the Upper Tribunal:

           "a.    ...The rejection of the protection claim is  a  preserved
                finding in relation to which the appellant was  not  granted
                permission  to  appeal  in  any   event.   The   appellant's
                immigration and criminal history,  family  composition,  and
                concessions regarding the  relationship  the  appellant  has
                with his partner and children are also preserved findings.

           b. The matter shall be listed for a Resumed Hearing before Upper
                Tribunal Judge Hanson on the next available date, subject to
                the availability of Mr Pipe, time estimate 3 hours,  limited
                to consideration of whether the appellant's deportation will
                be  unduly  harsh  upon  his  partner  and   children   and,
                therefore, not proportionate pursuant to article 8 ECHR."

The evidence

    6.  The  appellant  has,  in  accordance  with  directions,  provided  a
       consolidated bundle containing further witness  statements  dated  12
       June 2019 which  have  been  considered  together  with  the  earlier
       evidence. There is also a copy of a British passport issued to LK  on
       29 April 2018.

    7. The appellant in his witness statement repeats his claim  to  face  a
       real risk on return to Eritrea as a Pentecostal Christian but that is
       not an issue before the Upper Tribunal as such claim was rejected  by
       the First-Tier Tribunal which  found  the  appellant  did  not  leave
       Eritrea illegally, the appellant's evidence to be  unconvincing  even
       to the lower standard, that the appellant  lacked  credibility  on  a
       number of occasions, leading to the protection claim being  rejected.
       In relation to the  issue  to  be  considered;  the  first  appellant
       confirms he and his wife have five children in the United Kingdom all
       of whom have been born here and brought up with British  values.  The
       two older children have been in the UK for over  10  years  and  have
       been registered as British citizens. The  appellant  states  all  the
       children bar one attends a local primary school in  Birmingham  where
       they are performing well with  the  older  child  attending  a  girls
       grammar school, also in Birmingham. The appellant states it is not in
       the best interests of the children to be forced to leave  the  United
       Kingdom.

    8. The appellant claims it will be unduly harsh for the eldest child  to
       remain in the United Kingdom and for him to be deported as  it  would
       totally destroy the family and  it  will  be  unduly  harsh  for  the
       children to live in Eritrea as they  enjoy  family  life  with  their
       British national siblings and  separation  will  destroy  the  family
       unit. The appellant claims it is not possible for his wife to  return
       to Eritrea and claims their life will be in danger should they return
       to any part of Eritrea. The appellant also claims  neither  his  wife
       nor he have any family in Eritrea who will be able  to  provide  them
       with accommodation or protection and that there is nowhere in Eritrea
       that it will be safe for them to return to. The appellant also claims
       a fear that his female children and wife may be  subject  to  further
       violence in Eritrea as they will be vulnerable on  their  return  and
       will not be able to practice their faith freely.

    9. The appellant's wife TT, in her witness statement, repeats the  claim
       that her life will be in danger in Eritrea and claims  she  shall  be
       forced to undertake endless national service against her  will.  This
       witness refers to her faith as a  Pentecostal  Christian  and  claims
       that she, her husband  and  their  children  will  be  persecuted  if
       returned to Eritrea. The statement refers to assistance  her  husband
       has  given  to  the  primary  school  attended  by  the  children  in
       Birmingham. The witness repeats that their five  children  have  been
       born in the UK, that two have been registered  as  British  citizens,
       the schools attended by the children, and the fact the  children  are
       settled and integrated into British society. The witness repeats  the
       appellant's claim of lack of  accommodation  and  feeling  scared  if
       returned to Eritrea and fear for the female children and  herself  as
       they may be subject to further violence on return  to  Eritrea  as  a
       result of their vulnerability.

   10. There are also within the bundle two handwritten letters one from  LK
       born on 28 December 2007 who wishes to bring the Tribunal's attention
       to a few things that she  would  like  to  mention  about  the  whole
       situation. These are set out in the following terms:

           "Firstly, I know that most of my friends have passports and  can
           go out of the UK for a holiday; however I have  never  been  and
           cannot go because the rest of my family are  asylum  seekers.  I
           know I and my older sister have passports and it really makes me
           wonder how we are not allowed. I find  it  really  unfair!  Even
           though my younger sister were born and raised here,  they  still
           don't have their passport.

           During my life we have been moved around a lot of houses.  Since
           I was born we have moved in 8 different houses. It has been hard
           to cope, because the memories I make never stay and I know  many
           people who don't have to live like this.

           I find it very strange how at a random time G4S  come  into  our
           house. Also, knowing that they have the keys to my house,  makes
           me worried. I know that they have come to  help,  but  they  are
           still strangers. Especially, when people come inside my room and
           inspect it, I don't feel right.

           When we move houses, sometimes we live in a  big  house  with  5
           rooms and extra toilets; however sometimes we have  to  live  in
           small houses with 3 room and one  toilets,  like  we  have  now.
           Which is  stressful  in  the  morning  to  use  the  toilet  and
           bathroom.

           I would love to buy some good quality clothes, shoes  and  other
           things we need. All my friends tell me they  got  pocket  money,
           and I feel like the odd one out.

           It is hard to express how I feel because going on holiday  means
           a lot because right now I feel like I am trapped in a cage,  and
           not allowed out. The worst part is when after we come back  from
           school holiday our teacher asks what everyone did, everyone  has
           enjoyed themselves out of the country; however  I  feel  ashamed
           when I say I didn't go on holiday. We really need to get out  of
           this situation.

           I was sure my family have their passports and enjoy the rest  of
           our lives together. This coming summer holiday I would  like  to
           go abroad and enjoy my summer holidays with my family.

           This September I will be going to be in year  7  at  [.........]
           and really hope I can enjoy the holiday before I start secondary
           school."

   11. A statement written by RK age 13, is in the following terms:

           "Hi, my name is [R] and I am 13 years old. Life for  me  and  my
           family has been difficult. Me and my  sister  both  are  British
           because my parents are asylum seekers we,  as  a  family,  never
           experience things which a family who are  all  British  citizens
           do.

           Firstly we  aren't  permitted  to  go  abroad  and  visit  other
           countries; all my life has been in the UK and  I've  never  been
           out of the country to experience different cultures.  It's  hard
           for me as all my friends show me pictures of  the  holidays  and
           bring souvenirs from the places they have visited and  when  I'm
           asked about mine I always have the  same  answer:  I  didn't  go
           anywhere.

           It's especially hard on my younger sisters, who aren't aware  of
           our situation as they don't understand why  they  can't  do  the
           things their friends do. As the eldest I know what our situation
           is but I know my parents  do  their  best  for  us  and  provide
           everything they can with the little they receive.

           It's difficult for my  parents  as  they  have  5  daughters  to
           provide for. As a teenager there's a lot of things that you need
           to fit in (e.g. branded shoes) and it's difficult  for  them  to
           afford these things but they do whatever they can although I may
           not  necessarily  need  them  I  think  that  our  circumstances
           shouldn't prevent me from being an ordinary 13 year old girl.

           My childhood was has been very unstable as I've moved a  lot  in
           my life and especially harder now that I've come  of  a  certain
           age all I really want is to have  stability  in  my  life.  I've
           lived in over 9 houses: and in some of those we've  only  stayed
           for a while the shortest time being 3 months. It's hard  for  us
           as we are randomly told that we need to move and are only  given
           a short space of time to leave.  Furthermore,  it's  even  worse
           when we settle into a home and were told we have to move.

           It's especially hard as I worked really hard to get into a  good
           secondary school and I achieved my goal. However, I'm surrounded
           with students which have upper-class parents. This means my home
           and school environment are completely different to  other  girls
           which affects my studies and work.

           This month I had my 13th birthday;  me  and  my  parents  and  I
           considered having a birthday party with my friends.  However,  I
           quickly changed my mind as it would mean we would have  to  have
           it in our house because I was ashamed for my friends to  see  my
           house as I know that they had much better houses.

           At the end of this I just pray that my family and I can  finally
           all be content and happy. All of this has caused  so  much  pain
           and stress; all we want is to be like any normal family."

   12. The skeleton argument provided by Mr Howard recognises that  the  key
       issue in the case is whether  the  appellant's  deportation  will  be
       unduly harsh upon the appellant's  partner  and  5  children  in  the
       United Kingdom.

   13. There is no dispute between  the  parties  regarding  relevant  legal
       provisions. These include section 117 of the Nationality, Immigration
       and Asylum  Act  2002,  including  117C  which  sets  out  additional
       considerations  in  cases  involving  foreign   criminals.   Relevant
       immigration rules include A398, 398, 399, and 399A.

   14. A number of cases are referred to in the appellants skeleton argument
       but those of particular reference to assessing  the  case  where  the
       issue is that of whether the decision  is  unduly  harsh  include  KO
       (Nigeria) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018] UKSC 53
       in which Lord Carnwath, with whom the  other  members  of  the  Court
       agreed, said, at [23] of his judgment:

           "...   [T]he expression 'unduly harsh' seems clearly intended to
           introduce a higher hurdle  than  that  of  reasonableness  under
           section 117B(6), taking account of the public  interest  in  the
           deportation of foreign  criminals.  Further  the  word  'unduly'
           implies an element of comparison. It assumes  that  there  is  a
           'due' level of  'harshness',  that  is  a  level  which  may  be
           acceptable or justifiable  in  the  relevant  context.  'Unduly'
           implies something going beyond that level. The relevant  context
           is that set by section 117C(1), that is the public  interest  in
           the deportation of foreign  criminals.  One  is  looking  for  a
           degree of harshness  going  beyond  what  would  necessarily  be
           involved for any child faced with the deportation of  a  parent.
           What it does  not  require  in  my  view  (and  subject  to  the
           discussion of the cases in the next section) is a  balancing  of
           relative levels of severity of the parent's offence, other  than
           is inherent in the distinction drawn by the  section  itself  by
           reference to length of sentence. Nor ... can it be equated  with
           a requirement to show 'very compelling reasons'. That  would  be
           in effect to replicate the additional test  applied  by  section
           117C(6) with respect to sentences of four years or more."

   15. In the more recent case of RA  (s.  117C:  "unduly  harsh";  offence:
       seriousness" Iraq [2019] UKUT 123 it was found that the way in  which
       a court or tribunal should approach section 117C remains that set out
       in the judgement of Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) [2016] EWCA  Civ  662
       in which it  was  found  that  section  117C  applies  to  all  cases
       involving foreign criminal and not  just  to  those  sentenced  to  a
       period of imprisonment of at least 4 years.

Discussion

   16. The appellant is a 'medium offender', namely a person  who  has  been
       sentenced to more than 12 months but less than 4 years in prison. The
       appellant received such a sentence as a result of what was  found  by
       the sentencing judge to be a deliberate use of a false passport as  a
       result of which, notwithstanding any mitigation pleaded, he  received
       an immediate custodial sentence.

   17. Section 117C(3) states that in the case of a foreign criminal who has
       not been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of 4 years or more the
       public interest  requires  his  deportation  unless  Exception  1  or
       Exception 2 applies.

   18. Exception 1 required the applicant to  establish  that  he  has  been
       lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most of his life which he
       cannot satisfy as his residence has always been without any  form  of
       lawful leave. This  subsection  contains  a  further  requirement  of
       establishing very significant obstacles to integration into  Eritrea,
       which the appellant relies upon pursuant to paragraph 276ADE  of  the
       Rules too, which has not been made out, in any event, on the basis of
       the appellant's  claimed  religious  difficulties  in  light  of  the
       preserved findings of the First-Tier Tribunal or inability to  secure
       work and accommodation if returned.

   19. Exception 2 applies where the foreign  criminal  has  a  genuine  and
       subsisting relationship with a qualifying partner or  a  genuine  and
       subsisting parental relationship with  a  qualifying  child  and  the
       effect of the applicant's deportation on the partner or  child  would
       be unduly harsh.

   20. It is not disputed that on the facts this is a family splitting  case
       as it is  accepted  it  will  not  be  proportionate  to  remove  the
       appellant's wife and children from the United Kingdom.  The  question
       is therefore whether it is unduly harsh for the wife and children  to
       remain in the United Kingdom if the appellant is deported.

   21. The sentiments expressed by the girls in their handwritten statements
       are  understandable   when   considering   their   age,   levels   of
       understanding, and those items that are important to  them  in  their
       lives at this present  time.  It  is  the  reality  of  modern  life,
       however, that many children do not have the type of stability  craved
       by these young people or the able  to  enjoy  the  type  of  material
       benefits identified as being 'necessities'  such  as  branded  shoes,
       good clothes, or foreign holidays. Whilst it is  understandable  that
       peer pressure within the  school  or  social  environment  can  cause
       difficulties the situation that exists is solely as a result  of  the
       reality of the situation in which this family unit finds  itself.  It
       is not made out that even if the appeal succeeded the family will  be
       able to afford the items the children refer to in their evidence.

   22. What is clear on the facts is that all the children enjoy and benefit
       from a loving and stable family relationship that they would not wish
       to lose; but what needs to be  demonstrated  in  the  evidence  is  a
       degree of harshness going beyond what would necessarily  be  involved
       for any child or partner faced with the deportation of the appellant,
       on the facts of this case.

   23. As issues raised in the witness statements  regarding  difficulty  in
       the family as a whole re-establishing themselves in Eritrea takes the
       matter no further as it is only the appellant who  will  be  removed.
       The children wishing their father to remain with  them  and  becoming
       distressed if he is deported has not been shown to be other than  the
       normal consequence of deportation. It is not made out on the evidence
       that the children's  mother  will  not  be  capable  of  meeting  the
       physical and emotional needs of herself and the children. The witness
       statement she has provided refers to the children's  schooling  which
       there will be no need to change if the  appellant  is  removed.  Many
       single parents cope with such a situation even following the loss  of
       a partner.

   24. Whilst it is asserted in the skeleton argument that  the  appellant's
       partner does not have any legal status or  leave  to  remain  in  the
       United Kingdom with no certainty she shall be  permitted  to  remain,
       which it is submitted creates a real risk of the children being  left
       without either of their parents in the United  Kingdom,  this  is  no
       more than speculation.  Two of the children are British citizens  and
       the rest have spent  all  their  lives  since  birth  in  the  United
       Kingdom. The British citizens are also EU  nationals  and  cannot  be
       compelled to leave the territory of the member state. Their mother as
       their primary carer, if their father is removed, is arguably entitled
       to recognition of a right to remain under either  EU  law  under  the
       Zambrano principle or article  8  ECHR  on  the  basis  it  would  be
       disproportionate to remove  her  from  the  United  Kingdom.  If  the
       appellant is removed his partner, the children's mother, will be able
       to make an application in her own right which has realistic prospects
       of success meaning the children will not be deprived of the  care  of
       both parents.

   25. One thing that comes through from the witness statements prepared  by
       the children is the need for resilience  when  facing  disruption  in
       their lives flowing from their status as an asylum-seeking family. It
       has not been shown there is anything unlawful  in  their  experiences
       which at times can be disruptive and intrusive. What is not shown  on
       the evidence, other than expressing a desire for the same to stop, is
       any  adverse  impact  sufficient  to  establish  the  only  warranted
       decision in this appeal is for the same to be allowed. Indeed  it  is
       arguable that the degree of  certainty  the  children  crave  can  be
       achieved within this family unit if the  appellant  is  deported  and
       their mother is granted leave to remain in her own right, albeit that
       it will be without their father's presence.

   26. I accept consideration can be given to the desire for this family  to
       remain together and to the fact  that  families  do  ordinarily  stay
       together.  The  offence  was  committed  some  time  ago,   but   the
       appellant's immigration history shows this  is  not  a  case  of  the
       respondent doing nothing during the intervening years.  The  original
       deportation order in which the respondent took action to  deport  the
       appellant and the whole family,  in  December  2008,  was  eventually
       revoked in October 2013 following  the  receipt  further  submissions
       with there being a deportation appeal  hearing  in  April  2014.  Any
       delay that has occurred is not a determinative factor and has enabled
       the appellant to further establish ties and family  life  within  the
       United Kingdom.

   27. The  more  serious  the  offence  the  greatest  public  interest  in
       deportation.  Although the offence committed by the appellant is  not
       a crime of violence it is an offence  of  dishonesty  relating  to  a
       fundamental aspect of the integrity of the United Kingdom's system of
       immigration control namely the reliability of  immigration  documents
       such as passports.

   28. The best interests of the children, pursuant to  section  55,  favour
       them reminding in the United Kingdom with  their  mother  and  father
       although this is not the determinative  factor  in  this  case  where
       there are countervailing reasons of considerable force displacing the
       same; namely the appellant's deportation and  provisions  of  section
       117C and the public interest in deporting foreign criminals.

   29. There is no expert evidence to demonstrate that  the  effect  on  the
       appellant's partner and children, even though harsh, will  be  unduly
       harsh. The children and their mother will have  the  support  of  the
       schools and the church  together  with  all  the  benefits  to  which
       children are entitled as British citizens and continued NHS treatment
       that they have benefited from to date.

   30. It was said at the outset of the appeal hearing and at the  error  of
       law hearing that the decision at the resumed  hearing  might  be  the
       same as that before the First-Tier Tribunal, if the evidence warrants
       the same. Whilst it would be easy to say that the existence  of  five
       children warrants the appeal being allowed per  se  that  is  not  an
       appropriate  approach  and  reflects  the  situation   that   existed
       previously in some cases; which  resulted  in  section  117  and  the
       amendment to the Immigration Rules setting out a threshold that needs
       to be considered and shown to be crossed by  an  appellant.  Such  an
       assessment is always fact specific. Appling the correct  test  it  is
       not made out the consequences of  removing  the  appellant  upon  his
       partner and/or the children will be unduly  harsh  as  that  term  is
       understood in its correct legal context.

   31. As Mrs Aboni stated in her submissions is not  disputed  there  is  a
       genuine relationship with the children two  of  whom  are  qualifying
       children. Notwithstanding, the appellant had not proved  it  will  be
       unduly harsh on the children to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with
       their mother without him. It is not in the public interest to  enable
       the appellant to remain in the United Kingdom. There is  no  evidence
       the children have specific educational, medical or support needs  and
       their mother will be in the United Kingdom to meet such needs in  any
       event. There was no evidence the mother could not meet the  needs  of
       the children without the appellant and no evidence of the detrimental
       impact upon the children's well-being or  their  development  if  the
       appellant is removed. The appellant had not established  it  will  be
       unduly harsh if the children have to remain  in  the  United  Kingdom
       without him.

   32. As the appellant has failed to show he is entitled to the benefit  of
       either Exception 1 or 2 of section 117C(3) the  statutory  provisions
       require his deportation from the United Kingdom.

   33. On the basis of the available evidence the respondent has established
       that the decision to deport the appellant is  proportionate  pursuant
       to Article 8 ECHR.

Decision

   34. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is dismissed.

  Anonymity.

   35. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
       the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.

       I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
       (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008.


Signed

Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 9 July 2019
