
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/07978/2016
                                                               PA/08470/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 December 2018                         |On 30 January 2019            |
|                                            |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALLEN


                                   Between

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                            D P (First Appellant)
                           V P (Second Appellant)
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                 Respondents


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Whitwell, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondents:   Ms S Akinbolu, instructed by CK Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   This is the Secretary of State's  appeal  against  a  decision  of  the
    Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  who  allowed  the  appeal  of  the
    appellants on protection grounds and  on  human  rights  grounds.   For
    convenience I will refer to the parties as they were referred to in the
    First-tier Tribunal.

2.   The claim is essentially made on the basis of fear from the actions  of
    people who had lent money to the father of the first appellant and  the
    husband of the second appellant, they being daughter  and  mother,  and
    threats that  had  been  made  to  them  and  problems  that  had  been
    experienced which caused them to flee from Albania, in the case of  the
    first appellant via Greece and France to the United Kingdom and in  the
    case of the second appellant with her younger child,  her  son,  having
    travelled from Greece to Spain to the Republic of Ireland and  then  to
    the United Kingdom having left Albania in 2011.

3.   The refusal decision in the case of the first appellant  accepted  that
    her father owed money in Albania and had experienced problems with  his
    creditors.  What was not accepted was that her other  sister  had  been
    abducted in Greece by the creditors.

4.   The decision maker considered risk on return as a female  returnee  and
    noted the country guidance in the context  particularly  of  trafficked
    women and domestic violence,  which  of  course  in  some  ways  raised
    slightly different issues as this is a rather unusual claim  where  the
    risk is not what might be seen as  more  typical  categories,  but  the
    specific risk of the kind I have described.

5.    Consideration  was  given  to  sufficiency  of  protection   and   the
    background evidence was considered, the CIG  of  August  2015  and  the
    general view of the Secretary of State that there is a  sufficiency  of
    protection in Albania and internal relocation is  feasible,  though  of
    course it is accepted that  it  would  have  to  be  considered  on  an
    individual basis.  There was a consideration of Article  8  issues  and
    the conclusion was that there was no satisfaction of  the  requirements
    of  the  Immigration  Rules  and  nor  were  there   such   exceptional
    circumstances as to justify a grant of leave  outside  the  Rules,  and
    then the separate decision in relation to the second appellant.

6.    The  claim  was  regarded  as  lacking  in  credibility.   There  were
    references to the history as set out and the  amounts  of  money  being
    borrowed, and the people from whom it was borrowed.  There was an issue
    taken as to the timing of when the problems began which  was  addressed
    subsequently in the first appellant's witness statement, and the  claim
    in general was regarded as lacking in credibility on the basis that  it
    was considered that she had remained in Albania for ten  years  without
    any action before she left for Greece, and again,  in  the  submissions
    the  protection  and  internal  relocation  issues  were  addressed  on
    essentially the same basis as in relation  to  her  daughter  and   the
    human rights issues likewise.

7.   The judge set out the history of  the  claim  and  the  evidence.   The
    judge heard evidence from all three witnesses, the two children and the
    mother.  He then considered the background evidence.  The Secretary  of
    State relied on both the refusal letters.  Insufficiency of  protection
    had not been established and the threats had not been reported  to  the
    police.  They did not take the opportunity to see  whether  they  would
    receive protection.  The expert report said the first  appellant  could
    not relocate alone. However, the Secretary of  State  argued  that  the
    expert had not considered the situation if she returned with the  other
    family members and  contact  had  been  maintained  with  relatives  in
    Albania.  The money lenders were non-state agents and would not be able
    to reach them in another part of the country.

8.   On the appellants' side it was argued that the  only  inconsistency  in
    relation to the second appellant's evidence was  whether  the  problems
    began in 2001 or 2010 and she had clarified in  her  witness  statement
    that the borrowing began in 2001 and the problems began  in  2010,  and
    hence there was no inconsistency.  There was  evidence  of  integration
    between organised crime and the Albanian police forces.  Relocation was
    not an option because  of  the  high  reliance  in  Albania  on  family
    networks and the problems they would face of  the  registration  system
    and their whereabouts being traceable.

9.   Then I come to the judge's findings  and  decision,  and  he  found  at
    paragraph 61 that the family had encountered problems arising from  the
    debts owed by the  father  in  Albania  which  was  essentially  common
    ground.  He found the money lenders were owed a considerable amount  of
    money and were likely to use threats against  the  children  to  secure
    repayment of the debts and the children would be at risk of violence or
    kidnapping and therefore the first appellant and the second appellant's
    son were at risk.  The second appellant not at risk in  the  same  way,
    but was in fear of her children being harmed.

10.  He found that levels of corruption within the Albanian  justice  system
    remained high despite efforts to address it and that the kind of person
    who was able to lend money in the sums lent in this case  and  to  make
    credible threats was likely to be the type of person  with  connections
    with corrupt  police  and  other  officials.   There  was  therefore  a
    realistic risk of harm if returned.  He  accepted  that  there  was  no
    Refugee Convention reason in this case but found there were substantial
    grounds for believing that there was  a  real  risk  of  suffering  and
    serious harm if returned to Albania.

11.  He then  went  on  to  consider  in  no  great  detail  sufficiency  of
    protection.  He set out the Horvath requirement of a system of domestic
    protection, machinery for the detection and prosecution/ punishment  of
    the  money  lenders  and  an  ability  and  readiness  to  operate  the
    machinery.  The objective evidence he found showed that although  steps
    were being taken in Albania to improve its judicial systems there  were
    still significant amounts of corruption and Albania did  not  meet  the
    Horvath test.

12.  As regards internal relocation, he accepted the evidence that  Albanian
    society was family based, and it would be very difficult to return  and
    make a new life in another part of the country without  connections  to
    existing family members being known, and  that  those  with  access  to
    information, whether legitimately or not, would be  able  to  find  the
    family via the local registration system for provision for housing  and
    schooling and other services.  He also found the  sums  of  money  were
    such as to mean that the money lenders  would  take  steps  to  recover
    their money.

13.  He then went on to consider Article  8  issues  and  found  that  there
    would be no interference with family life, but the removal of the first
    appellant would constitute interference with her private life.  She was
    established in  her  studies  in  the  United  Kingdom.   It  would  be
    difficult for her to continue these in Albania given the issues in  the
    country information about the situation of single women in Albania  and
    he found that the interference was disproportionate, taking account  of
    the respondent's requirement  to  exercise  immigration  controls.   He
    noted that she had established her private life while  her  immigration
    status was precarious.  He  considered  it  to  be  relevant  that  the
    decision on the claim took so long as she would inevitably establish  a
    private life while in the United Kingdom.  He found no disproportionate
    interference with the second appellant's private life, but with  regard
    to her son he found that he had developed a private life, and  that  it
    was in his best interests to remain in  the  United  Kingdom  with  his
    sister, and in his best interests for his mother to remain with him and
    therefore allowed the appeal under Article 8.

14.  The Secretary of State challenged the decision first on the basis  that
    there was a lack of adequate reasons for the credibility  findings  and
    that the account was in the face of societal and cultural  norms.   The
    first appellant claimed on the one hand to know nothing about the debts
    run up but now claimed she was responsible for repaying a debt of  over
    a quarter of a million euros and this was said, to say the least, to be
    unlikely.  The judge had failed to consider the likelihood  of  such  a
    debt arising or the current whereabouts of the husband, and  the  claim
    should have been found to lack credibility.

15.  As regards internal relocation, the grounds are in  a  sense  something
    of a combination of issues in  relation  to  that  and  sufficiency  of
    protection.  It is said that the appellants are not attempting to  seek
    protection from the authorities.  Their own evidence suggested that the
    police did take action against  perpetrators  but  they  said  that  no
    threats had been made to the family in Albania  and  it  was  therefore
    deemed safe for them to relocate to where the extended family lived and
    contact had been maintained.  It was said that it was likely  that  the
    money lenders if they had such influence would seek  out  the  extended
    family in order to retrieve their money or locate  the  appellants  and
    there was no such evidence in this case.

16.  As regards Article 8 the appellants could not meet the requirements  of
    the Immigration Rules.  Private life had been considered but  incorrect
    weight had been given.  The rights of the child amounted to  a  primary
    consideration but not the only consideration and academic success could
    not be regarded as a trump card and there was no proper application  of
    section 117B of the 2002 Act  and  there  was  a  failure  to  consider
    section 8 of the 2004 Act when considering the entry  into  the  United
    Kingdom on the basis of false documentation.

17.  Permission was granted and there was a  preliminary  issue  as  to  the
    ambit of the grant.  The judge granted permission to appeal  generally,
    but said nothing about the Article 8 issue in the reasons for decision.
     This is unsatisfactory in that something needed to be said either  way
    about Article 8.  The decision is simply silent on the  point,  but  it
    does seem to me in light of the recent guidance  of  the  President  in
    Safi [2018] UKUT 388 (IAC) that where permission  to  appeal  has  been
    said to be granted generally, that absent exceptional circumstances,  a
    failure to refer to a particular matter in the reasons for decision  is
    unlikely to mean that permission  could  be  taken  not  to  have  been
    granted in relation to that point, so I conclude that permission is  to
    be taken to have been granted in relation to Article 8.

18.  In the Rule 24 response Ms Akinbolu argued first  that  it  is  unclear
    what is meant by in the face of societal and cultural norms.  The judge
    had accepted the evidence given, there was no  contradictory  evidence,
    the account had been consistent overall.  There was no reference to any
    background material in relation to this issue of societal and  cultural
    norms.  As regards internal relocation, it was said that this  appeared
    to be an attempt to reargue the existence of sufficiency of  protection
    as opposed to the availability of internal relocation.  The  judge  had
    made it clear that all those steps  were  being  taken  and  protective
    mechanisms in Albania were subject to corruption and  were  inefficient
    and this was consistent with the country guidance.  The judge had given
    clear reasons for finding  that  the  appellants  could  not  relocate.
    There was another issue about relocation which had now gone away as  Mr
    Whitwell on behalf of the Secretary of State no longer relied on  that.



19.  As regards Article 8 it was said that the ground  is  misconceived  and
    generalised.  The judge had taken into account the  unlawful  delay  in
    deciding the claim.  Clear reasons had been given for the establishment
    of private life and the decision was legally sustainable and  rational.



20.  Those are the essential arguments made.   I  will  say  a  little  also
    about the submissions which have been made which in each case build  on
    the points made on the one hand in the grounds of  appeal  and  on  the
    other hand on the Rule 24 response.

21.  With regard to Article 8, Mr Whitwell argued that the judge had  failed
    to  refer  to  section  117B(4)(a)   and   (5),   in   particular   the
    precariousness point, and it was clear from  Patel  that  there  is  no
    breach of protected rights by itself in an inability for  a  person  to
    continue studies.  In the decision, it was argued, it  was  unreasoned,
    and in light of the second appellant there  was  no  interference  with
    family or private life so her claim  could  be  said  to  fall  at  the
    initial hurdle.  If there was no interference with  private  or  family
    life then there was nothing to attach the best interests assessment to,
    so it was argued that there was an error of law in that respect.

22.  As regards ground 1 it was argued, as I say, that there was a  lack  of
    reasons for the credibility finding.  With regard to the cultural norms
    point, the point made was that the  first  appellant  had  argued  that
    being a  single  woman  in  Albania  was  a  factor  making  relocation
    difficult and there are points made in the CIPIN about the  essentially
    male-centric  culture  in  Albania   and   the   difficulty   and   the
    discriminatory nature of life in Albania, so there was  information  in
    the public domain to support this cultural norms point.

23.  Otherwise it was argued that the judge  had  insufficiently  considered
    the background evidence in coming to his conclusions on sufficiency  of
    protection and internal relocation.  There was an  absence  of  ongoing
    threats to the extended family which, as I say, was a factor  that  had
    been referred to in the grounds.  Sufficiency of  protection  had  been
    found in the country guidance in the case of trafficked women  and  the
    decision in general was inadequately  reasoned  and  therefore  it  was
    required to be set aside.

24.  Ms Akinbolu argued first in  relation  to  the  protection  claim  that
    there was a discrepancy in the findings in the  refusal  letter  as  to
    what was accepted or not accepted in the claim with regard to the first
    appellant accepting the  existence  of  the  debt  and  problems  as  a
    consequence of that.   The  issue  of  cultural  norms  still  remained
    unclear.  It was clear that Albania is a patriarchal  society,  but  no
    evidence had been produced to show that money lenders would not  attack
    or threaten female family members.

25.  The judge had accepted the credibility of the claim  and  although  the
    reasoning was not in great detail, nevertheless the relevant issues had
    all been properly addressed, including sufficiency  of  protection  and
    internal relocation, and the findings on Article 8 were adequate.

26.  By way of reply Mr Whitwell  argued  that  although  the  existence  of
    corruption in Albania is accepted, the guidance considers that there is
    a genuine sufficiency of protection and  internal  relocation  and  the
    judge's findings were, as a consequence, inadequate.

27.  I will consider first of all the protection issue.  I have set out  the
    arguments that have been made and  what  was  said  by  the  judge  and
    perhaps I do not need to say a very great deal about this.   The  first
    point is the contention that the credibility findings  lack  reasoning.
    The judge had set out what the issues were.  He accepted, as I think is
    common ground, that problems had  been  encountered  arising  from  the
    debts owed by the father in Albania.   He  was,  I  consider,  properly
    entitled to find that the money lenders were owed a considerable amount
    of money and were likely to use threats against the children to  secure
    repayments of the debts.  There was, I think, no good  reason  for  him
    not to accept that threats had been made, and that  the  problems  that
    were said to have existed occurred and that  there  was  a  risk  as  a
    consequence, in particular with regard to the children.  It was open to
    him also to find that a person who could lend money  in  these  amounts
    and to make credible threats was likely to be somebody with connections
    to corrupt police and other officials, so he  found,  as  I  say,  that
    there was a realistic fear of harm on return and I think  that  finding
    was open to him.

28.  It is, I think, common ground that not a lot was said by the  judge  on
    sufficiency of protection,  but  it  is  clear  from  the  respondent's
    guidance and I think from the country guidance also that each case must
    be assessed on the basis of its own facts, and of  course  the  country
    guidance has tended to be related to  other  issues  such  as  risk  on
    return to previously trafficked people, risk in relation to blood feuds
    and so on.  This is a more particular matter and  the  judge  addressed
    the Horvath test.  Clearly, as he had set it out in some detail he  had
    before  him  the  arguments  that  had  been  made  on  sufficiency  of
    protection, he had the decision letter of course as well, and he  found
    that steps were being taken in Albania to improve the judicial  system,
    but that there were still significant areas of corruption, and he found
    that Albania did not meet the Horvath test.  I think that must be taken
    to have been applicable to the particular facts of  the  case  and  the
    kind of people making the threats in this case being the type of people
    who have had connections  with  corrupt  police  and  other  officials.
    So,  although  terse,  I  think  what  he  said  about  sufficiency  of
    protection was open to him.

29.  Likewise with regard to internal relocation.  Again, what  he  said  is
    brief, but it is to the point.  He accepted the evidence that  Albanian
    society is family-based and I do not think that is  controversial.   He
    found it would be very difficult to return  and  make  a  new  life  in
    another part of the country without the connections to existing  family
    members being known and the registration system which makes  people  in
    this position vulnerable to persons who may well, legitimately or  not,
    have access to the registration system which would enable  them  to  be
    located.  Well, it might be said, this is a very old  debt.   Is  there
    really an ongoing interest, it might be asked, and the judge's response
    to that was that the sums of money involved  were  sufficient  to  mean
    that the money lenders would take steps  to  recover  their  money,  so
    although the problem was an old one, it was not a problem that had gone
    away. In my view that conclusion was properly open to him.

30.  In the end therefore it seems to me that the  judge's  conclusions  are
    ones that were open to him and that there has not been shown  to  be  a
    failure  to  address  material  issues  in  respect   to   credibility,
    sufficiency of protection or internal relocation such as to  materially
    flaw the decision, so as a consequence I conclude that the findings  of
    the judge in regard to international protection are sound and have  not
    been shown to be flawed as a matter of law, and therefore his  decision
    with regard to international protection is maintained.

31.  I think perhaps in the light of that I do not need to say much  at  all
    about the human rights issues.  I think there are  some  problems  with
    the human rights conclusions but in my view those really fall  away  in
    light of my  findings  on  international  protection,  so  the  outcome
    therefore is that the appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed and
    the judge's decision is upheld.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

[pic]
Signed                                  Date 17 January 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Allen

