
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07169/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7th January 2020                  |On 7th April 2020                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                     FA
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr M Islam, Taj Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. An anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier Tribunal ("FtT").
     As this a protection claim, it is  appropriate  that  a  direction  is
    made. Unless and until a Tribunal or Court  directs  otherwise,  FA  is
    granted anonymity. No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify him or any member of his  family.   This  direction
    applies amongst others to all parties.  Failure  to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 2. The appellant is a Bangladeshi national.  On  14th  June  2012  he  was
    granted a visit visa and he  arrived  in  the  UK  in  July  2012.   He
    remained in the UK unlawfully when the  visit  visa  expired  and  some
    years later, on 21st October 2018, he claimed  asylum.  His  claim  was
    refused by the respondent for reasons set out in a decision dated  19th
    July 2019. The appellant's appeal against that decision  was  dismissed
    by First-tier Tribunal Judge Skehan for reasons set out in  a  decision
    promulgated on 23rd September 2019.


 3. The First-tier Tribunal Judge heard evidence  from  the  appellant  and
    summarises the appellant's evidence at paragraph [9] of  her  decision.
    The judge's findings and conclusions are set out at paragraphs [12]  to
    [29] of the decision.


 4. The judge noted, at [11], that one of the  issues  is  the  appellant's
    credibility. Taking the evidence  as  a  whole,  the  Judge  found  the
    appellant has shown it reasonably likely that  his  father  and  family
    were BNP supporters.  The judge found it is likely that  the  appellant
    was a supporter of  the  BNP  and  its  student  arm.   She  found  his
    activities were 'low level'  in  that  he  accompanied  his  father  or
    friends rather than taking a direct active political role.


 5. The judge also found the appellant has established  that  there  was  a
    land dispute between the appellant and his uncle.  The  judge  accepted
    the appellant's uncle was a supporter of the Awami League, and that  he
    was the chairperson within the local area.  However, the judge was  not
    satisfied  that  the  political  influence  of  the  appellant's  uncle
    extended beyond his local area.


 6. The judge accepted that the two sides to the  land  dispute  come  from
    different political persuasions.  The appellant claimed that  the  land
    dispute led to a fight between  the  families.  The  appellant's  uncle
    blamed the appellant of injuring him during the fight and  a  complaint
    was  raised  with  the  police  in  2011.   The  police  attended   the
    appellant's home to arrest the appellant and his father, but they  were
    not there. No further action was taken by the police.  The  appellant's
    evidence was that his family tried to raise  a  complaint  against  his
    uncle, but the police refused to act. The judge found,  at  [16],  that
    the appellant has established that the  police  refused  to  follow  up
    complaints made against the appellant's uncle.  She also found that the
    police do not have any continuing interest in the appellant.


 7. The judge noted, at [17], that the appellants evidence as to  what  has
    happened since he left  Bangladesh,  was  contradictory  and  confused.
    Taking the appellant's evidence as a whole, the  judge  concluded  that
    the appellant has not established that any of his family have  suffered
    any adverse or detrimental treatment as a  result  of  their  political
    opinion since the appellant left Bangladesh.   As  to  the  appellant's
    political activities in the UK,  the  judge  found  the  appellant  has
    failed to establish that he has a political profile within  the  UK  or
    would be recognised in any way in Bangladesh as a  leader  or  activist
    for the BNP.


 8. In her assessment of the risk upon return, the judge stated at [19].


         "... Although it is accepted that  [the  appellant's  uncle]  is  a
         local chairman  within  the  AL,  I  have  been  provided  with  no
         information that could lead me to conclude that he has the capacity
         or connections  to  locate  the  appellant  through  his  political
         position."

 9. The judge found, at [20], that neither the appellant nor his family are
    of continued adverse interest, and the appellant  has  not  established
    that he would be targeted for reasons of  his  political  opinion  upon
    return.  The judge found at [21], the appellant has established that he
    may be targeted by his  uncle  on  return  to  his  home  area,  and  a
    potential reluctance on the part of the police in  that  area  to  take
    action against the appellant's uncle linked to the  political  position
    of the appellant's uncle as the local chairman of the Awami League.  At
    paragraph [22], the judge said:


         "in light of  the  above,  taking  the  appellant's  claim  at  its
         absolute highest, he has shown a reasonable  degree  of  likelihood
         that the appellant may have a well-founded fear of being persecuted
         for reasons of his political opinion in his home area and would  be
         unable to avail himself of the protection of the police within that
         area."

10. The judge went on to consider internal relocation, noting the appellant
    has not established that his uncle has connections that would allow him
    to find the appellant elsewhere in  Bangladesh.  The  judge  noted  the
    appellant had lived for six months with his grandparents prior  to  his
    departure from Bangladesh, and although his  uncle  had  known  of  his
    whereabouts, his uncle had taken no action against the appellant.   The
    judge was not satisfied the appellant's uncle is actively  looking  for
    the appellant.  At paragraph [24], the judge went on to say:


         "... It is accepted that the appellant does not want to  return  to
         Bangladesh. The appellant is a single male who is familiar with the
         culture of the country. I have considered the appellant's  evidence
         that should he return to Bangladesh he will be obliged to care  and
         accommodate  his  mother  and  sister  (sic).  I  acknowledged  the
         cultural obligations that the claimant may face,  however  this  is
         not  in  my  view  a   sufficient   reason   to   make   relocation
         inappropriate.  Bangladesh  is  a  large  country  with   a   large
         population and many urban areas.  The  appellant,  and  his  family
         should they so wish, may choose to live in any urban area away from
         their home place. I have taken the  appellant's  health  conditions
         into account."

11. The judge also considered the possibility that the appellant will  face
    persecution  by  reference  to  his  political   opinions   even   when
    unconnected to  his  uncle.  The  judge  noted  the  appellant  has  no
    political profile to speak of, and cannot be described as  having  even
    the profile of a grassroots level leader or local committee member. The
    judge noted the appellant is a member of the  BNP,  a  main  opposition
    party, with, according  to  the  background  information,  millions  of
    members. The judge noted  that  although  the  political  situation  in
    Bangladesh remains unsettled, the  background  material  suggests  that
    those with a higher profile may face potential risks depending  on  the
    particular  circumstances.  The  judge  found  the  appellant  has  not
    established that he faces a real risk should he return to  an  area  in
    Bangladesh, other than his home area.


The appeal before me


12. The appellant claims the judge erred in her assessment of the risk upon
    return by failing to have regard to the background material relied upon
    by the appellant which establishes that all members  and  activists  of
    the opposition parties face persecution despite their  position  within
    the party. It is said the judge accepted the  appellant's  family  were
    involved  in  the  BNP  and  the  appellant  was  inspired   by   their
    involvement. That demonstrates the appellant historically came  from  a
    family with a political background at least  at  a  local  level.   The
    appellant claims that the judge's conclusion  that  the  appellant  can
    internally relocate contradicts her own findings that the appellant has
    been detrimentally treated in Bangladesh for reasons connected  to  his
    BNP political opinion and the police did not follow up  his  complaint.
    It is said that in concluding that the appellant's uncle would  not  be
    able to harm him outside his local area, the judge failed  to  consider
    the vital change in the circumstances of the appellant.  That  is,  the
    appellant is now  an  adult  and  has  been  continuing  his  political
    activities in the  UK.   The  appellant  claims  the  judge  failed  to
    appreciate that the Awami  League  is  the  main  political  party  and
    current ruling party,  with  a  presence  all  over  the  country.  The
    appellant's uncle is a local chairperson of the  Awami  League  and  as
    such, is part of the government, and could trace the appellant anywhere
    in the country using his political influence. The appellant claims  the
    most important point missed by the judge is that the appellant  is  not
    only of interest to his uncle, but he is also a  target  of  the  Awami
    League government due to his historic and sur place activities  in  the
    UK.


13. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge  Rimington  on
    27th November 2019.  The matter comes before me  to  determine  whether
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal judge is tainted by a  material
    error of law, and if so, to remake the decision.


14. Mr Islam submits there were a number of  positive  findings  that  were
    made by the judge and based on those findings, it was not open  to  the
    judge to conclude that the  appellant  can  internally  relocate.   The
    judge found the appellant's uncle is a member of the Awami  League  and
    the judge accepted the appellant's uncle  was  the  chairperson  within
    their local area.  The judge stated at [14] that the appellant has  not
    shown any reasonable degree of likelihood that  his  uncle's  political
    influence extended beyond his local area, but the CPIN  -  'Bangladesh;
    Opposition to the government - version 2.0,  January  2018',  that  was
    relied upon by the respondent confirms that where the person's fear  is
    of persecution and/or serious harm by the state, they will not be  able
    to avail themselves of the protection of the  authorities.  The  report
    confirms at section 2.3, that law  enforcement  agencies  at  a  senior
    level  tend  to  be  aligned  with  the  ruling  party  and   political
    affiliation at times, is a motive for the  arrest  and  prosecution  of
    people on criminal charges.


15. Mr Islam submits that at paragraph [25] of the  judge's  decision,  the
    judge refers to the background material suggesting that  those  with  a
    higher profile may face potential risks depending on  their  particular
    circumstances.  Mr Islam refers to the 'Odhikar Human Rights Monitoring
    Report on Bangladesh released  on  2nd  November  2018'  regarding  the
    suppression on opposition  political  parties  ahead  of  the  upcoming
    national elections.  The report  states  that  a  "list  of  BNP-Jamaat
    Alliance leaders and activists has been  prepared  and  new  cases  are
    being lodged, in addition to reactivating investigations in  old  cases
    against them.  Many cases were filed against grassroots  level  leader-
    activists, the BNP General Secretary and Standing Committee Members..".
    the report confirms that most of the cases are allegedly fabricated and
    made to harass.  Mr Islam accepts that no false charges have been  laid
    against the appellant.


16. Mr Islam also drew my attention to the 'Odhikar Human Rights Monitoring
    Report on Bangladesh released on 17th April 2019, which  confirms  that
    many dissenters, opposition activists and ordinary citizens  were  sued
    under the newly passed Digital Security Act 2018 and  defamation  cases
    filed and sentences passed from making comments against any  high-level
    person in the ruling party or government.  Again, Mr Islam accepts  the
    appellant has not been sued and has not made comments against any high-
    level person in the ruling party.   Mr  Islam  referred  to  the  Human
    Rights Watch Report of December 2018 regarding the 'Bangladesh Election
    Crackdown on Political Opponents and  Critics'  which  states  that  as
    Bangladesh prepares to vote, arrests  and  other  repressive  measures,
    including widespread surveillance  and  a  crackdown  on  speech,  have
    contributed to a climate of fear extending  from  prominent  voices  in
    society to ordinary citizens.  He submits this background material that
    was before the FtT demonstrates that it is not  only  those  with  some
    political profile that will be targeted, but ordinary citizens too.  He
    submits that is reinforced by what is said in the respondent's CPIN, at
    paragraph 6.1.10, that across the country, criminal activities  of  the
    leaders and activists of  the  ruling  party  affiliated  organisations
    reportedly  increased  and  they  attacked  leaders  and  activists  of
    opposition political parties, women and children and ordinary citizens.
     Mr Islam submits that it is clear from the background material that it
    is not only high-profile members that  are  affected,  but  people  are
    targeted even if they are simply activists.  He submits  the  appellant
    would be at risk simply because  he  a  member  of  the  BNP,  and  the
    influence that the appellant's uncle may have away from his home  area.
    Mr Islam submits the judge was aware that the appellant has  family  in
    Bangladesh, and it is entirely possible that with the family links, the
    appellant's uncle would be able to find the appellant and he  would  be
    at risk upon return.


17. For the respondent, Ms Isherwood submits there is no material error  of
    law in the decision of the FtT  and  she  invites  me  to  dismiss  the
    appeal.  Ms Isherwood submits the appellant simply disagrees  with  the
    findings and conclusions reached by the judge that  were  open  to  her
    following a careful consideration of the claim made  by  the  appellant
    and the background material.    She  submits  the  appellant  does  not
    challenge the findings made by the judge, at [14] and  [19],  that  the
    political influence of the appellant's uncle does not extend beyond his
    local area and although he is a local Chairman within the Awami League,
    there is nothing to conclude that he has the capacity or connections to
    locate the appellant through his political  position.  Furthermore  the
    appellant does not challenge the finding at paragraph [20], that he  is
    of no continued adverse interest since his departure from Bangladesh as
    a 16-year-old, and, as someone who has developed no  political  profile
    since, for the reasons set out in paragraph [18]. Ms Isherwood referred
    me to paragraph [20] of the appellant's  witness  statement  dated  3rd
    September 2019 that was before the FtT and considered by the judge.  In
    that statement the appellant confirms that he is a member  of  the  BNP
    and confirms he does not have any official  position  or  role  in  the
    party. He states that he is unable to attend all the activities of  the
    party in the UK due to the immense mental pressure that he is under and
    also due to the fact that travelling to different places to attend  the
    political activities requires money which he does not have.


18. Ms Isherwood submits that throughout her decision, the judge refers  to
    the background material.  Ms Isherwood submits the background  material
    demonstrates that internal relocation is  available  and  that  a  fact
    specific assessment of the risk upon return  is  needed.   She  submits
    that is what the judge did at paragraphs [23] to [27] of her  decision,
    and looking at the evidence as a whole, it was open  to  the  judge  to
    dismiss the appeal for the reasons given.


Discussion


19. There are two  strands  to  the  appellant's  claim  for  international
    protection  albeit  connected.  First,  his   political   profile   and
    membership of the BNP, and second, the land dispute with his uncle.  As
    the judge accepted at paragraph [15], the two sides to the land dispute
    come from different political persuasions.


20. In my judgement, upon a careful reading of the  decision  it  is  clear
    that the FtT judge carefully considered the claim being advanced by the
    appellant and the risk upon return. I reject the claim that in reaching
    her decision the judge failed to have regard to the background material
    relied upon by the appellant.  The  'Odhikar  Human  Rights  Monitoring
    Report on Bangladesh released  on  2nd  November  2018'  regarding  the
    suppression  on  opposition  political  parties  does  not  assist  the
    appellant because, as Mr Islam accepts, no false charges have been laid
    against the appellant.  Similarly, the 'Odhikar Human Rights Monitoring
    Report on  Bangladesh  released  on  17th  April  2019,  is  of  little
    assistance to the appellant because, as Mr Islam accepts, the appellant
    has not been sued and has not  made  comments  against  any  high-level
    person in the ruling party.  At paragraph [25]  of  her  decision,  the
    judge  considered  the  possibility  that  the  appellant   will   face
    persecution by reference to his  political  opinions.   She  noted  the
    appellant  has  no  political  profile  to  speak  of,  and  he  cannot
    reasonably be described as having even  the  profile  of  a  grassroots
    level leader or local committee member.  She found  the  appellant  has
    not shown that he could be reasonably considered to be  an  'activist'.
    Although there is no express reference to the  reports  that  Mr  Islam
    drew my attention to, the matters set out at paragraph [25] are clearly
    directed to what is said in those reports.


21. The respondent's CPIN, does as Mr Islam submits, state that "Where  the
    person's fear is of persecution and/or serious harm by the state,  they
    will not  be  able  to  avail  themselves  of  the  protection  of  the
    authorities",  but the report also confirms that  decision-makers  must
    assess whether the state can provide effective protection.  The  report
    confirms that law enforcement agencies, at a senior level, tend  to  be
    aligned with the ruling party and political affiliation at times  is  a
    motive for the arrest and persecution of people  on  criminal  charges.
    There is no claim by the appellant that any criminal charges have  been
    brought against him.  More importantly, at section 2.4.2 of  the  CPIN,
    insofar as internal relocation is concerned, it is said  that  "If  the
    person's fear is of persecution or serious harm from  nonstate  actors,
    such as supporters of rival political parties or  factions  within  the
    same party, that threat may be localised.  Middle  ranking  and  junior
    party officials, in most cases would not be  recognised  outside  their
    home district. Relocation to another area of Bangladesh is likely to be
    reasonable, depending on the facts  of  the  case  and  the  individual
    circumstances and profile of the person..".


22. The judge found the appellant's uncle is a member of the Awami  League.
    Indeed,  she  also  accepted  that  the  appellant's  uncle   was   the
    chairperson within the local area.   The judge  found  the  appellant's
    uncle's political influence does not  extend  beyond  his  local  area.
    That finding is not challenged and is undoubtedly a  finding  that  was
    open to the judge on the evidence. In reaching her decision  the  judge
    carefully considered the appellant's political profile both  whilst  he
    was in Bangladesh and since his  arrival  in  the  UK.  The  judge  was
    entitled to conclude that in Bangladesh, the appellant was a  supporter
    of the BNP and its student arm mainly due to  his  family  connections.
    His activities were 'low level' in that he accompanied  his  father  or
    friends rather than taking a direct active political role.  In reaching
    that decision the judge noted the appellant's  evidence  is  consistent
    with incidental political involvement on the part of  a  young  teenage
    boy whose family supported the  BNP.   The  judge  noted  the  evidence
    provided by the appellant in respect of his political activities in the
    UK is sparse. The judge accepted that the appellant continues to  be  a
    member of the BNP and noted that he does not claim to hold any position
    within the BNP, but considers himself a supporting member.   The  judge
    was undoubtedly entitled to  reach  that  view  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence as set out in the appellant's witness  statement  that  I  was
    referred to by Ms Isherwood.


23. It was against that background that the judge considered  the  question
    of internal relocation and the risk upon return.  The judge  found  the
    appellant has not established that his uncle has connections that would
    allow him to find the appellant  elsewhere  in  Bangladesh.  The  judge
    noted the appellant had lived for  six  months  with  his  grandparents
    prior to his departure from Bangladesh and although his uncle  knew  of
    his whereabouts, no action was taken against him.  The judge noted  the
    appellant is a single male who is familiar  with  the  culture  of  the
    country and considered the appellant's claim that should he  return  to
    Bangladesh, he would be obliged to care for and accommodate his  mother
    and sister. The judge noted Bangladesh is a large country with a  large
    population and many urban areas. She noted it is open to the  appellant
    and his family to live in any urban area away from  their  home  place.
    The judge was undoubtedly entitled  to  reach  that  conclusion  having
    carefully considered the evidence.


24. I also reject the claim that the judge failed to consider the risk upon
    return by reference to the appellant's profile as a member of the  BNP,
    and his sur place activities in the UK.  At paragraph [18],  the  judge
    referred to the appellant's political activities in the UK. It  was  in
    my judgement open to the Judge to find that the appellant has failed to
    show that he has any political  profile  within  the  UK  or  would  be
    recognised in any way Bangladesh, as a leader or activist for the  BNP,
    for the reasons given.  The judge noted, at paragraph  [25],  that  the
    appellant has no political profile to speak of and he cannot reasonably
    be described as having even the profile of a grassroots level leader or
    local committee member. In reaching her decision the judge  noted  that
    the BNP is a main opposition party with, according  to  the  background
    information, millions of members. She noted that whilst  the  political
    situation in Bangladesh  remains  unsettled,  the  background  evidence
    suggests that those with a higher  profile  may  face  potential  risks
    depending on their particular circumstances.


25. The judge determined the appellant's international protection claim  on
    its own merits, and it was in my judgement open to the  judge,  looking
    at all the evidence in the round, to conclude that  the  appellant  can
    internally relocate  for  the  reasons  given  by  the  judge.   It  is
    necessary to guard against the temptation to characterise as  an  error
    of law what is in truth no more than a disagreement about the weight to
    be given to different factors, particularly where the judge who decided
    the  appeal  has  had  the  advantage  of  hearing  oral  evidence  and
    considering all the evidence in the round.  The decision to dismiss the
    appeal for the reasons set out in the decision was in my  judgement,  a
    decision that was open to the FtT judge on the evidence before the FtT.
     The findings  and  conclusions  reached  by  the  judge  were  neither
    irrational nor unreasonable in the Wednesbury sense,  or  findings  and
    conclusions that were wholly unsupported by the evidence.


26. In my judgment, it was open to the judge to dismiss the appeal for  the
    reasons given by her.   It  follows  that  the  appeal  before  me,  is
    dismissed.





Notice of Decision


27. The appeal against the decision of FtT Judge Skehan is dismissed.





Signed                                  Date          11th March 2020





       Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

