
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                              Appeal
Number: PA/07909/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 14 March 2018                           |  On 3 April 2018                |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN

                                   Between

                               mr bodrul alom
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Reza of Counsel, instructed by JKR Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 12 December 1974.  He
    made an application for asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and  on  the
    basis of his human rights and had a screening interview on  28  January
    2016  and  a  substantive  asylum  interview  on  8  July  2016.   This
    application was  refused  in  a  decision  dated  19  July  2016.   The
    Appellant appealed against this decision and  his  appeal  came  before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Abebrese for  hearing  on  1  November
    2017.

 2. In a decision and reasons promulgated on 30 November  2017,  the  judge
    dismissed the appeal. An application for permission to appeal was  made
    in time on  13  December  2017  on  the  basis  that  the  Judge  erred
    materially in law: (i) in  failing  to  find  that  the  Appellant  had
    resided continuously in the United Kingdom for more than 20  years,  in
    accordance with paragraph 276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules; (ii)
    the Judge erred in his assessment of proportionality.

 3. In a decision dated 4 January 2018 Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Chohan granted permission to appeal in the following terms:

         "2.   The  grounds  argue  that  the  judge  erred   in   requiring
             documentary evidence  to  establish  the  Appellant's  claimed
             residence in the United Kingdom for a period of twenty  years;
             that the judge failed to engage with Article 8; and  that  the
             judge gave no reasons as to why the evidence of the  witnesses
             had been rejected.

         3.   It does appear from the judge's decision that perhaps too much
             emphasis has been placed on  the  requirement  of  documentary
             evidence.  That, per se, is not fatal to the judge's  decision
             but, the judge fails to engage in any meaningful  sense,  with
             the evidence of the witnesses.

         4.   Accordingly, there is an arguable error of law."

 4. A Rule 24 response was lodged by the Respondent on 29 January  2018  in
    which the Respondent opposed the Appellant's appeal.

     Hearing

 5. The error of law hearing came before  me  on  14  March  2018.   Having
    considered the judge's decision, the grounds of appeal and the grant of
    permission, I informed the parties that, even if there were  errors  in
    the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Abebrese,  ultimately  these
    errors would not be material given that it would not have been possible
    for the Appellant to succeed in his appeal  with  regard  to  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(iii) of the Immigration Rules for the reason  that  paragraph
    276ADE(1) expressly provides  that  at  the  date  of  application  the
    applicant needs to have resided continuously for twenty years. This  is
    the reason that [48] of the Respondent's decision provides as follows:

         "When considering the requirements outlined in paragraph  276ADE(1)
         it is noted that you are a national of  Bangladesh  and  you  claim
         that you entered the UK in  1997.   However,  you  have  failed  to
         provide   documentary   evidence    to    support    this    claim.
         Notwithstanding this, you  have  therefore  lived  in  the  UK  for
         nineteen years and it is not accepted you have  lived  continuously
         in the UK for at least twenty years."

 6. Thus regardless of the presence or absence of documentary evidence, the
    fact remains that at the date of decision on 19 July 2016 the Appellant
    was  not  eligible  to  qualify  under  paragraph  276ADE(iii)  of  the
    Immigration Rules because even on his own account he did not enter  the
    United Kingdom until 1997.

 7. On this basis, whilst the appeal was brought on human  rights  grounds,
    an assessment of the proportionality  of  the  decision  is  inevitably
    informed by whether or not the Appellant can meet the  requirements  of
    the Rules. On that basis I intended to find no error of law and  uphold
    the decision of the First tier Tribunal Judge.

 8. Neither representative had anything to add.  I informed Mr Reza, acting
    on behalf of the Appellant, that it was open to the  Appellant  to  now
    make an application under paragraph 276ADE  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    given that more than twenty years has now elapsed since  he  claims  he
    arrived in the United Kingdom.

     Decision

 9. For the reasons  set  out  above,  I  find  that  although  there  were
    potentially arguable errors  of  law  in  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Abebrese for the reasons  set  out  in  the  grounds  of
    appeal viz the failure to engage with the evidence of  the  Appellant's
    sister and nephew and the absence at [25]  of  clear  reasoning,  these
    errors are not ultimately material given that the Appellant  could  not
    have succeeded in respect of paragraph 276ADE(iii) of  the  Immigration
    Rules at the date of application in  any  event  and  on  the  evidence
    before the Judge, the appeal correctly fell to be  dismissed  on  human
    rights grounds.

10. In these circumstances I find no material error of law and  uphold  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Abebrese.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.







Signed   Rebecca Chapman                     Date 28 March 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
