
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07128/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th January 2018                          |On 6th February 2019          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHAERF


                                   Between

                                     SU
                       (anonymity direction CONTINUED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     None
For the Respondent:    Ms S Cunha of the Specialist Appeals Team


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The Appellant

 1. The Appellant is a Bangladeshi born on 28 August 1993. In late 2006  or
    early 2007 he entered the United Kingdom as a  child  accompanying  his
    parents and two younger siblings with leave as a visitor. He states his
    parents and his sister returned  to  Bangladesh  leaving  him  and  his
    younger brother in the United Kingdom.

 2. On 30 October 2016 he was encountered by the authorities in the  course
    of an immigration investigation at the Balti Hut in  Hastings  when  he
    proffered identity documents relating to his younger  brother  who  had
    been granted leave in March 2016.

 3. The next day, 1 November 2016, he made a claim for leave on  the  basis
    of his  human  rights.  On  29  November  2016  the  SSHD  refused  the
    application. There is no  indication  in  the  Tribunal  far  that  the
    Appellant appealed that decision.

 4. On 18 January 2017 the Appellant made  an  application  for  subsidiary
    protection based on his fear of persecution  on  return  to  Bangladesh
    because his father is or was a politician involved with  the  Jamaat-e-
    Islami party and chairman of the union in Sylhet. In  2005  the  family
    home had been torched by Awami League supporters and the Appellant  had
    suffered  burn  injuries.  He  stated  the  authorities  were   of   no
    assistance, notwithstanding that in 2005  the  Bangladeshi  Nationalist
    Party (BNP) was in power in  coalition  with  other  parties  including
    Jamaat-e-Islami. The Appellant also claimed involvement with the BNP.

The Home Office Decision

 5. By a decision of 14 July 2017 SSHD refused the  Appellant's  protection
    claim. The Appellant's scars attributable to being burnt were noted but
    the SSHD did not accept his account of his family home being torched by
    Awami League supporters in 2005. Similarly, his claimed involvement  in
    the BNP was not accepted because he appeared to know very little  about
    any BNP activities in which he claimed to have been involved. The  SSHD
    also referred the delay of  the  Appellant  in  making  his  subsidiary
    protection claim which  damaged  his  credibility  pursuant  to  s.8(6)
    Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act 2004.

Proceedings in the First-tier Tribunal

 6. By a decision promulgated on 6 November 2018, Judge of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Traynor,  finding  the  Appellant's  account  not   credible,
    dismissed his appeal.  On 6 December  2018,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Andrew granted the  Appellant  permission  to  appeal  on  the
    ground that it was arguable the Judge had erred in law  by  failing  to
    take proper account of the medical evidence before him and  by  failing
    to address the Appellant's claim based on his private and  family  life
    with his cousins living in the United Kingdom.

The Hearing in the Upper Tribunal

 7. The Appellant attended. He had no representation although he  had  been
    represented at  the  First-tier  Tribunal  hearing.  He  confirmed  his
    address. I explained the purpose and procedure  to  be  adopted  at  an
    error of law hearing. Since the Appellant was unrepresented,  Ms  Cunha
    made her submissions first.

Submissions for the SSHD

 8. Ms Cunha referred to paragraphs 10 and 11 of  the  grounds  for  appeal
    which appear to indicate  the  Appellant  had  legal  advice  in  their
    preparation. These two paragraphs are the only grounds which  refer  to
    specific parts of the Judge's decision. Paragraph 10 asserts the  Judge
    failed to address the contents of the Rule 35  report  which  had  been
    prepared when the Appellant was in detention.

 9. Paragraph  11  asserts  the  Judge  gave  inadequate  consideration  or
    reasoning to reject the Appellant's claim based on his family life with
    his relatives in the United Kingdom

10. The Judge had referred to the Rule 35 report at paragraph 8(iii) of his
    decision and at paragraph 26 the SSHD's rejection  of  the  Appellant's
    claim that the injuries were the consequence of the Appellant's  family
    home being torched in 2005. The Rule 35  report  was  evidence  of  the
    existence of scarring but not of its causation.

11. At paragraph 40 the Judge found that the injuries may  well  have  been
    caused in a fire but he did not accept the Appellant's claim about  the
    circumstances of the fire. Ms Cunha noted  the  Appellant  had  claimed
    that between 10 and 20 Awami League supporters had torched  his  family
    home but at paragraph 14 of  his  decision  the  Judge  had  noted  the
    Appellant stated he  had  learned  that  his  father's  home  had  been
    attacked by members of the opposition party from a cousin  and  further
    that he knew nothing of his father's  political  activity  until  March
    2017 when a cousin told him.

12. The Judge at paragraph 40 gave adequate reasons not to accept that  any
    apparent inconsistencies in the Appellant's  evidence  about  this  far
    were attributable to a poor memory. The grounds  for  appeal  have  not
    challenged the Judge's adverse  credibility  finding,  particularly  at
    paragraph 36 of the decision.

13. At paragraphs 37 and 38 the Judge had given reasons for concluding that
    the Appellant's primary concern for remaining (or having been  left  by
    his parents) in the United Kingdom was for  reasons  of  education  and
    economic  betterment.  He  had  delayed  seeking  to   regularise   his
    immigration  status  until  he  had  been  encountered  by  immigration
    officials in the course of an investigation. He had proffered  a  false
    identity, that of his younger brother, and then  made  a  human  rights
    claim before making a subsidiary protection claim  after  rejection  of
    the human rights claim.

14. At paragraph 46 of his decision the Judge had given sustainable reasons
    for rejecting  the  subsidiary  protection  claim  based  on  political
    opinion. The Appellant's father had died in 2014 and the Appellant  had
    not discharged the burden of proof to show that he would be at risk  on
    return to Bangladesh.

15. The Judge had made an adequate and proper consideration of the  private
    and family life claim at paragraph 53 of his decision which  needed  to
    be viewed in the light of the Appellant's claim which the Judge had set
    out at paragraphs 18-22 of his decision.

16. The Judge at paragraph 53 had considered all the relevant  issues  even
    if  he  had  not  referred  to  the  relevant  case  law  or  statutory
    provisions. The decision was safe and the appeal should be dismissed.

Response by the Appellant

17. I summarised the import of the  submissions  for  the  SSHD.  Ms  Cunha
    agreed it was a fair summary and the Appellant  did  not  ask  for  any
    clarification.

18. He reminded me that he was aged about 12 in  2005.  All  his  relatives
    were in the United Kingdom and that explained why he was  not  able  to
    obtain medical evidence from Bangladesh. He re-asserted that his  scars
    were the result of injuries from the 2005 fire. He had  been  taken  to
    hospital after the fire and while in detention in the United Kingdom he
    had been examined for the purpose of  the  preparation  of  a  Rule  35
    report. He sought to explain the apparent inconsistency  identified  at
    paragraph 14 of the Judge's decision by stating that he  knew  that  he
    had been attacked but had only found out by whom and why  he  had  been
    attacked when told in 2017 by his cousin.

19. While in detention  in  the  United  Kingdom  he  had  not  felt  safe,
    previously he had never lived alone. While in detention he had suffered
    badly on account of his wisdom teeth and had sought medical assistance.



20. On return to Bangladesh he could  easily  be  traced  through  Facebook
    because his father had been well-known and had enemies.

21. On arrival in 2006/7 he had been about 13.  Thereafter,  he  had  lived
    with his aunt who had suffered a stroke in 2010 whereupon  he  went  to
    live  with  Nadir  Begum  whom  the  Judge  found  is  married  to  the
    Appellant's first cousin. She provided everything for him and he had  a
    good relationship with her children. He has lived in the United Kingdom
    some 13 years and all his family are  either  here  or  in  the  United
    States. Since he came here the general position in Bangladesh was worse
    than ever. He had no assets in Bangladesh. Awami League supporters  had
    burned his family home in 2005  during  which  they  had  attacked  his
    grandmother who had died the  following  year.  He  had  no  family  in
    Bangladesh.

22. Ms Cunha for the SSHD had  nothing  further  to  add  to  her  previous
    submissions.

Findings and Consideration

23. The Rule 35 report concludes that the Appellant's scars are  consistent
    with torture or assault and notes  that  some  of  them  the  Appellant
    contributes to burns. The Rule 35 report is not a Medicare-legal report
    but is prepared primarily in the context of matters referred to in  the
    SSHD's letter to the  Appellant  releasing  him  from  detention  which
    states his detention has been reviewed and the Rule 35 report carefully
    considered when determining his suitability  for  detention  under  the
    "Adult at Risk" policy. There was no other medical evidence before  the
    Judge. He knew of the Rule 35 report. At paragraphs 14 and 26 he  dealt
    with the Appellant's evidence about the claimed 2005 attack and why the
    SSHD did not believe him and gave sustainable reasons for  his  adverse
    finding on the claimed attack at paragraphs 39 and 40 of his decision.

24. The adverse credibility finding on the 2005 attack  together  with  the
    conclusions for which sustainable reasons were given at  paragraphs  37
    and 38 are sufficient to explain to the Appellant why the Judge did not
    find his political asylum claim to have been substantiated, even to the
    lower standard of proof.

25. At paragraphs 18-22 the Judge set out the evidence of  the  Appellant's
    private and family life. He was  entitled  to  note  the  lack  of  any
    evidence to support the Appellant from his younger brother and the lack
    of any explanation for this. At paragraphs 43 and 44 he  made  findings
    about the Appellant's private and family life in the United Kingdom. At
    paragraph 53 he referred expressly  to  the  relationship  between  the
    Appellant and his family expressly noting that he lived with  his  aunt
    and her family. This fed into his assessment in the same and  following
    paragraph of the proportionality of the SSHD's decision to  reject  the
    Appellant's claim based on his private and family life.

26.   The Judge gave ample and sustainable reasons for his  conclusions  and
    I do not find his treatment of the claim discloses any  material  error
    of law.  The appeal is therefore dismissed because the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal contains no material error of law.

Anonymity

27.  No submissions were made about the  anonymity  direction  made  by  the
    Judge and in the circumstances, I direct that it should continue.

SUMMARY OF DECISION

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  did  not  contain  a  material
    error of law and it shall stand.  The consequence  is  the  Appellant's
    appeal is dismissed.

    Anonymity direction continued.


Signed/Official Crest                                              Date  29.
i. 2019

Designated Judge Shaerf
A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
