
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07094/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13th February 2018                         |On 6th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                    [M M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Patyna instructed by Davies, Blunden & Evans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant, a national of Bangladesh,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State of 6th July  2017
    to refuse his application for asylum in the  UK.   First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge David Clapham dismissed the appeal and the Appellant now  appeals
    to this Tribunal with permission granted by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Saffer on 8th December 2017.



Preliminary Issue

 2. At the hearing Ms Patyna sought to introduce documents  lodged  on  6th
    February 2018 which she said go to the issue of the  delay  in  seeking
    asylum.  She submitted that following the  First-tier  Tribunal  appeal
    hearing the Appellant made a complaint against his solicitors acting at
    that time and that complaint was upheld.  She submitted  that  the  new
    representatives had sought to introduce the evidence contained  in  the
    further bundle.  However no details of the complaint were put  forward.
    I noted that Ms Patyna herself represented the Appellant at the hearing
    in the First-tier Tribunal.  It  was  not  clear  on  what  basis  this
    evidence had not been previously submitted.  I decided not to admit the
    documents prior to the error  of  law  hearing  but  would  review  the
    decision should I find an error of law.

Background

 3. The background to this appeal is the Appellant  claims  that  he  is  a
    member of the Rohingya ethnic group and that his family left Myanmar in
    1962/1963 for Bangladesh.  He said that his father and brothers  worked
    in a factory called Modern Bricks and Textiles Ltd which was owned by a
    man who came from Myanmar and that the Appellant himself began  working
    there in 1996.  The Appellant says that on 6th May 1998 he witnessed  a
    violent attack at Modern Bricks and Textiles Ltd during which  gunshots
    were fired and two people were murdered.  The Appellant talked  to  the
    police about what he had seen.  The  Appellant  later  found  out  that
    those behind the attack at  the  factory  were  members  of  the  Awami
    League.  He claims that about a week later he was threatened  by  these
    men who were linked to the Awami League  and  told  that  he  would  be
    killed if he went to the police  or  provided  a  statement  about  the
    incident in the factory.  He claims that he was threatened on a  second
    and then a third occasion by these men.

 4. The Appellant obtained a Tier 4 (Student) Visa on 17th August 2006  and
    came to the UK on 16th September 2006.  The Appellant  claims  that  he
    visited Bangladesh for a  few  days  in  2008.   His  applications  for
    subsequent extensions of his leave to remain were  granted  until  28th
    July 2014.  The Appellant made an application for leave  to  remain  on
    the basis of ten years' residence and family and private life  on  22nd
    August 2014 and this was refused on 24th November 2014.  The  Appellant
    claimed asylum on 4th January 2017.

The submissions

 5. At the hearing Ms Patyna outlined the  four  Grounds  of  Appeal.   The
    first ground contends that the judge erred in his approach to Section 8
    of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of Claimants, etc.) Act  2004.
    Ms Patyna submitted that this is an error because Section 8  is  not  a
    determinative factor on credibility as set out in the  decision  of  JT
    Cameroon [2008] EWCA Civ 878 at paragraphs 14 and 16.

 6. It is contended in the second Ground of appeal that the judge failed to
    engage with the documentary evidence and failed to provide reasons.  Ms
    Patyna submitted that the judge made a key error at paragraph 52  where
    the  judge  said  that  he  did  not  accept  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's account "because I consider that if the Appellant had  been
    the victim of threats as he claimed such that he felt he  had  a  well-
    founded fear he could and would have  claimed  asylum."  She  submitted
    that this is  the  only  paragraph  that  deals  with  the  Appellant's
    credibility.

 7. Ms Patyna submitted  that  paragraphs  47  and  51  seems  to  conflate
    credibility with internal relocation and that one should not be left to
    guess the findings made by the judge.   In  her  submission  the  judge
    could have found  that  the  attack  in  1998  happened  but  that  the
    Appellant had not been pursued or that  he  had  only  been  pursued  a
    limited number of times or that he was still at risk.  However  in  her
    submission it is not possible to know from the determination  what  the
    components of the findings were and  what  weight  the  judge  gave  to
    crucial aspects of the Appellant's case.

 8. The second main part of Ms Patyna's  submissions  in  relation  to  the
    credibility findings was that the judge appeared to have failed to have
    regard to the documentary evidence.  At paragraph 52 the judge said  "I
    do not attach weight to the documents  relied  on  in  the  Appellant's
    claim."  In her submission this amounts to a bare statement rather  any
    reasoning in relation to the credibility of the Appellant's  documents.
    She submitted that it appears from paragraph 52 that the  judge  formed
    his view in relation to credibility and then decided not to attach  any
    weight to the documents.  She submitted that this is an error of law as
    identified in Mbanga (AG to insert quote) or MK (AG to insert quote).

 9. Ms Patyna submitted that at  paragraph  50  the  judge  said  that  the
    Appellant's position was "vague" but he erred  in  that  he  failed  to
    reach a conclusion in relation to  this  matter.   She  submitted  that
    there is insufficient reasoning and  that  it  is  not  clear  how  the
    judge's assessment that the appellant's position was vague went to  the
    overall credibility assessment.

10. It is contended in the  third  ground  that  the  judge  erred  in  his
    approach to internal relocation. Ms Patyna  contended  that  the  judge
    failed to engage with the objective evidence in relation to sufficiency
    of protection and internal relocation. She submitted that at page 74 of
    the Appellant's  bundle  details  the  effectiveness  of  policing  and
    concludes that corruption is endemic.  In concluding  at  paragraph  47
    that the Appellant could have gone  higher  up  the  chain,  the  judge
    failed to take account of the country information.

11. In advancing Ground 4 Ms Patyna submitted  that  at  paragraph  51  the
    judge questioned whether there is any up-to-date  reliable  documentary
    evidence in relation to ongoing adverse interest in the Appellant.  She
    referred to pages 61, 64 and 66 of the  Appellant's  bundle  which  she
    said contained evidence of ongoing interest in the  Appellant  and  his
    family.  She accepted that if the judge had said that he had looked  at
    this documentary evidence but did not find it credible  that  would  be
    enough but the judge had made no reference at all to  this  documentary
    evidence in the determination.  She  submitted  that  the  phrasing  in
    paragraph 51 is material.  The judge said; "given that we  are  now  in
    2017, I question whether there  is  any  up-to-date  information  of  a
    reliable nature to suggest that the Appellant is as of now  of  adverse
    interest to anyone in Bangladesh."  In her submission the judge  should
    have  considered  whether  there  is  a  risk  that  these  people  are
    interested in the Appellant and not the other way round.  She said that
    the judge did not go through the documentary evidence to  say  that  he
    had not accepted  it  and  therefore  the  phrase  "I  question..."  is
    problematic.  The judge also said "There must always be the possibility
    of assailants who are allegedly interested in  the  Appellant  in  1998
    having lost that interest now."  She submitted that this shows that the
    judge applied the wrong standard of proof and looked at  the  issue  of
    risk the wrong way around. She submitted that  these  defects  are  not
    cured by the overall decision and that all errors compound one another.



12. In her submissions Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that  the  judge  was
    wholly entitled to take the Section  8  point  against  the  Appellant.
    However in her submission it is apparent from  paragraph  46  that  the
    judge attached weight to it, but it is clear that this  matter  is  not
    determinative.  She referred to  paragraph  21  of  JT  Cameroon  which
    states that weight is a matter for the fact-finder. She submitted  that
    it does not matter that this at the beginning  of  the  findings  given
    that the judge has dealt with all relevant matters.  She submitted that
    the  judge  had  made  sufficient  other  findings   in   relation   to
    credibility.  She pointed to paragraphs 47  and  48  which  go  to  the
    credibility and plausibility of the claim.  She noted that at paragraph
    47 the judge referred to the Appellant's visit to  Bangladesh  in  2008
    and submitted that this goes to risk and internal flight. She contended
    that at paragraph 41 the judge clearly dealt with the Appellant's claim
    at its highest based on the passage of time, and at  paragraph  52  the
    judge concluded that even if the Appellant is credible there is no real
    risk.  In her submission the judge did not need to deal with all of the
    documentary evidence given that he dealt with the Appellant's claim  at
    its highest  at  paragraph  52.   In  her  submission  the  documentary
    evidence or background evidence  does  not  specifically  identify  the
    Appellant.  She submitted that in these circumstances the assessment of
    internal relocation and sufficiency of protection do not bite.

13. In response Ms Patyna submitted that, although  JT  Cameroon  does  say
    that weight in relation to Section 8 is a matter for the judge, this is
    only if it can be shown that the judge has properly assessed all of the
    evidence in the round.  In her submission there was here no  engagement
    with the documentary evidence  or  background  evidence  therefore  the
    Section 8 assessment was not sufficient.  She submitted that  there  is
    no clarity between paragraphs 46 to 52  as  to  where  the  credibility
    assessment begins and ends and where the findings in relation  to  risk
    are made.

Error of Law

14. I firstly note that the judge set out all of the evidence contained  in
    the Appellant's statement at paragraphs 8 to 17.  The judge  noted  the
    Appellant's oral evidence at paragraphs 18 to 44.   In  the  record  of
    examination-in-chief and cross-examination and there  is  reference  to
    the documents in the bundle on a number of occasions.  At paragraph  19
    there is reference to page 64 of the Appellant's bundle.   At  page  20
    there is reference to page  69.   I  note  that  at  paragraph  19  the
    Appellant accepted that the document did  not  relate  to  any  of  his
    family.  At paragraph 19 of the  decision  the  judge  notes  that  the
    Appellant referred to his brother being referred to in the document  at
    page 64.  The judge accepted  that  a  newspaper  cutting  at  page  69
    referred to Rohinghya people and that his brothers were mentioned there
    [20].  As these matters were set out in  significant  detail  I  accept
    that the judge was aware of the documents submitted by the Appellant.

15. In considering the judge's assessment of the documentary  evidence  and
    in particular his conclusion at paragraph 52 that  he  did  not  attach
    weight to the documents relied on in the Appellant's claim  I  bear  in
    mind the guidance in MK (duty to give  reasons)  Pakistan  [2013]  UKUT
    00641 (IAC) set out at paragraph 2 in the head note:

         "(2)  If  a  tribunal  finds  oral  evidence  to  be   implausible,
         incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be  worth  no  weight
         whatsoever, it is necessary to say so in the determination and  for
         such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a
         witness was not believed or that a document was afforded no  weight
         is unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons."

16. However paragraph 52 must be read in the context of the decision  as  a
    whole.  The  judge  was  clearly  aware  of  the  documentary  evidence
    submitted by the Appellant. At paragraph 51 the  judge  concludes  that
    there is no up-to-date reliable evidence to suggest that the  Appellant
    is as of now (in 2017) of adverse interest to anyone in Bangladesh.   I
    do not agree with Ms Patyna's suggestion that the use of the phrase  "I
    question whether" undermines the finding here. Ms Patyna pointed me  to
    a number of pages in the bundle including page 61 which appears to have
    been issued in March 2012, page 64 which appears to relate  to  January
    2013 and appears to name the Appellant's brothers and page 66 which  is
    from January 2013 and  does  not  relate  to  the  Appellant's  family.
    However Ms Patyna did not point me  to  any  more  recent  evidence  in
    relation to any alleged ongoing threats or to indicate in any way  that
    the Appellant is of ongoing adverse interest to anyone  in  Bangladesh.
    Therefore the judge's conclusion at paragraph  51  that  there  was  no
    evidence to suggest that the Appellant is now of  adverse  interest  to
    anyone in Bangladesh was open to him on the basis of the evidence.   In
    my view it is clear from reading the decision as a whole that the judge
    gave sufficient consideration to the documentary evidence.

17.  The  judge  began  his  assessment  of   credibility   with   detailed
    consideration of Section 8 at paragraph 46.  There were two elements of
    Section 8 which he considered adversely affected the Appellant.   There
    is the fact that the Appellant made a  claim  for  asylum  after  being
    notified of the decision to refuse his private or  family  life  claim.
    Further there had been a  very  considerable  delay  in  the  Appellant
    making an asylum claim.

18.  At  paragraph  46  the  judge  said  that  he  attached  "weight   and
    significance" to the fact that the Appellant made a  claim  for  asylum
    after being notified of a decision to refuse his claim in  relation  to
    private and family life.  The judge noted that  there  had  been  "very
    considerable delay" in making an asylum claim and that  throughout  the
    years the Appellant was in contact with the Home Office in  making  his
    various applications for extensions to stay.  The judge  said  that  he
    did not accept that the Appellant was not aware of the  asylum  process
    [49].  It is clear from paragraphs 46 and 49 that  the  judge  attached
    significant weight to the Appellant's delay in claiming asylum.

19. In this case the Appellant had arrived in the UK in 2006  and  did  not
    claim asylum until 4 January 2017. This was a significant  delay  which
    the judge was entitled to consider. In my view it was  clear  that  the
    judge was entitled to attach weight  to  this  factor  as  he  said  at
    paragraph 46, as outlined by Pill LJ at paragraph 21 of JT Cameroon:

         "Section  8  can  thus  be  construed  as  not  offending   against
         constitutional principles. It is no more than a reminder  to  fact-
         finding tribunals that conduct coming within the categories  stated
         in section 8 shall be taken into account in assessing  credibility.
         If there was a  tendency  for  tribunals  simply  to  ignore  these
         matters when assessing credibility,  they  were  in  error.  It  is
         necessary to take account of them.  However,  at  one  end  of  the
         spectrum, there may, unusually, be cases in which  conduct  of  the
         kind identified in section 8 is held to carry no weight at  all  in
         the overall assessment of credibility on the particular facts. I do
         not consider the section prevents that finding  in  an  appropriate
         case.  Subject  to  that,  I  respectfully  agree   with   Baroness
         Scotland's assessment, when introducing the Bill, of the effect  of
         section 8. Where section 8 matters are held to be entitled to  some
         weight, the weight to be given to them is entirely a matter for the
         fact-finder."

20. I do not accept Ms Patyna's submission that the  judge  made  no  other
    credibility findings.   At  paragraph  47  the  judge  found  that  the
    Appellant had been back to Bangladesh in 2008 and had  not  encountered
    any problems.  The judge attached weight to this factor as damaging the
    Appellant's credibility.  Further, at paragraph 48 the judge noted that
    one of the Appellant's brothers remains in  Bangladesh  another  factor
    which the judge considered to have damaged the Appellant's  credibility
    in relation to his assertion of ongoing risk. A  further  matter  which
    damaged the Appellant's credibility is set out at  paragraph  50  where
    the judge concluded that the Appellant's evidence in  relation  to  his
    whereabouts between 1998 and 2006 was 'vague'. Whilst Ms Patyna submits
    that the judge  failed  to  reach  a  conclusion  in  relation  to  his
    assessment that the Appellant's evidence was vague in  my  view  it  is
    clear that the judge considered that this vagueness in his evidence and
    the fact that the Appellant remained in  Bangladesh  between  1998  and
    2006 damaged the  credibility  of  his  claim  to  remain  at  risk  in
    Bangladesh. This is a significant  period  of  time  during  which  the
    Appellant was said to have remained in Bangladesh and it  was  open  to
    the judge to find that this too damaged  his  credibility.   The  judge
    also made credibility findings at paragraph 51 where he considered that
    the lack of  current  documentary  evidence  as  to  any  ongoing  risk
    undermines the Appellant's  claim  to  be  of  interest  to  anyone  in
    Bangladesh.

21.  Accordingly  I  am  satisfied  that  the  judge  did  make  sufficient
    credibility findings beyond the findings in relation to Section 8.   In
    my view it is clear that the judge found that the Appellant's claim  in
    relation to events in Bangladesh was not  credible  but  that,  in  the
    alternative, even if the Appellant were credible there  is  no  ongoing
    risk.  This was a decision open to  the  judge  on  the  basis  of  the
    evidence before him.

22. I agree with Ms Brocklesby-Weller that if there is no ongoing  risk  to
    the Appellant in his home area the issues of sufficiency of  protection
    and internal relocation are not relevant.  In any event the judge  made
    sufficient findings in relation to both of those issues.  At  paragraph
    48 the judge found that the persecutors were non-state agents who  were
    after money, that the Appellant did not take his complaint beyond local
    police, and that the Appellant returned to Bangladesh in  2008  without
    encountering any difficulties.

23. On the basis of all of this evidence I am satisfied that the judge  did
    not make any material error of law.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge does not  contain  a  material
error of law.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is preserved.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal has been dismissed there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date: 5th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
