
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/07911/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 28th February 2019                    |On 19th March 2019                 |
|                                         |                                   |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD

                                   Between

                              Mr rouzbeh jamali
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms J Fisher, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran whose appeal was dismissed by First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Taylor in a decision  promulgated  on  31st  August
    2018.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged.  It was said  that  the  judge  had
    ignored the Appellant's initial SEF form and  statement  where  he  had
    clearly provided detailed responses to all the questions he  was  asked
    regarding Christianity and  how  he  and  his  family  practised  their
    particular faith.  His position remained  that  he  did  not  know  the
    reasoning behind his mother's decision to continue with her  activities
    and the judge had failed to take into account that the Appellant was  a
    16-year-old child and the Appellant's parents had  asked  him  to  help
    them with the deliveries and he did as he was told.  It was not open to
    the judge to make adverse credibility findings that were not factual in
    nature  and  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  explain  the  actions  or
    intentions of his parents.

 3. Permission to appeal was initially refused but  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Holmes who considered that the judge may have  erred  by
    failing to show that he had  given  any  thought  to  the  age  of  the
    Appellant when he left Iran and the effect that this might have had  on
    his ability  to  answer  the  questions  put  to  him  consistently  or
    accurately.  None of the relevant guidance in this respect was referred
    to and there was also no country guidance decision or country  evidence
    referred to either.

 4. The Secretary of State  lodged  a  Rule  24  notice  stating  that  the
    Appellant was an adult at the time  of  the  drafting  of  his  witness
    statement and giving oral evidence at his appeal.  It followed that  he
    had the opportunity and maturity to revisit earlier evidence given when
    a minor and re-assess his answers then given either  by  correction  or
    elaboration.  The judge had given cogent reasons  for  concluding  that
    the Appellant had not made out  his  claim.   The  judge  had  properly
    rejected the credibility of the core account.

 5. Thus, the matter came before me on the above date.

 6. Before me Ms Fisher asked for a de novo hearing on the basis that there
    was a material error in law by the judge for the reasons given  in  the
    grounds and she also referred me to a note by Counsel, Mr  Eric  Fripp,
    dated 13th November 2018 which emphasised the fact that the  judge  had
    been wrong to conclude that the claim was not plausible having given no
    examination of the surrounding circumstances.

 7. For the Secretary of State Mr Clarke relied on the Rule 24 notice.  The
    scenario presented to the judge was a baffling one.   The  risks  being
    taken by the parents were extraordinary.  The judge had regard  to  all
    the outstanding issues and there was no challenge to paragraphs 16  and
    17 of the decision which set out other matters relating to credibility.
     The judge had accepted the Appellant's account was broadly  internally
    consistent but it was not an account that he found to be  plausible  or
    credible in the overall circumstances of the case.  There was no  error
    of law and the decision should stand.

 8. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

 9. The judge found that it was not plausible that the Appellant's  parents
    would have allowed their son to  act  in  the  capacity  of  delivering
    leaflets.  The judge noted (paragraph 15) that the  Appellant  was  not
    paid and had no particular interest in the church as  when  his  mother
    attended he would usually simply wait outside.  The final  sentence  in
    paragraph 15 is "Why he should put himself at risk in this way  is  not
    clear and I don't find it credible."

10. The difficulty in this conclusion is that the judge has not  considered
    the age of the Appellant at the time and has not taken into account the
    fact that he  would  probably  have  obeyed  the  instructions  of  his
    parents.  Indeed, the judge noted  the  Appellant's  evidence  on  this
    point in paragraph 12 of his decision when the Appellant said he merely
    did what he was asked to do for no pay.

11. The clear reason why the Appellant put himself  at  risk  was,  on  the
    evidence. because his parents told him that that was what  they  wanted
    him to do and as a child he would no doubt be  used  to  following  the
    instructions and directions of his parents.  The judge does not  factor
    this explanation into his decision  which  I  consider  lacks  adequate
    reasoning.  Nothing is said about how these  particular  parents  would
    have reacted to the dangers they faced. No  doubt  some  persons  would
    cease their activities if there was a danger involved but history tells
    us that others would carry on regardless of the threat. It  is  notable
    that in not finding the account credible the judge does  not  refer  to
    any background material nor give any guidance as to what  yardstick  he
    used in coming to those views. The judge is really concluding that  the
    account is not plausible without any further reasoning.  It  cannot  be
    said that facts presented by the Appellant are inherently incredible or
    even highly unusual. The judge appears not to have considered  that  it
    might have been perfectly normal for the Appellant to have followed the
    instructions of his parents and that was why he was putting himself  at
    risk.  On any view this was a matter which should have  been  carefully
    considered by the judge and it appears that it was  not.   He  has  not
    considered the Appellant's age at the time when the events  took  place
    and it was important to consider his age.  The fact that the judge  did
    not believe the Appellant would put himself at risk was a  major  plank
    in the decision  to  reject  the  claim.   The  judge  has  simply  not
    considered the fact that the evidence before him was that the child did
    what he was told to do.

12. In my view this undermines the safety of this decision and it seems  to
    me that the lack of proper reasoning amounts to  a  material  error  in
    law. It follows that  the  decision  cannot  stand  and  fresh  factual
    findings will require to be made.

13. Further fact-finding is necessary and the matter will have to be  heard
    again by the First-tier Tribunal.

14. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act  and  Practice  Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

15. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

16. I set aside the decision.

17. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

18. No anonymity order is made.






Signed   JG Macdonald                            Date 14th March 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald




