
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07892/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at UT (IAC) Hearing in Field House      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16th January 2019                          |On 14th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                                    mr BC
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Benfield, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Zambia whose appeal on all  grounds  was
    dismissed by First-tier Tribunal Judge Lingam in a decision promulgated
    on 17th August 2018.

 2. Grounds of application were lodged and permission to appeal granted  by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Osborne in a decision  dated  18th  September
    2018.

 3. The Grounds of Appeal are extensive.   They  are  broken  into  several
    parts.

 4. The first ground is (a) namely unreasonable delay.  It is said that the
    appeal took forever to kick  off  and  was  muddled  in  administrative
    hiccups.  Documents were misplaced.  The case was finally heard on 29th
    September  2017.   The  matter  was  adjourned  again  for  instructing
    solicitors to arrange the attendance of Dr Agarwal on  the  basis  that
    there was a need to clarify what the judge  perceived  was  a  conflict
    between his report and that of another expert, Dr Walsh.  Judge  Lingam
    did not issue any written directions to that effect.

 5. There then followed a period of the agents  endeavouring  to  ascertain
    what the current situation in the case was before the appeal was listed
    again on 12th February 2018.  Effectively  a  case  management  hearing
    took place at that point.  Directions were issued whereby  parties  had
    to file written submissions to conclude the hearing and that  was  done
    on 12th March 2018 and the decision was made on 17th August  2018  some
    five months later.  This was  technically  eleven  months  between  the
    hearing of the witnesses and recording the evidence and no  explanation
    had been given for what was said to be, inordinate  and  unfair  delay.
    Reference is made to various case law, including SS (Sri Lanka)  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 139 where it was recognised that there  was  no  Rule  that  a
    delay of more than  three  months  between  the  hearing  of  the  oral
    evidence and the date of  the  Tribunal's  decision  would  render  the
    decision unsafe.  Nevertheless, this was a case  where  the  delay  was
    substantial.

 6. Under (b) it was said there was a failure to  apply  anxious  scrutiny.
    Judge Lingam had said that when reading the reports  from  the  medical
    officers this had raised some concerns for her.  However, she  did  not
    say what those specific concerns were or where to find them.

 7. The judge had made an error in stating  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    stopped in 2009 for possession of class A drugs when in fact it  was  a
    class C drug, cannabis.  The mistake that the judge made in determining
    that this was a very dangerous drug  may  have  clouded  her  mind.   A
    number of facts are said to have been recorded incorrectly.

 8. Under (c) there was a failure to  take  into  account  the  Appellant's
    vulnerability.  He was a vulnerable young adult and his  attention  and
    concentration  was  variable  according  to  the   evidence   presented
    (paragraph 24 of the grounds).

 9. Furthermore, it was said under (d) that the judge had made  speculative
    findings.  The judge had said at paragraph 90 that the Appellant  would
    have relatives in Zambia to support him with  his  mental  illness  but
    there was no basis for that finding.   It  was  pointed  out  that  Mrs
    Murasa, the client's witness and carer, was resident in the UK but  was
    originally from Tanzania and had nothing to do with Zambia.

10. The judge had speculated that Mrs Murasa could continue to support  the
    applicant in  Zambia  but  there  was  no  evidence  for  that  in  the
    statement.  There was enough evidence to show that the Appellant  would
    not be able to access treatment or therapy in  Zambia  and  this  would
    make his condition deteriorate and increase his  suicide  risk.   Under
    (e) there was a failure to consider the medical evidence and there  was
    no  basis  to  allege  that  the  Appellant  did   not   act   on   the
    recommendations from Dr Agarwal.  The judge had accused Dr  Agarwal  of
    making credibility findings on the asylum claim (paragraphs 48 and  49)
    but Dr Agarwal had not delved into that field at all.

11. Before me Ms Benfield relied on her grounds.  I was asked  to  set  the
    decision aside and order  a  de  novo  hearing  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  The  substantial  grounds  of  delay  were  made  out.   The
    Appellant had not been treated as  a  vulnerable  witness.   There  was
    country material in relation to the plausibility  of  his  actions  but
    that had not been dealt with.  There was a lack of proper findings.  In
    response to submissions from Ms Jones, Ms Benfield pointed out that the
    decision had in fact taken eleven months from  when  the  evidence  was
    presented and this was an unjustified delay.  The findings were opaque.
    A distinct Article 3 case had been presented- indeed she had  presented
    it.  No reasonable observer could conclude that the Appellant had had a
    fair hearing.

12. For the Secretary of State Ms Jones referred me to SS  (Sri  Lanka)  on
    the issue of delay.  A period of four months there had not resulted  in
    an error of law being shown.  As such the Appellant had failed to prove
    there had been an unreasonable delay under ground (a).  The  judge  had
    applied anxious scrutiny  by  looking  at  the  medical  evidence  very
    carefully.  Nothing under ground (b) was  material.   Contrary  to  the
    grounds the judge had taken into account his vulnerability under ground
    (c).  The judge was correct to note that he  had  been  an  overstayer,
    that he had sold the family home, that he was  the  sole  heir  of  the
    property, and that he had arrived on a visa.  There was  no  unfairness
    to the Appellant.  In terms of the speculative  findings  under  ground
    (d) it was said that there was nothing material to those grounds.   The
    witness Mrs Murasa had supported the Appellant in the  past  and  there
    was no reason why she would not be able to do it in  the  future.   The
    judge had properly considered the medical evidence all as noted in  the
    decision.  There was no separate case made  under  Article  3.   I  was
    asked to uphold the decision.

13. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

14. I should point out one issue in the grounds with which Ms Benfield  did
    not continue to support, namely what is said in paragraph  7  that  the
    Appellant had a legitimate expectation that his appeal matter would  be
    determined within a month as is usually the norm.

15. However, there is no doubt that there has been a considerable  (and  in
    my view unacceptable) delay in this  case.   In  effect  the  delay  is
    really one of eleven months because of the fact that all  the  evidence
    was given eleven months before the judge issued her decision.  The case
    law of SS (Sri Lanka) is clear enough that a delay of three  months  is
    not fatal to the outcome but here  the  delay  is  one  of  effectively
    eleven months which goes a long way to the consideration of whether the
    decision may be unsafe.  Quite why it took  another  five  months  from
    when the submissions were received for the judge to write a decision is
    not explained.

16. What is very troubling in this case is that at no point in the decision
    does the judge set out the basis of the Appellant's  claim.   While  it
    has been said on many occasions that a  decision  is  written  for  the
    benefit of parties it should also be written  for  the  benefit  of  an
    appeal judge who then may have to listen to an argument that there  has
    been unfairness.  For whatever reason the judge simply did not set  out
    the basis of the Appellant's claim and the reader  is  left  in  a  fog
    trying to  work  out  exactly  what  the  Appellant's  claim  is.   The
    Appellant did provide a  witness  statement  but  the  judge  does  not
    rehearse its terms.  Instead she launches into his  oral  evidence  and
    without the benefit of the terms of the witness statement being set out
    the reader is at somewhat of a loss to know whether or  not  the  judge
    has made proper factual findings.  As such the decision is not a  stand
    alone document.  It is necessary to look at the  witness  statement  to
    see what the Appellant's case really is.  When I do that  it  is  quite
    clear that the judge has not  made  careful  factual  findings  on  the
    matters set out by the Appellant in his witness statement and  although
    not specifically focused on in the grounds of application it  seems  to
    me that this is a very significant failure by the judge  which  goes  a
    long way to supporting the proposition that there is a  material  error
    in law in the decision.

17. Paragraph 15 of the grounds of application has force.   The  judge  did
    not say what the concerns were about the medical reports  and  did  not
    take the matter further.  I doubt  the  Appellant  can  be  blamed  for
    failing to provide the Respondent with his Rule 35 report.  There seems
    to be a mistake about whether or not  the  Appellant  was  stopped  for
    possessing a class C drug or a class A drug.  Paragraph 19 points out a
    possible failure by the judge in concluding that the Appellant did  not
    give accurate answers about his family.  There is a question mark  over
    whether the Appellant was treated properly as a vulnerable young adult.
     When the judge said that he would have relatives in Zambia to  support
    him with his mental illness (paragraph 30 of the grounds)  it  is  said
    that there is no basis for that finding and no evidence to support such
    a finding.  There is  a  question  mark  over  whether  the  judge  was
    entitled to  find  that  Mrs  Murasa  would  continue  to  support  the
    Appellant in Zambia.  It is said in the  grounds  that  the  judge  had
    accused Dr Agarwal of making credibility findings on the  asylum  claim
    which he did not do.  All these factors  suggest  a  causal  connection
    between the delay and the decision being unsafe.

18. Taking all these matters together I find that  these  are  cumulatively
    enough  for  me  to  conclude  that  this  judgment  is  unsafe;  I  am
    particularly concerned about the very lengthy delay in the  hearing  of
    the evidence to the issuing of the  decision  and  the  fact  that  the
    Appellant's case has not been set out in  the  manner  it  should  have
    been, let alone in any proper detail. These failures give force to  the
    submission that the factual findings that the judge did  make  are  not
    ones which can be relied upon.  Looking at all the issues before  me  I
    have concluded that the judgment must be set aside as it is not safe to
    rely on the judge's findings as being correct.

19. Following that conclusion, further fact-finding is  necessary  and  the
    matter will have to be heard again by the First-tier Tribunal.

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is therefore set aside  in  its
    entirety.  No findings of the First-tier Tribunal are to stand.   Under
    Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice Statement  7.2  the
    nature and extent  of  the  judicial  fact-finding  necessary  for  the
    decision to be remade is such that it is appropriate to remit the  case
    to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

21. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

22. I set aside the decision.

23. I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      JG  Macdonald                                Date  8th  February
2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
