

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/07531/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                     |      Decision & Reasons         |
|                                     |Promulgated                      |
|on 14 March 2018                     |      On 09 April 2018           |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DEANS

                                   Between

                                     S F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by DGF Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is an appeal against a decision by Judge of the First-tier
      Tribunal Handley dismissing an appeal on protection and human rights
      grounds.


   2. The appellant claims to be a national of Eritrea.  According to the
      appellant, he and his mother fled from Eritrea in 2002 after the
      appellant's father was detained for practising as a Pentecostal
      Christian.  The appellant and his mother lived in Sudan until the
      appellant's mother died in 2014.  The following year the appellant
      left Sudan and went to Libya, where he claims he was detained and
      mistreated.  The appellant's uncle in South Africa paid to arrange the
      appellant's release and for him to be taken by boat to Italy, from
      where he travelled to the UK.




   3. The Judge of the First-Tier tribunal did not accept the appellant's
      evidence as credible.  Having rejected the appellant's evidence on
      this basis, the judge then turned to give consideration to a medical
      report by a consultant clinical psychologist.  According to this
      report the appellant had PTSD as a consequence of past trauma.  The
      judge found, however, that if the appellant had PTSD there may have
      been other causes for this than the appellant's claim to have been
      detained and ill-treated.


   4. Permission to appeal was granted on the basis that it was arguable
      that the judge had failed to take account of the appellant's cognitive
      difficulties identified in the psychologist's report.  These cognitive
      difficulties were arguably relevant to the assessment of the
      credibility and reliability of the appellant's evidence, including the
      appellant's explanation of his lack of knowledge of Tigrinya.  It was
      further arguable that the medical report had been considered as an
      adjunct to the judge's assessment of the appellant's credibility.

   5. At the hearing before me the parties were agreed that the Judge of the
      First-tier Tribunal had erred in law in respect of the treatment of
      the medical report.  The proper course was for the appeal to be
      remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing before a different
      judge with no findings preserved.  I am satisfied that this is the
      proper course in the circumstances.

Conclusions

   6. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the
      making of an error on a point of law.


   7. The decision is set aside.

   8. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing before a
      different judge with no findings preserved.



Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make a direction for anonymity.  As the
appeal is to be reheard I consider that such a direction should be made to
preserve the positions of the parties until the appeal is finally decided.
Unless or until a court or tribunal directs otherwise no report of these
proceedings shall identify the appellant or any member of his family.  This
direction applies to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to
comply with this direction may lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Deans
                  4th April 2018

