
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07054/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 February 2018                          |On 19 March 2018              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD


                                   Between

                                    [M G]
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Slatter, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr L. Tarlow, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Mr Slatter indicated that his client, the Appellant was not present  at
    the hearing centre and invited me to proceed. There was no  reason  not
    to. The Appellant  is  a  citizen  of  Iran  who  sought  international
    protection. That application  was  refused  on  12  July  2017  and  he
    appealed.  Following  a  hearing,  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Davidson, in a decision promulgated on 14 September 2017, dismissed the
    Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    by  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Pickup.  However,  a  renewed
    application was made and permission granted  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge
    Kamara on 8 January 2018. Her reasons for so doing were: -

         "1.  The Appellant appeals  the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal
             Davidson promulgated on 14 September 2017.

         2.   While the facts of this case are not the strongest, given  the
             brevity of the  Judge's  findings  set  out  at  [20]  of  the
             decision, it is arguable that the  reasons  were  insufficient
             and that there was an absence  of  anxious  scrutiny  for  the
             reasons as set out in the grounds."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. Mr Slatter relied on the grounds dated 30 November 2017 and argued that
    the First-tier Tribunal Judge had failed to give adequate  reasons  for
    finding the Appellant lacked credibility. That  such  reasons  as  were
    given by the Judge are  insufficient  and  not  commensurate  with  the
    obligation of anxious scrutiny. He further argued that it was not  open
    to the Judge to say  that  the  Appellant's  answers  were  "vague  and
    evasive" without giving any examples in support of such  a  contention.
    The Judge gives no indication of  how  the  account  lacked  detail  or
    specificity. The failure by the Judge to explain how the Appellant  was
    vague and evasive without putting the appellant and his  representative
    on notice of the same was unfair and open to criticism that  the  Judge
    did not take into account underlying factors in the evidence  given  by
    the minor Appellant such as his age, lack of education etc.  The  Judge
    failed to make adequate findings of fact upon factual issues in dispute
    between the parties as highlighted in Counsel's  skeleton  argument  to
    the First-tier Tribunal and failed to give  adequate  reasons  why  the
    Appellant would not be at risk on return to Iran if  his  account  were
    accepted.

 5. Not surprisingly Mr Tarlow relied on the Respondent's Rule 24 notice of
    1 February 2018 contending that the brevity  of  the  fact  finding  is
    directly related to the brevity of evidence provided by  the  Appellant
    and that the Judge had come to findings that were open to  be  made  on
    the facts of the appeal which the Judge in  granting  permission  noted
    were "not the  strongest".  The  Judge,  he  argued,  directed  himself
    appropriately.

 6. I have carefully considered the competing arguments. I  find  that  for
    the reasons put forward in the grounds to the Upper Tribunal within the
    renewed application for permission to appeal the Judge  has  materially
    erred. In short, his decision is inadequately reasoned. I am  satisfied
    that the evidence has not properly been considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and there has been consequently a deprivation  of  opportunity
    for the Appellant to put his case properly. In the circumstances I have
    decided to remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be heard  de
    novo.




Decision

The making of the decision in the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge Davidson.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 16 March 2018.

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard

