
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07520/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On March 16, 2018                       |On March 26, 2018                  |
|                                             |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ALIS


                                   Between

                                  MR A H T
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               the Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Appiah, Counsel, instructed by Vince Court
Chambers
For the Respondent:    Mr Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I extend the anonymity order previously ordered in this appeal.  Unless
    and until a Tribunal or court  directs  otherwise  the  appellants  are
    granted anonymity no report of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant or any member  of  his  family.  This
    direction applies to amongst others, the appellant and the  respondent.
    Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of  court
    proceedings.

 2. The appellant is a Kuwaiti national.  He claimed to  have  entered  the
    United Kingdom using a fake passport on May 30, 2008. He claimed asylum
    but this was refused by the  respondent  on  September  26,  2008.  His
    appeal against this decision was rejected by the Tribunal  on  November
    14, 2008. An appeal to the High Court failed on January  26,  2009.  He
    then lodged further submissions  on  March  13,  2009  but  these  were
    rejected  without  a  right  of  appeal.  On  November  25,  2014   his
    representatives lodged further submissions but these  were  refused  by
    the respondent on July 21, 2017.

 3. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal on August 8, 2017 under  Section
    82(1) of the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.  His  appeal
    came before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Povey (hereinafter  called
    "the Judge") on September 6, 2017 and  in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    September 19, 2017 the Judge refused the appeal on all grounds.

 4. The appellant appealed this decision on October 3, 2017. Permission  to
    appeal was refused by  Designated  Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Manuell on October 16, 2017 but when those grounds were  renewed  Upper
    Tribunal Judge Canavan granted permission on  December  20,  2017.  She
    found it arguable the Judge may have erred (a) by failing  to  consider
    the likelihood of the appellant being able to renew his  identity  card
    and (b)  by  failing  to  consider  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's
    witnesses.

 5. In a Rule 24 response dated January 18, 2017 the respondent opposed the
    permission arguing the Tribunal had properly directed itself  and  made
    findings open to it.

 6. This matter came before me on the above date.

    SUBMISSIONS ON ERROR IN LAW

 7. Mr Appiah submitted there were two grounds of appeal.

 8. With regard to the first ground he referred the Tribunal to  paragraphs
    41, 43 and 44 of the  Judge's  decision  and  the  country  report  and
    submitted that the Judge had failed  to  consider  this  evidence  when
    deciding the appellant would be able to renew his security card. If  he
    had properly considered the evidence  Mr  Appiah  submitted  the  Judge
    would have concluded that there  would  be  difficulties  renewing  the
    security card.

 9. The second ground of appeal  concerned  his  failure  to  consider  the
    appellant's brother's evidence. There had been an  adjournment  request
    made and based on the Judge's indication the appellant's representative
    was content to proceed. Mr Appiah submitted there was no  evidence  the
    Judge  had  considered  the  written  evidence  especially   from   the
    appellant's brother. Whilst his findings may  have  been  open  to  him
    there was a procedural unfairness  as  the  Judge  failed  to  properly
    consider their evidence.

10. Mr Melvin relied on the Rule 24 response. He submitted that with regard
    to ground one the Judge had clearly considered the country  report  and
    neither NM (documented/undocumented Bidoon: risk) Kuwait CG [2013] UKUT
    00356 (IAC) nor the country report suggested the Judge's findings  were
    not open to him. There was nothing in the  guidance  that  suggested  a
    person who had previously held a "security card"  would  be  unable  to
    renew it.

11. With regard to the second ground the witnesses did  not  attend  either
    this hearing or the appellant's previous  hearing.  The  appellant  was
    found to lack credibility and  at  paragraph  5  the  Judge  agreed  to
    consider their evidence. The fact the appellant's brother's  claim  had
    been accepted did not mean this appellant's appeal should be  accepted.
    The decision was open to the Judge.

12. Having heard these submissions I reserved my decision.

    FINDINGS ON ERROR IN LAW

13. The original Judge's decision from 2008 formed  part  of  the  evidence
    considered both by the respondent and the Tribunal when  the  appellant
    renewed his application in 2014.

14. Two grounds have been raised by the appellant. The first ground centred
    on the Judge's approach to the availability of a  replacement  security
    document. At paragraphs 41 and 42 of the decision, the Judge identified
    that he considered the background evidence and the decision of NM.

15. It therefore follows that  unless  the  Judge  has  misinterpreted  the
    background evidence there can be no material error.

16. Mr Appiah referred me to paragraph 87 of NM.  This  paragraph  confirms
    that if a person was unable to renew his/her security cards  then  that
    person may be at risk. Neither the  Tribunal  in  NM  nor  the  country
    guidance is authority for the argument that people will face a  problem
    renewing their security cards.

17. Both representatives invited me to consider the Country Information and
    Guidance (July 2016). The fact the appellant had held a  security  card
    placed him in a different category to a Bidoon who had never held  such
    a document. The appellant's claim was that he would  have  difficulties
    renewing his security card because of his previous  political  activity
    or incarceration. The Judge rejected his claims and it follows that his
    finding at paragraph 43 was open to him. In  making  that  finding  the
    Judge had considered the case of NM as well as the country  information
    report.

18. The second ground touches on procedural unfairness. At paragraph  5  of
    the Judge's decision the  Judge  referred  to  an  application  for  an
    adjournment to enable the appellant's brother to attend the hearing and
    for the brother's asylum paperwork  to  be  adduced.  The  respondent's
    representative did not oppose the application.

19. After considering these submissions the Judge indicated that  based  on
    the DNA evidence the Judge was satisfied the appellant was a Bidoon and
    the primary issue was whether the appellant was undocumented. Based  on
    that indication the appellant's representative withdrew his application
    for an adjournment and the case proceeded. In considering the case  the
    Judge noted that he had witness statements from  both  the  appellant's
    brother and a friend albeit neither attended to give evidence. In fact,
    the appellant's brother's situation had not even been placed before the
    original Judge in 2008.

20. Mr Appiah argued the Judge did not consider the evidence but I note  at
    paragraph 33  the  Judge  made  clear  the  evidence  relating  to  the
    appellant's brother must be considered as  one  part  of  the  evidence
    pertaining to the appellant's account and his credibility.

21. Mr Appiah's submission that the Judge overlooked the  evidence  is  not
    supported by the detail in the Judge's decision.

22. The Judge started from the position adopted by the previous  Judge  but
    he accepted the appellant was a Bidoon whereas the previous  Judge  had
    not. The Judge considered documents that had  been  submitted  and  his
    findings at paragraphs 37 and 38 do not appear  to  be  challenged.  At
    paragraph 39 the Judge identified inconsistencies between his  evidence
    before the previous Tribunal and his evidence now. The  Judge  rejected
    the appellant's account and found  him  to  be  a  witness  lacking  in
    credibility.

23. The fact the appellant's brother had previously been granted status was
    something the  Judge  was  aware  of  but  having  heard  the  evidence
    presented to him he concluded the appellant had failed  to  demonstrate
    he was also an undocumented Bidoon.

24. Mr Appiah accepted in his submissions to me that the  Judge's  findings
    would be open to him if he  had  considered  all  the  evidence.  I  am
    satisfied that he did consider the evidence of the appellant's brother.
    The Judge was not required to make individual findings but  merely  had
    to demonstrate that he had taken account of this evidence.

25. The Judge was clearly aware of the evidence as he highlighted the  fact
    that this evidence had not been presented  to  the  original  Judge  in
    2008. The Judge's findings at paragraphs 31 and 33 of his decision were
    evidence he had considered the evidence and those findings were open to
    him.

26. I therefore find that there was no error of law in the Judge's approach
    to either issue.

    DECISION

27. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

28. I uphold the previous decision.


Signed                              Date     22/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I do not make a fee award as I have dismissed the appeal.


Signed                              Date     22/03/2018

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Alis
