
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07341/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 4 September 2019.                 |On 17 September 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                  Rami [M]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION Not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Malik, Clerk from HUMD Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is  Rami  [M].   He  is  a  citizen  of  the  Palestinian
    Territories who was born on 30 January,1984.  He is represented  by  Mr
    Malik, a clerk from HUMD Solicitors, and the respondent is  represented
    by Mr McVeety.

2.   The appellant made application for recognition as  a  refugee  and  was
    refused.  He appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  On  29  April,  2019
    the appellant's appeal was due to be heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Foudy.

3.    The  appellant  sought  an  adjournment  at  10  o'clock  because  his
    representative Mr Malik, a solicitors' clerk, had failed to attend  the
    hearing.  The Tribunal received a facsimile from Mr Malik saying:

         "I write to inform the court that I was due to attend and represent
         the above client in court today however due  to  a  serious  family
         emergency I cannot attend.  I have informed my client and his  wife
         to attend and informed them  why  I  cannot  attend.   I  am  fully
         prepared  for  this  appeal  and  cannot  entrust  it  to   another
         representative at such short notice due to the  complexity  of  the
         case and trust the court will adjourn this  matter  which  is  very
         important to my client."

4.   As a result the judge felt  unable  to  agree  to  an  adjournment  and
    proceeded with the hearing.  She concluded that the appellant was not a
    refugee and was not  entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.   She  was
    satisfied that his rights would not  be  breached  under  the  European
    Convention for the Protection of Human Rights.

5.   At the hearing before me this morning Mr Malik appeared  and  explained
    that there was only one partner in the office on the  day  in  question
    and no one in his firm, apart from him, dealt  with  immigration  work.
    He could offer me no sensible excuse why that partner  could  not  have
    gone to the First-tier Tribunal and explain the circumstances  and  ask
    for an adjournment.

6.   Mr Malik appears to understand the importance of  this  matter  to  his
    client and yet let him down at the very last minute.  People  who  seek
    refuge in this country are people who need the very best  service  that
    can be provided by lawyers and it simply is not good on the day of  the
    hearing to let them down, for whatever reason.  Mr Malik says he is the
    only person in the practice who knows anything about immigration.  That
    begs the question of how he can be properly supervised?

7.   Out of fairness to the appellant  I  remit  this  appeal  to  be  heard
    afresh by the First-tier Tribunal before a judge other than  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Foudy. I am satisfied  that  the  interests  of  justice
    require that I should do this.  An Arabic speaking interpreter will  be
    required and two hours should be allowed for the hearing of the case.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley           Date: 10 September 2019

