
 [pic]

The Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                         Appeal Number:
PA/07684/2016




    |                                             |
|                                             |


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 2nd June 2017                             |On 6th July 2017              |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                 DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                  MR.Y.J.O.

                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

     Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal
    or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings  or  any
    form of publication thereof shall directly or indirectly  identify  the
    original Appellant. This direction  applies  to,  amongst  others,  all
    parties. Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:

For the Appellant: Broudie Jackson Centre.
For the Respondent:  Mr A McVettey, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS
Introduction.

   1. The appellant is a Kurdish national of Iraq and a Sunni Muslim. He
      gave his date of birth as January 1990. He was encountered by
      immigration officials and then claimed protection.


   2. He said that he was from Daquq. He claimed his father was an informer
      for the Ba'ath party and was responsible for the deaths of two
      Peshmerga.Subsequently, the appellant and his friend was recruited by
      the Peshmerga to provide intelligence on Isis activity. In May 2015 he
      discovered that his friend had been caught by Isis and they knew of
      his involvement. Fearful, he travelled to Kirkuk. Shortly afterwards
      he discovered that his friend had been killed by Isis. A month later
      they had been to his home. Seven months later he left Iraq.

   3. The respondent refused his claim in July 2016. The respondent referred
      to the country guidance case of AA(article 15 (c) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT
      544 which recorded that the armed conflict in Kirkuk was such that as
      a general matter  any civilian returned there faced a real risk of
      being subjected to indiscriminate violence within the scope of article
      15 (c) of the Qualification Directive. It was accepted that he came
      from there and that it was a contested area.

   4. It was not considered credible that he would be involved with
      Peshmerga if they were seeking revenge for his father's actions
      towards their comrades. It was not considered he was at risk from
      them. Regarding his claim about ISIS his account was considered to be
      inconsistent and his claimed fear of them was rejected.

   5. Taking his claim at its highest the respondent considered the
      feasibility of his return to a different part of Iraq. The respondent
      concluded that he could live in the IKR, for instance in Erbil. He
      could be returned to Baghdad and then travel onwards.

The First tier Tribunal


   6. At the outset of the hearing the presenting officer submitted
      additional country information with a view to demonstrating a change
      in country conditions. The suggestion was that Kirkuk was no longer a
      contested area. The reception this evidence was opposed on behalf of
      the appellant with the argument being if a new approach to the
      feasibility of return was being introduced then they would have to
      request an adjournment  in order to prepare. The judge considered the
      information presented but was not prepared to depart from the position
      as stated in the country guidance decision in relation to Kirkuk. The
      judge concluded that because of this the appellant could not be
      returned to Kirkuk.


   7. The judge did not find the appellant credible. The judge referred to
      his failure to mention at screening his claim about his father.
      Furthermore, it was considered inconceivable if his father was an
      informer that the Peshmerga would recruit the appellant. A similar
      view was taken of the appellant's claim that he was to act as
      informant for Isis. The judge gave numerous reasons, set out in
      paragraph 16 of the decision. At paragraph 18 in summary the judge
      said there was no part of his account that could be accepted and there
      was no viable basis for a fear from imputed political opinion outside
      a contested area.

   8. At paragraph 19 the judge went on to consider the question of return
      and internal relocation. The judge accepted in line with the country
      guidance decision and article 15 (c) that he could not return to
      Kirkuk. The judge referred to practicalities of return discussed in
      the country guidance.

   9. On the basis the appellant did not have identification documents the
      judge concluded it was not at that point feasible to return him. The
      judge did say however that with some effort on his part he could
      obtain documentation through his family with whom he was in contact.

  10. The judge then went on to consider return to Erbil via Baghdad. The
      country guidance decision indicated that the IKR was violence free. A
      Kurd who was not originally from there could obtain entry for a
      limited period, subject of finding employment.

  11. The judge at paragraph 27 referred to the need to consider the
      appellant's specific situation. It was accepted he had a very limited
      education and only spoke Kurdish Sorani. The judge referred to him as
      being resourceful and concluded he could establish himself in either
      the IKR or Baghdad. The judge did not accept he had no family support.
      The judge concluded at paragraph 28 that the appellant had failed to
      discharge the burden to the lower standard that there were no places
      where he could not safely live in the IKR.

The Upper Tribunal


  12. Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted on the basis it
      was arguable the judge did not fully apply the country guidance given
      on internal relocation.


  13. The respondent opposed the appeal by way of rule 24 response.
      Reference was made to paragraph 15 of the decision and the appellant's
      circumstances. The judge had not accepted the appellant was without
      family support. The judge had concluded that if he entered via Baghdad
      he could travel onwards to the Kurdish region where he should be able
      to secure employment.

  14. The appellant's representative at hearing confirmed there was no
      challenge to the judge's negative credibility findings. Rather, the
      challenge remained as   set out in the leave application and the
      consideration of relocation. In particular this required an assessment
      of the appellant's individual characteristics. It was submitted that
      the judge in considering relocation according to the Elgafaji decision
      and whether the appellant would face a risk of article 15 (c) harm the
      judge had set too high a threshold. Rather, the test was whether the
      appellant could reasonably be expected to stay in another part of the
      country rather than whether they would face a real risk of 15 (c)
      harm.

  15. It was submitted that to simply describe the appellant as resourceful
      was inadequate. It was necessary to consider the mechanism of travel,
      the likelihood of employment and the support available from family or
      others.

  16. It was also argued the judge factually erred in referring to the
      appellant returning to the IKR or Baghdad, being places where he had
      never lived.

  17. In response, the presenting officer referred me to the judge's
      comments at paragraph 24 that the appellant could get documents sent
      from his family. Therefore he would not be undocumented on return. As
      someone with documentation he could access the labour market. He would
      not be required to turn to his family for ongoing support. In the IKR
      he would not need a sponsor. The judge found that he was resourceful
      and this was not an irrelevant consideration. It was relevant to his
      ability to access the labour market. Furthermore he would be returning
      with a package from the UK government which would help his
      integration. There are flights to Baghdad from London and from there
      he could make his way to Erbil. The presenting officer said he would
      not need to be in Baghdad for any length of time and that it was
      possible to go to Erbil directly from there as flights had commenced
      as of January 2017.

  18. In response the appellant's representative acknowledged the finding
      that the appellant has relatives who could send him documentation.
      However documentation was only one of the factors relevant. He would
      not have the practical support of his family's presence because of
      where they where. He submitted that even with documentation but
      without links to the area it was questionable whether he could find
      employment in a short timescale. Consequently, it was submitted the
      comment that he was resourceful was not adequate.

 Consideration

  19. No challenge has been made to the judge's conclusion that the
      appellant's underlying claim in relation to his father and Peshmerga
      and Isis was untrue. The only issue arising was a question of the
      appellant's return. The judge was not prepared to accept that the
      situation in Kirkuk had improved to the point where it was no longer
      considered a contested area. Consequently, the focus was upon the
      appellant's return to Baghdad and then from there to the IKR.


  20. I find nothing turns on the judge's use of the phrase `return '.
      Although the appellant says he is from Kirkuk and so would not be
      returning to Baghdad or Erbil it is clear that the phrase `return' is
      not meant literally but rather is a reference to his country.

  21. In terms of AA and as a matter of principle there is no obligation on
      the respondent to prove preclearance or any other mechanism of return.
      There was no challenge to the judge's findings that he has family who
      could provide him with documentation. There was no challenge to the
      judge's finding that with documentation the appellant could be
      returned to Baghdad by air. There was no challenge to the judge's
      statement at paragraph 26 that travel by air from Baghdad to Erbil is
      taking place. In Erbil he will be able to gain entry to the remainder
      of the IKR.

  22. The principal challenge has been upon the reasonableness of the
      proposed relocation and the contention that the judge did not make
      sufficient findings of fact specific to the appellant. In such an
      exercise the practicalities are that only the most basic findings will
      most likely be available. The appellant's age was not disputed. He was
      a young man with no health issues. He spoke Kurdish Sorani. There was
      no finding he spoke Arabic. The judge found that he had some contact
      with his family. The judged posed the question as to whether it would
      be reasonable to expect the appellant to relocate. His return was
      premised on his ability to obtain documentation. The judge at
      paragraph 27 indicated an appreciation of the need to have regard to
      the individual's characteristics as set out at paragraph 15 of the
      country guidance decision. Reference was made to the background
      information about what he might face on return. It was accepted that
      he had a very limited education. No additional risk factors were
      identified. My conclusion from this is that the judge has set out a
      basic matrix for concluding that return was reasonable. That
      conclusion was open to the judge. Consequently, I find no material
      error of law established.

Decision

I find no material error of law established in the decision of First tier
Judge Lloyd Smith. Consequently, that decision, dismissing the appellant's
appeal on all grounds shall stand.


Deputy Judge Farrelly

5th July 2017

