
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07705/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 31st August 2017                      |On 19th September 2017              |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD

                                   Between

                                 a m (sudan)
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Bandegani, Counsel, instructed by Birnberg
Peirce&Partners
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant is a citizen of Sudan  born  in  1972.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in February  2000  concealed  in  a  lorry  and  claimed
    asylum.  That claim was refused in May 2004.  An  appeal  against  that
    decision was dismissed on 8th September 2004.

2.   Between May 2006 and 6th June 2011 the applicant was convicted  on  six
    separate occasions of a total of eleven offences.  On 6th June 2011  he
    was convicted at Isleworth Crown Court of possessing a  false  document
    and sentenced to six months' imprisonment.  On 8th December 2015 he was
    convicted at the Central London  Magistrates'  Court  of  making  false
    representations.

3.   On 13th July  2016  the  respondent  made  a  decision  to  deport  the
    appellant and refused his  protection  and  human  rights  claim.   The
    appellant sought to appeal against that  decision,  which  appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Russell on 12th April 2017.

4.   In a determination promulgated on  21st  April  2017,  the  appeal  was
    dismissed  under  the  Immigration  Rules  and  on  human  rights   and
    protection grounds.

5.   The appellant sought to challenge that decision and  permission  to  do
    so was  granted  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  on  the  basis  of  lack  of
    consideration as to internal relocation and the reasonableness thereof.
     Thus the matter comes before me to determine that issue.

6.   It is to be noted that the  grounds  of  appeal  against  the  decision
    focus, not so much  upon  the  merits  of  deportation,  but  upon  the
    circumstances of the appellant's return to Sudan.  It is said generally
    that the criticisms made by the First-tier Tribunal Judge of the expert
    report of Peter Verney was unjustified.   Secondly  it  was  said  that
    there were  inadequate  findings  made  on  the  issue  of  generalised
    violence and in particular the risk of detention.  Third  it  was  said
    that there was inadequate consideration of  the  reasonableness  as  to
    relocation, particularly given the appellant's mental difficulties.  At
    the outset it was recognised that the appellant was of the  Nuba  tribe
    and originally came from southern Kordofan.  It  was  accepted  by  all
    parties that the  situation  in  southern  Kordofan  was  one  of  dire
    humanitarian need in the context of a prolonged  conflict  between  the
    government of  Sudan  and  SPLM-N.   The  situation  had  provoked  the
    displacement of many people who now live in areas around Khartoum.   It
    was clearly accepted that the appellant could not return to that  area.
    The issue was essentially whether he could return to Khartoum  as  have
    many other displaced persons from southern Kordofan.

7.   The Judge properly  considered  the  most  recent  case  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal in IM and AI (risks -  membership  of  the  Bjbeja  tribe,  BJ
    Congress and JEM) (Sudan) CG [2016] UKUT 00188  (IAC)  which  sets  out
    categories of risk of those who could or could not safely return.   The
    case states generally that, other than activists, there does  not  seem
    to be a particular risk for  people  from  southern  Kordofan  or  Nuba
    outside the two areas and there does not seem to be  a  risk  for  such
    people arriving at the airport in Khartoum or for people who have  been
    outside of Sudan for a long time.  As the  case  of  IM  and  AI  makes
    clear, the decision maker must build up as comprehensive a  picture  as
    possible of the claimant taking  into  account  all  relevant  material
    including that which may not have been established even  to  the  lower
    standard of proof.  Once a composite assessment  of  the  evidence  has
    been made, it will be for the decision maker to determine whether there
    is a real risk that the  claim  will  come  to  the  attention  of  the
    authorities on return in such a way as amounts  to  more  than  routine
    common place detention that meets the threshold of real risk of serious
    harm.

8.   It was the finding of the Judge, at paragraph 39 of the  determination,
    that the appellant did not have a profile as  an  activist,  either  in
    Sudan or in the UK.  The information about his activities in Sudan  was
    limited (and was disbelieved in the previous hearing) and in any  event
    would have occurred 17 years ago, since when he has not undertaken  any
    political activities.  The Judge concludes  that  he  would  return  to
    Khartoum as a Nuba travelling on  a  temporary  document  after  having
    spent a long time outside of Sudan.  The background evidence  does  not
    suggest that this puts the appellant at risk.

9.   It is not suggested otherwise that the profile is as has been found.

10.  Contrary to the generality of the  conclusions  in  IM  and  AI,  Peter
    Verney in his report seeks to suggest that there was a risk on  account
    of his  Nuba  ethnic  origin.   His  conclusions  of  his  report  were
    summarised at pages 45 and 46 of the report  which  he  prepared  dated
    30th March 2017.

11.  He expresses his  view  as  to  the  credibility  of  the  account  and
    concludes that non-Arabs of Nuba ethnic origin are automatically likely
    to be suspected and accused of siding with the  rebel  opposition.   He
    contends that  rebel  political  sympathies  will  be  imputed  to  him
    automatically by reason of his ethnic identity.

12.   The Judge made a number of criticisms  of that report, not least  that
    the issue of credibility is for the Judge not the expert and  that  the
    report lacks objectivity.  It  seems  to  me  that  the  comments  were
    generally well-founded, notwithstanding the arguments submitted  by  Mr
    Bandegani to the contrary.  Indeed the conclusion made  by  the  expert
    runs contrary to the conclusions as set out by the  Upper  Tribunal  in
    the country guidance decision.

13.  It is said that proper account should be given to the expertise  of  Mr
    Verney, particularly as to his  assistance  to  the  Tribunal  in  many
    cases.  In that connection it is to be noted that  in  IM  and  AI,  at
    paragraph 249 of that decision,  the  Tribunal  expressly  rejects  the
    approach adopted by Mr Verney in his two reports and, for  the  reasons
    given in the appendix, his report does not form  part  of  the  country
    guidance.  Indeed Mr Verney gave evidence at the  earlier  decision  of
    HGMO (relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKIAT  00062  promulgated
    in August 2016.  The Tribunal again, having heard his evidence, gave it
    little weight for the reasons as set out in paragraphs 163 and  164  of
    that decision, particularly noting a tendency  to  exaggerate  or  make
    assertions beyond the evidence cited in support.   In  particular,  and
    very relevant to this matter, they rejected his  claim  that  ethnicity
    was linked automatically to suspicion of sympathy with the rebels.   It
    seems to me that the Judge was entitled  to  give  that  report  little
    weight and to prefer the country guidance case.

14.  Clearly a focus of concern to those returning to Khartoum will  be  the
    events at the airport.   It will be inevitable that there would be some
    questioning, if not a period of detention at the airport, to enable the
    authorities to clarify the nature of  the  person  who  was  returning.
    The Judge does, as can be seen at paragraph 44  of  the  determination,
    factor in significantly the fact that the appellant has  mental  health
    difficulties, raising the question as to whether that would  cause  him
    to be unable to function properly in stressful situations.  It is  also
    noted that  on  the  medical  evidence  the  appellant  was  no  longer
    suffering from PTSD although there were still  medical  concerns  about
    his general mental health.

15.  As the country guidance case makes clear that there is a likely  to  be
    wide response by the authorities to those who return.   There  will  be
    those who have names on a particular wanted list, who no doubt will  be
    subjected to detailed questioning and possibly serious  detention.   On
    the other  hand  there  are  those  who  have  no  profile  and  little
    significance after questioning.  It is entirely understandable,   given
    the lack of profile of the appellant, that the  Judge  is  entitled  to
    consider that the detention would be of short duration and  that  there
    would be nothing untoward that stems from it so far as any hardship  or
    risk to the appellant.  The Judge has done what is required  namely  to
    factor in the mental health as to whether that would create any problem
    to the appellant in questioning and the Judge has properly come to  the
    conclusion that it would not.

16.  I find that the Judge has properly followed the guidance as set out  in
    IM and AI.  There has been a careful consideration of profile  together
    with risk at the airport and in detention.

17.  The further  challenge,  which  is  not  entirely  articulated  in  the
    grounds of appeal but relied upon by Mr Bandegani, is that there was no
    proper   consideration  by  the  Judge  as  to  the  reasonableness  of
    relocation, as required in the leading case of Januzi  [2006]  UKHL  5.
    It is contended that the appellant is a vulnerable  person  because  of
    the mental illness and will find it difficult to cope in the  situation
    in or  around  Khartoum  with  many  other  displaced  persons.  It  is
    contended that there has been no proper analysis by the Judge  of  that
    matter.  Rather the focus has been on  whether  Article  3  is  engaged
    rather than upon the reasonableness of relocation.  Put another way  it
    is a question of whether it would be unduly harsh for an individual  to
    live in a particular area, for example living in conditions in the safe
    haven may be attendant with dangers or vicissitudes which pose a threat
    which is as great or greater than the risk of persecution in the  place
    of habitual residence.  Where  the  safe  haven  is  not  a  viable  or
    realistic alternative to the place  where  persecution  is  feared,  it
    cannot properly be said that  relocation  is  a  reasonable  or  viable
    option.  The court in Januzi looked at various aspects such as economic
    survival, ability to sustain life at a reasonable subsistence level  or
    where a person will be denied access to land, resources or  protection.
     That issue was considered with considerable care by the Upper Tribunal
    in HGMO (relocation to Khartoum) Sudan CG [2006] UKAIT 0062. The  Upper
    Tribunal looked very much at the conditions of those returning  to  the
    area of Khartoum.  It noted at paragraph 228 where the conclusions were
    as follows:

         "However, even if returnees of Darfuri origin have to be considered
         on the basis that they will be left with no alternative but to live
         in IDP camps or squatter settlements, we still do not consider that
         in the general run of cases the conditions  they  would  face  give
         rise to either persecutory harm, ill-treatment contrary to  Article
         3  or  to  undue  hardship  within  the  context  of  a  claim  for
         international protection under the Refugee Convention."


18.  The Tribunal went on to consider conditions for IDPs  in  the  Khartoum
    State and life in squatter camps and IDP camps.   The  facilities  were
    also considered in paragraph 254.  The Tribunal was very much aware  of
    the factors set out in  Januzi,  but  in  general  terms  came  to  the
    conclusion that notwithstanding the privations of and  difficulties  of
    life in or around Khartoum it would not engage Article  3  nor  did  it
    constitute such harshness being  the  test  under  Januzi.    There  is
    nothing to indicate that that decision has been superseded by the other
    decision, indeed the Tribunal in IM and AI makes  particular  reference
    to HGMO.  It does not seem to me, therefore, that it is incumbent  upon
    the Judge to embark upon a detailed the examination of life  conditions
    facing the  appellant,  once  passed  the  airport  and  in  or  around
    Khartoum, or to determine whether that meets the  reasonableness  test,
    when that matter has been determined essentially in a country  guidance
    decision.

19.  Indeed it is relevant to note that  the  documents   presented  at  the
    hearing by the respondent included the report on  Sudan,  situation  of
    persons from Darfur, southern Kordofan and Blue  Nile  in  Khartoum,  a
    joint report of the Danish Immigration Service and the UK  Home  Office
    Fact-Finding Missions to Khartoum conducted in February to March  2016.
    It was a report dated August 2016 and it deals particularly in  Section
    4 with living conditions in Khartoum for persons from  Darfur  and  the
    two areas.  It deals with access to documentation,  access  to  housing
    accommodation.   In  that  case  it  is  noted  there  is  no  systemic
    discrimination against persons from Darfur of the two areas with regard
    to where such  communities  could  live  in  Khartoum.   It  recognised
    generally that those with limited means lived in the poorer communities
    on the outskirts of the city. Access to education and healthcare and to
    humanitarian assistance were also highlighted and in particular, in the
    slum areas of Greater Khartoum ,there were social committees supporting
    local communities with regard to services.  The  IDP  camps  were  also
    noted as was as access to the employment.  There is nothing to indicate
    in that report that circumstances had in any  sense  deteriorated  from
    those considered in 2006 by HGMO.   The Judge was entitled to rely upon
    the country guidance generally as to the reasonableness of return.

20.  What was of course of  importance  for  the  Judge  to  determine  was,
    whether or not the mental condition of the appellant would be  such  as
    to create particular risks  or  difficulties  for  the  appellant,  and
    particularly the risk of suicide and self-harm.  The Judge does  engage
    in some detail with that aspect together with the question  of  suicide
    risk.  Significantly the grounds do not seem to challenge that approach
    in  particular.   Although  the   grounds   seek   to   challenge   the
    reasonableness of return they do not specify any  detail  what  factors
    would militate against that return other  than  those  that  have  been
    considered already by the Tribunal in HGMO.   Significantly  indeed  at
    paragraph 51 of the determination the Judge noted  KH  (Afghanistan)  v
    SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 1354.  Mr Tufan submits that that  is  a  relevant
    authority for consideration.,having regard to the remarks of that court
    it set out in paragraph 33 which reads as follows:

         "The truth is the presence of mental illness  among  failed  asylum
         seekers cannot really  be  regarded  as  exceptional.   Sadly  even
         asylum seekers with mental illness who have no families can  hardly
         be regarded as 'very exceptional'.  If this case is to be  regarded
         as a very exceptional one, there will  inevitably  be  cases  which
         will be indistinguishable.  A person with no family would  have  to
         be equated with a person who has a family  but  whose  members  are
         unwilling or unable to look after him or her.  I cannot think  that
         Baroness Hale had such a wide category in mind.   In  order  for  a
         case to be "very exceptional"  it  would  have  to  be  exceptional
         inside the class of  person  with  mental  illness  without  family
         support.  Perhaps a very old or very young person would qualify but
         hardly an ordinary adult."

21.  As was submitted by Mr Bandegani, this of course  is  a  decision  made
    within the context of Article 3  rather  than  with  reasonableness  of
    return.  There is a  recognition  that  mental  illness  sadly  is  not
    uncommon among those being returned.  The Judge was entirely  right  at
    paragraph 51 to bear in mind that.

22.  I find that the Judge rightly concentrated upon the  issue  of  suicide
    and how the mental condition can be managed.  The Judge has clearly had
    regard to the report of Dr Maloney.   Mr  Bandegani  submits  that  the
    Judge has pitched the matter too high by simply considering  Article  3
    of the ECHR.  It was indicated by Dr Maloney that return to Sudan could
    worsen the features of his mental state, making it unlikely  to  engage
    in treatment or social interaction.   Significantly,  however,  in  the
    conclusions at 9.7 of the report, Dr Maloney has little  detail  as  to
    the current state of his illness or the likely treatments required  for
    the future.  It is to be noted that the Judge, at paragraph 52  of  the
    determination, engages with comments of Dr Maloney and  does  not  find
    that the appellant would be at risk of ill-treatment  or  returning  to
    disintegrating society.  Mr Maloney does not  identify  any  particular
    course of treatment that is required.  In any event it is to be  noted,
    from the bundle of documents that was presented at the  hearing,  there
    was a document dealing with Mental Health treatment in  Sudan  at  page
    173 of the bundle.  It is to be noted at page 174 in  particular,  that
    the  only  two  mental  health  hospitals  in  Sudan  catering  to  the
    generalised population are in Khartoum.  There are also community based
    psychiatric units offering 760 beds for inpatients.  Although there are
    clearly limitations in terms of mental health  treatment  it  is  clear
    through the report that the area of Khartoum  is  perhaps  best  served
    than others for these purposes.

23.  In all the circumstances I find that the Judge has properly dealt  with
    the issues as to relocation to Khartoum.  In  those  circumstances  the
    appeal against the Judge's decision is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The  appellant's  appeal  against  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  is
dismissed such that the decision shall stand, namely  that  the  appellant's
appeal against deportation is dismissed as is that  in  relation  to  asylum
and human rights and other humanitarian protection.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed            [pic]                      Date  18 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD




