
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07620/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27th October 2020                 |On 02nd November 2020                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LINDSLEY


                                   Between

                                     SM
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                  SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr K Mukherjee, of Counsel, instructed by Jerry
Clore Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    Introduction

    1. The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born in 1987. She came to the UK
       and applied for asylum on 15th September 2018. The  application  was
       refused on  26th  July  2019.   She  lodged  an  appeal,  which  was
       dismissed on protection and human rights grounds in  a  decision  of
       First-tier Tribunal Judge Lever promulgated on 25th February 2020.

    2. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kopieczek
       on the 15th July 2020 on all grounds but principally  on  the  basis
       that it was arguable that the First-tier Tribunal had erred  in  law
       in failing to consider the witness  evidence  when  concluding  that
       there was no evidence that the appellant was at risk from Ahmed  and
       that he was linked to Al Shabab.

    3. The matter came  before  me  to  determine  whether  the  First-tier
       Tribunal had erred in law. The hearing was held at  a  remote  Skype
       for Business hearing in light of the need to reduce the transmission
       of the Covid-19 virus, and in  light  of  this  being  found  to  be
       acceptable by both parties, and being a means by  which  the  appeal
       could be fairly and justly determined.  There  were  no  significant
       issues of connectivity or audibility with the hearing.

Submissions - Error of Law

    4. In grounds of appeal to the Upper Tribunal, drafted by Mr  Mukherjee
       for the appellant, and in oral submissions from Mr Mukherjee  it  is
       argued for the appellant, in summary, as follows.

    5. It is argued firstly that the First-tier Tribunal  errs  in  law  in
       finding that it is pure speculation on the  part  of  the  appellant
       that her former partner, Ahmed, was a member of  Al  Shabab  and  in
       finding that the appellant did not leave Dubai out of fear  of  him.
       The grounds identify a section of the appellant's statement from the
       appellant's bundle at paragraph 45 to 55 and the statements  of  her
       witnesses, JK and RK, as relevant to this issue.  It  is  said  this
       detailed evidence gives proper reasons to believe that this was  the
       case going beyond speculation, and that  insufficient  reasoning  is
       provided for disbelieving the history in the decision of the  First-
       tier Tribunal.

    6. Secondly it is also not the case  that  the  appellant  returned  to
       Dubai at the point when all of the  key  events  that  lead  to  her
       asylum claim had  taken  place,  as  is  argued  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal, although she was concerned about a risk to  her  life  and
       had decided to leave Dubai as  a  result.  At  the  point  when  she
       returned to Dubai the killing of her friend M had, for instance, not
       taken place. The return trips to Dubai are not, therefore, a  reason
       to disbelieve the appellant's history as argued  by  the  First-tier
       Tribunal.

    7. Thirdly it is argued that the finding of the First-tier Tribunal  at
       paragraph 23 of the decision that  there  is  no  link  between  the
       appellant and the killing of the lady called M  is  flawed  as  this
       ignores the evidence from a newspaper article in The Nation, a well-
       known Kenyan newspaper, that the murder investigation into M's death
       had moved to Kenya and that an associate of  Ahmed,  Joseph  I,  was
       charged with her murder. There is no suggestion that  the  newspaper
       is a forgery. It is argued that overall the decision is  unsafe  due
       to insufficient reasons and a failure to consider relevant evidence.






    8. In a Rule 24 response from Mr  C  Avery,  Specialist  Appeals  Team,
       dated 24th August 2020 it is argued that the grounds only amount  to
       a disagreement with the conclusions of the First-tier  Tribunal.  It
       was open to the First-tier Tribunal to conclude  that  the  evidence
       that "Ahmed" was involved with Al Shabab was  based  on  part  over-
       heard conversations and documents in a language which the  appellant
       did not fully  understand.  It  was  also  open  to  the  First-tier
       Tribunal to conclude that the behaviour of  the  appellant  did  not
       show that she was afraid of Ahmed. The newspaper  article  does  not
       include any explicit link between the appellant and the lady  M  who
       was murdered. Mr Melvin accepted that the reasoning with respect  to
       why the links with Al Shabab were speculative is  not  actually  set
       out in the decision, but argued that this was a case involving  non-
       state actors  and  so  there  would  be  issues  of  sufficiency  of
       protection to be explored and the appeal was therefore not going  to
       succeed in any case so any errors were not material.

         Conclusions - Error of Law

    9. The appellant claims that she is at real risk of serious  harm  from
       two men in Kenya, both non-state agents. The first is her ex-husband
       C, who is also said to be trying to take her older  disabled  son  K
       (who remains in Kenya) from her, but the grounds of appeal raise  no
       challenge to the conclusions at paragraphs 20 and 21 of the decision
       that  the  appellant  has  not  made  out  a  well-founded  fear  of
       persecution from him, although it is found that he may have been  an
       unpleasant and violent man.

   10. The threat from the second man, Ahmed, a former  partner,  is  dealt
       with very briefly at paragraphs 22 to 25  of  the  decision  of  the
       First-tier Tribunal. Three issues  are  said  to  tell  against  the
       history of risk from this man being well founded: the fact that  his
       links with Al Shabab are " purely speculative"; the  fact  that  the
       appellant returned to Dubai twice after supposedly  becoming  afraid
       of Ahmed; and the fact that there was no credible link  between  the
       appellant and the killing of the woman M set out  in  the  newspaper
       reports.

   11. The First-tier Tribunal, at paragraph 17  of  the  decision,  states
       that all of the evidence in the case has been carefully  considered.
       However, I find that the statement that Ahmed  is  a  member  of  Al
       Shabab is "purely speculative" at paragraph 22 of  the  decision  is
       entirely unreasoned, and that there is insufficient engagement  with
       the detailed evidence in the witness statements.  In  short  summary
       this evidence is as follows. That the appellant saw that Ahmed  held
       three different passports, a small gun and had photographs of  armed
       Jihadi fighters; and the  evidence  of  her  mother,  JK,  that  the
       appellant had told her she was  worried  about  Ahmed  being  in  Al
       Shabab in July 2018 for these reasons. Further the witness statement
       of the appellant's friend RK, describes Ahmed wearing white  Islamic
       style robes and that she and the appellant were detained by the  CID
       in Dubai because of Ahmed and his group of friends.

   12. The analysis of the two returns  to  Dubai  the  appellant  made  in
       August and September 2018 telling  against  the  appellant,  showing
       that she was not afraid of Ahmed fails, as Mr Mukherjee has  argued,
       to consider the full time-line of events in the appellant's  lengthy
       statement. At the time she returned for these two trips to Dubai the
       appellant's evidence is that she was afraid and felt a need  to  put
       distance between herself and Ahmed,  first  applying  unsuccessfully
       for a  visa  to  the  US  and  secondly  making  a  successful  visa
       application for the UK through an agent  (based  in  part  on  false
       documents), but it was only after she arrived in  the  UK  that  her
       mother received a call making a threat against the appellant's  life
       from Dubai and suffered a serious fire at her home she  believes  to
       be arson, and only later still had men coming to  her  house  asking
       about the appellant's whereabouts; and that her friend M was killed.
       Again, I find that the reasoning with respect to the  issue  of  the
       appellant's flights between countries is insufficient to  find  that
       this shows that she is not credible in her claim  to  have  a  well-
       founded fear of serious harm from Ahmed.

   13. The First-tier Tribunal finds that there is no  credible  connection
       between crimes committed against M,  namely  her  killing,  and  the
       appellant  at  paragraph  23  of  the  decision  with   no   further
       explanation or reasoning.  This  matter  is  returned  to  again  at
       paragraph 25 of the decision, but simply with a statement that  what
       happened to M  had  no  link  or  relevance  to  the  fears  of  the
       appellant. Again, I find that the evidence needed  to  be  carefully
       considered and reasoning set out  dealing  with  the  newspaper  and
       witness on this issue. There is substantial newspaper evidence  that
       M was killed and that Joseph I is the  main  suspect  and  had  been
       charged with murder. Joseph I is said to be close friend of Ahmed by
       the witness RK, and the appellant is said to be a close friend of  M
       by the witness CW. The First-tier Tribunal  errs  in  law  again  by
       failing to engage with the evidence and provide sufficient reasoning
       for the finding.

   14. I also find that there was a failure to consider  relevant  evidence
       from the Refugee  Council,  Bristol  Refugee  Rights  and  Avonmouth
       Community  Centre  Association  that  the  appellant  has   anxiety,
       depression, night terrors,  panic  attacks  and  symptoms  of  post-
       traumatic stress disorder  and  takes  medication  for  anxiety  and
       depression in the context of her claim to be at real risk of serious
       harm.

   15. I do not agree with Mr Melvin's submission that because this  appeal
       involves non-state agents it would be bound to fail in any case  due
       to issue of sufficiency of protection.  If  it  were  believed  that
       Ahmed was a member of Al  Shabab  with  an  intention  to  harm  the
       appellant, and had already had involvement in  the  killing  of  her
       friend M and arson and  threats  against  her  mother,  then  it  is
       possible that this would be a case where a Tribunal might find  that
       there is no sufficiency of protection.

   16. I find that the appeal should be remade in the  First-tier  Tribunal
       because it will involve extensive fact finding. I preserve only  the
       findings that the appellant is not at real risk of serious harm from
       her ex-husband C. The appeal with respect to the question of whether
       she is at real risk of serious harm from Ahmed  must  be  remade  de
       novo, in its entirety, with no findings preserved. It is remitted to
       be heard in Newport by any  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  other  than
       Judge lever with a time estimate of three hours. No  interpreter  is
       required.

          Decision:

   1. The making of the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
      making of an error on a point of law.

   2. I set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing  the
      appeal and all of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.

   3. I remit the remaking of the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


Signed:     Fiona Lindsley                   Date:  28th October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lindsley

