
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07576/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 13 September 2019                         |On 23 September 2019          |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE APPLEYARD

                                   Between

                                   Mr D S
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms C Bexson, Counsel.
For the Respondent:    Ms A Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer.


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka. He  made  an  application  for
    international protection which was refused. He appealed, and  following
    a hearing, and in a decision promulgated on 5 June 2019, Judge  of  the
    First-Tier Tribunal Hamilton dismissed the Appellant's appeal.

 2. The Appellant sought permission to appeal which was  initially  refused
    in the First-Tier Tribunal. However, a  renewed  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal was granted on 6 August 2019 by Judge of  the  Upper  Tribunal
    Grubb. His reasons for so granting were: -

         "1. The First-tier Tribunal (Judge  J  C  Hamilton)  dismissed  the
         appellant's appeal against a decision to refuse  his  international
         protection, humanitarian protection and human rights claim.

         2. It is arguable, on the basis of  the  grounds,  that  the  judge
         failed properly to consider the medical evidence and also, in doing
         so, failed to engage with the appellant's evidence itself.

         3. For these reasons, permission to appeal is granted."

 3. Thus, the appeal came before me today.

 4. At the outset of today's hearing Ms Fijiwala accepted that  Judge  J  C
    Hamilton materially erred for the reasons set out in  the  grounds  and
    identified in the above-mentioned grant of permission to appeal dated 6
    August 2019.

 5. On my own analysis of the  documentation  within  this  appeal  I  find
    likewise and that the Judge has materially erred.

 6. Ms Bexson, in light of the Respondent's concession invited me to  remit
    the appeal for a de novo hearing. That is the proper course here.

Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making
of an error on a point of law. The decision is  set  aside.  The  appeal  is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  dealt  with  afresh  pursuant  to
Section 12(2)(b)(i) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement  Act  2007  and
Practice Direction 7(b) before any Judge aside from Judge J C Hamilton.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                                 Date:   19  September
2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Appleyard
