
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07178/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Determined on the papers             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 7 August 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                     M H
                         (aNONYMITY DIRECTION  MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Submissions received:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Safiullah, Law Dale Solicitors dated 15th July
2020
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Presenting Officer dated 1st July
2020


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity owing to the sensitive matters within  the  decision.   No
report of these proceedings shall directly or  indirectly  identify  him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

I have had regard to the Pilot Practice Direction: Contingency  arrangements
in the First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal 2020 and the  Presidential
Guidance Note No. 1 2020.

The Tribunal may pursuant to Rules 34 of The Tribunal Procedure (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008 (as amended) ("the Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules")
make decisions in appeals without a hearing. The Upper Tribunal gave the
provisional direction owing to the Covid-19 pandemic that the decision on
the error of law in this matter could be determined on the papers and
invited submissions from both parties.  I have had regard to the views of
both parties pursuant to rule 34(2) of The Upper Tribunal Procedure Rules.

Further, I bear in mind the principles established in Osborn v The Parole
Board [2013] UKSC 61.  I have concluded that the matter although complex
factually does not require, in the interests of justice and fairness, a
hearing to determine the matters on the error of law.  Both parties are
legally represented, and issues have been clearly explained and their views
on the grounds fully set out.

The appellant appealed with permission against the decision of First-tier
Tribunal Judge Talbot promulgated on 17th February 2020 which dismissed the
appellant's appeal on protection and human rights grounds.

The appellant is a Bangladesh national and feared return because his
daughter was said to have been trafficked and he would be at risk from the
traffickers in Bangladesh. The daughter has been diagnosed with a
Personality Disorder and Schizophrenia.

The grounds of appeal set out that there was no doubt that the appellant
was Ms K's father as demonstrated by the entries in her passport and she
was a victim of human trafficking.  The letters issued by the Home Office
dated 13th November 2015 and 16th July 2017 concluded that she was the
victim of trafficking.  The Judge failed to consider this evidence, failed
to identify the appellant did make an attempt at regularising his stay in
the United Kingdom and failed to consider the appellant was entitled to
acquire a derivate right to remain based on his care for her (MS Malaysia v
SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 580.  Those were errors of law.

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul extended time for the appeal and granted
permission in the following terms:

         'It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in
         concluding that the appellant is (sic)[not] the father of NMK given
         the entries in her passports, which state her father's name and
         which do not appear to have been considered.

         It is also arguable that the judge erred in his assessment of
         whether NMK had been the victim of modern slavery given her
         testimony combined with the reasonable grounds letter.

         It is arguable that these errors are material notwithstanding the
         finding at [28] the findings made there in the alternative being
         insubstantial'.

On 1st July 2020 the Secretary of State conceded that there was an error of
law and conceded further that the appeal would be conducted on the basis
that it is accepted that NMK is the biological daughter of the appellant.

The respondent accepted that the Judge erred in proceeding on the basis
that the appellant's daughter was not the victim of trafficking. It was
unclear why the Conclusive Grounds letter had not been produced at the
hearing. However, it was accepted that the respondent was represented and
'a reasonably competent presenting officer could and should have checked
the appellant's daughter's CID records which would have disclosed the
decision in question'.  It was noted however that counsel represented the
Home Office at the First-tier Tribunal.  The judge's rejection of the
appellant's daughter's claim to have been a victim of trafficking was
inextricably linked to his findings on credibility and risk and thus, Mr
Kotas sensibly conceded, that this error was unquestionably material.

In the light of the concessions made above there was indeed a material
error of law and the decision is set aside with no findings preserved.  The
concessions by the Home Office in the submissions of 1st July 2020 should
be noted for the forthcoming appeal.

Both parties agreed the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for rehearing.



    Notice of Decision

The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal for redetermination.

    Direction

    The appellant's solicitors have objected to a remote hearing on the
    basis of the vulnerability of the appellant's daughter.  The matter
    should be considered for listing for a face to face hearing and set
    down for a case management review hearing following transfer to the
    First-tier Tribunal.


Signed      Helen Rimington                  Date 30th July 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington
