
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07670/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 10 December 2018                          |On 11 January 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE L J MURRAY


                                   Between

                                   C N S C
                         (anonymity directioN MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Fenney, NLS Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a national of Cameroon.  The Respondent refused her
application for asylum and humanitarian protection in a decision letter
dated 3 August 2017.  The Respondent also decided that she failed to meet
the requirements of the Immigration Rules for leave to remain on the basis
of her private life in the United Kingdom.

2.   The Appellant appealed the Respondent's decision and her appeal came
before First-tier Tribunal Judge Holder, who in a Decision and Reasons
promulgated on 18 December 2017 dismissed her appeal on all grounds.

3.   The Appellant sought permission to appeal against the decision of
Judge Holder and permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede, who
concluded that it was arguable that the Judge's findings at paragraph 29
(x) of the decision failed to take account of the Appellant's evidence at
paragraph 22 of her witness statement in regard to her intention to carry
on her political activities in Cameroon and that arguably infected his
findings on risk on return as the grounds asserted. Whilst there was less
merit in the ground regarding delay in determining the appeal, that ground
was not excluded.

4.   The appeal came before me on 19 September 2018 in order to determine
whether there was an error of law in the decision of Judge Holder and if so
whether to set that decision aside.     I found that there was a material
error of law in the Judge's conclusion at paragraph 29 (x) where he found:

         "It is not suggested (and nor do I find) that she would continue to
         voice her political beliefs on social media or elsewhere on return
         to Cameroon; ..."

5.   The Appellant had stated in her witness statement at paragraph 22:

         "If I were to return to Cameroon, I would carry on with my
         political activity. The current situation in Cameroon is not fair.
         Cameroon is such that no matter what you do, even stay quiet, there
         is always the risk of being in trouble. This was the case even
         before the current political situation. There is no benefit in my
         staying quiet."

6.   The Appellant clearly therefore voiced her intention to continue with
her political activity and I found that the Judge was required to assess
the credibility of this claim as it was accepted that if she were
politically active in Cameroon she would be at risk. I found that there was
a material misapprehension of the Appellant's claim as to future risk and
the alternative finding wholly lacked reasoning.

7.   The parties agreed at the hearing that the matter could be remitted to
Judge Holder for him to deal with the aspect of the case related to his
findings in paragraph 29 (x) with other findings preserved. However, I
subsequently ascertained that Judge Holder would not be available to sit in
the First-tier Tribunal in the near future. In the circumstances I
determined that given that limited fact finding was required the matter
should be retained in the Upper Tribunal with all findings save for that at
paragraph 29 (x) preserved.  I therefore set aside the decision of the
First-tier Tribunal with all findings of fact preserved save for those at
paragraph 29 (x).

The Resumed Hearing

8.   The Appellant adopted her witness statement  in  the  bundle  submitted
    for the resumed hearing. She was cross-examined by Mr Howells. I do not
    set out her evidence here which is in the record of proceedings on  the
    Court file. I refer to it where relevant in my findings and reasons.  I
    heard submissions from both representatives. Mr Howells said  that  the
    issue was whether the Appellant's claim that she  would  carry  on  her
    political activity was credible. The Respondent submitted that  it  was
    not. The Appellant's evidence had been that she  became  interested  in
    politics as a teenager at around the age of 13  and  yet  she  was  not
    involved in politics in Cameroon in the 10 years before  she  left  for
    the UK. When she entered the UK she entered a country where there  were
    freedoms to express political activity openly, yet she  did  not  begin
    any political activity until November 2016 and when she did it  was  in
    the knowledge that her visa was expiring in a few months. Even in  that
    political activity she used various pseudonyms and the evidence  before
    Judge Holder that it was on social  media.  There  was  no  documentary
    evidence to show that she had attended meetings and she did not  attend
    a protest in  Cameroon  despite  the  movement  being  operational  for
    decades. She did not immediately exercise freedoms  here  and  she  was
    involved in social media only. Her claim that she would  engage  lacked
    credibility and she was not a risk on return.

9.`  Ms Fenney submitted  that  Judge  Holder  fould  the  Appellant  to  be
    credible and she asked me to  agree  with  that.  This  situation  that
    Cameroon now found itself in did not exist when she  left.  She  was  a
    minor when she left. She had not  exaggerated  and  had  been  entirely
    honest and gave clear reasons that she would continue. She asked me  to
    believe her and allow the appeal.

The Re-making of the decision

10.  Judge Holder made  a  number  of  findings  of  fact  which,  with  the
    agreement of the parties, I preserved. He found at paragraph 29 of  his
    decision that the Appellant was  from  Southern  Cameroon,  a  minority
    English-speaking area. He further found that not all persons  from  the
    minority English-speaking  area  of  Cameroon  were  at  real  risk  of
    persecution or serious harm as a consequence of being a member of  such
    group alone but that that persons from this part of  Cameroon  who  are
    politically active  against  the  government  of  Cameroon's  perceived
    marginalisation of Southern Cameroonians are at  risk  of  persecution.
    This was apparent from the objective evidence at page  974  onwards  of
    her bundle.

11.  It was the Appellant's case that  she  had  not  come  to  the  adverse
    attention of the Cameroonian authorities whilst living in that country.
    Her evidence was that it was only from November 2016  that  she  became
    politically active and this was when she was in the United Kingdom. The
    First-tier Tribunal Judge  concluded  that  she  had  been  politically
    active on social media and that the  Cameroonian  government  monitored
    the use of social media, but, due to her use of various pseudonyms  she
    would not be identified by the  Cameroonian  government  by  virtue  of
    using social media on return. Judge Holder accepted that she  had  used
    social media to create a WhatsApp group called "Southern Cam Women" and
    other  organisations.  She  had   shared   "The   Consortiums   Groups"
    communications on her Facebook account. This group was a consortium  of
    trade unions in Cameroon. He found that she had not come to the adverse
    attention of the Cameroonian authorities.

12.  The issue to be determined therefore is whether, the  Appellant  would,
    as she claimed at paragraph 22 of  her  witness  statement  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, carry on with her political activities in Cameroon
    or, whether she would not do so for fear of persecution (HJ(Iran) &  HT
    (Cameroon) [2010] UKSC 31).

13.  In KB &  AH  (credibility-structured  approach)  Pakistan  [2017]  UKUT
    00491 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal held that the  'Credibility  Indicators'
    identified in the Home  Office  Asylum  Policy  Instruction,  Assessing
    credibility and refugee status Version 3.0, 6 January 2015  (which  can
    be  summarised  as   comprising   sufficiency   of   detail;   internal
    consistency; external consistency; and plausibility), provide a helpful
    framework within which to conduct a  credibility  assessment.  However,
    they are merely indicators, not necessary conditions; they are  not  an
    exhaustive  list;  assessment  of  credibility  being  a  highly  fact-
    sensitive affair, their main role is to help make sure, where relevant,
    that  the  evidence  is  considered  in  a  number  of  well-recognised
    respects; making use of these indicators is not a  substitute  for  the
    requirement to consider the evidence as a whole or 'in the round'.

14.  The approach for the assessment  of  future  risk  is  a  single  stage
    process  of  evaluating  all  the  evidence  for  what  it   is   worth
    (Karanakaran v Home Secretary [2000] 3 All ER 449). The approach to the
    evidence as set out in that case does not  entail  the  decision  maker
    purporting to find "proved" facts, whether past or present about  which
    it is not satisfied on the balance of probabilities, but means that  it
    must not  exclude  any  matters  from  its  consideration  when  it  is
    assessing the future unless it feels that it can  safely  discard  them
    because it has no real doubt that they did in fact not occur.

15.  According to her witness statement dated 6 December 2018  in  the  last
    12 months she has lost an aunt and uncle as  a  direct  result  of  the
    crisis in Cameroon. She says she has cousins that have been  killed  or
    have joined separatist groups.  She  states  the  reason  that  she  is
    politically active is that she hopes that by speaking out  and  drawing
    attention to the crisis something will be done to  end  it.  Currently,
    there is no outside intervention  from  the  UN  or  other  nations  in
    assisting the people of Cameroon. She states that even if she tried  to
    keep quiet in Cameroon she is not the sort of person who could sit back
    and watch what was happening and not say or do anything. She  knew  the
    risks but was not any more special than any other person  who  died  in
    this crisis. She would rather die trying and sit back  and  watch.  She
    adds that she was a youth leader before she left Cameroon.  She  wanted
    to inspire the youth and speak out and try to effect  change  and  stop
    being afraid. She adds that if she  were  imprisoned  in  Cameroon  she
    would have no access to the medication she needed  as  a  diabetic  and
    would die. She was not afraid of dying but did not wish to give up  the
    chance that she had to continue speaking out  about  the  situation  in
    Cameroon in the hope that she could make a difference.

16.  First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Holder  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a
    credible witness as to past  events.  The  Appellant  set  out  in  her
    witness statement before the First-tier Tribunal that she believed  she
    would be arrested in Cameroon due to her social media  activity.  Judge
    Holder found that this fear was not objectively well-founded  both  due
    her use of pseudonyms and due to the fact that it had  not  been  shown
    that any attempt at hacking her Facebook account and emails was  linked
    to the government.

17.   First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Holder  did  not  take  issue  with   the
    genuineness of her political beliefs or find that she had  manufactured
    any part of her case. Her beliefs were set out in her witness statement
    and evidenced by the 600 pages of WhatsApp chats  which  supported  the
    separatist movement. There is also evidence at E  of  the  Respondent's
    bundle of her activities including  letters  from  'Southern  Cameroons
    European Women' stating that  the  Appellant  is  an  'active,  dynamic
    comrade and freedom fighter for the restoration of Southern  Cameroon's
    Statehood'. The letter states that she has been a 'politically vibrant'
    participant as an assistant speaker  and  moderator  for  the  Southern
    Cameroon European women (SCEW) on top social media concerns against the
    current regime. It is said that she is also a  planner  of  fundraising
    programs for the humanitarian sector.

18.  Mr Howells argued that the Appellant had only become active in  voicing
    an opinion on social media after her arrival in the UK  and  after  her
    visa expired, the suggestion being that this was to  engineer  a  false
    asylum claim. This submission  does  not  accord  with  Judge  Holder's
    findings in relation to past events.  Further,  the  Appellant  gave  a
    plausible explanation for having  commenced  her  political  activities
    after her arrival in the UK as a student in August  2015,  namely  that
    she did not take part in demonstrations or protests in Cameroon because
    at that  time  there  were  no  protests  or  demonstrations.  She  had
    supported the independence of Cameroon but the movement  was  but  only
    popular since 2016.  This accords with  the  evidence  at  p12  of  the
    Appellant's bundle which confirms that Cameroon has  been  troubled  by
    unrest since separatists in two English-speaking regions in  2016  said
    they wished to form a new country.

19.  Against this background evidence, I find that  Judge  Holder's  finding
    that if she were politically active on return  she  would  be  at  risk
    remains sound. I find that the Appellant has  given  evidence  that  is
    detailed, consistent with external evidence, internally consistent  and
    plausible. Her political activities in the UK were  accepted  by  Judge
    Holder and having heard evidence on her  intentions  to  continue  with
    such activities on return, I accept this  is  so.  I  accept  that  the
    strength of her convictions are such that she would feel  compelled  to
    speak out, and were she not to voice her beliefs it  would  be  due  to
    fear of persecution.  I therefore  find  that  there  is  a  reasonable
    degree of likelihood that she would face persecution on grounds of  her
    political opinion on return.

Notice of Decision
I allow the appeal on asylum grounds and under Article 3 ECHR.

The appeal, in  the  alternative,  against  the  refusal  of  the  grant  of
humanitarian protection is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 20 December 2018
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge L J Murray

