
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07033/2018



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd November 2019                        |On 27th November 2019         |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ZUCKER


                                   Between

                                A M M (Sudan)
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akram, Counsel instructed by Batley Law Ltd
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sudan whose date of birth is recorded  as
    27th January 1995.  He appealed the decision of the Secretary of  State
    dated 24th May  2018  in  which  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to
    recognise  the  Appellant  as  a  person  in  need   of   international
    protection.  The Appellant appealed.  His appeal was heard on 4th  July
    2018 by Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Dearden sitting at Bradford.

 2. The primary facts upon which the Appellant relied are set  out  in  the
    Decision and Reasons from paragraph 11 onwards, but in short there were
    two bases upon which the  Appellant  sought  international  protection.
    The first was that he had come to the attention of the authorities  and
    that he had been arrested by the Sudanese National Security Service and
    ill-treated.  He had been accused of supporting Darfuri  nationals  and
    supplying them with  weapons  to  use  against  the  Sudanese  Security
    Services.  The second limb of the Appellant's case was that as a member
    of the Berti tribe, without more he was at risk were he to be returned,
    though of course it was part of his case that in respect of  the  first
    limb his membership of the Berti tribe  aggravated  the  situation  for
    them.

 3. Judge Dearden did not accept the Appellant's case other than his tribal
    affiliation.  He went further and went on to say that even  if  he  had
    been told the truth by the Appellant, which he found was not the  case,
    he would still have dismissed the appeal because of the internal flight
    alternative which Judge Dearden found available to  the  Appellant.  It
    was that aspect of the Appellant's appeal that had loomed large in  the
    appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

 4. Before the matter reached  the  Upper  Tribunal,  I  should  note  that
    permission was granted by Judge Mailer on 13th  August  2018.   It  was
    noted, and indeed it was confirmed before me, that the primary findings
    of fact made by Judge Dearden were not  the  subject  of  appeal.   The
    focus of appeal related to paragraph 33 of the Decision and Reasons  of
    Judge Dearden who, on the face of his Decision and Reasons, saw himself
    departing from country guidance in the shape of AA  (CG)  [2009]  UKAIT
    00056.  I set out paragraph 33 in full: it reads as follows:

         "In my conclusion the Secretary of State has made out his assertion
         that the situation in Sudan has moved on since the determination in
         2009 in AA.  The Secretary of State relies on  the  Country  Policy
         and Information Note for Sudan dated August 2017 which  is  sourced
         from the joint report of the Danish Immigration Service and the  UK
         Home Office Fact Finding Missions dated February and March 2016.  I
         am course [sic] wary of the Danish  Immigration  Service  following
         difficulties with their Fact-Finding Mission to Eritrea.   However,
         paragraph 9 of the skeleton argument provided  details  that  there
         are 29 consulted sources which have resulted in  the  2017  Country
         Policy Note.  It would not help the brevity of  this  determination
         to cite the five bullet points referred to at paragraph  9  of  the
         skeleton argument.  I have to say that the bullet points appear  to
         be of persuasive authority and to me indicate that there has been a
         sustained and markedly changed  situation  in  Khartoum  since  the
         country guidance of AA was promulgated.  I confirm again that I  am
         reluctant to depart from the country  guidance  case,  but  in  the
         particular circumstances of this case I feel obliged and able to do
         so".

 5. This matter first came before me on 20 September 2019. I noted that  at
    paragraph 28 of the Decision and Reasons Judge Dearden made very  clear
    findings, which were not the subject of any appeal.  He said:

         "I have overall considered all the evidence in the round  together.
         I remind myself of the low burden of proof upon the Appellant,  but
         overall, I have concluded that the Appellant was  not  credible  in
         the assertions which he makes.  Whilst of course I accept  that  he
         is Sudanese and a member of the Berti tribe I do not accept that he
         has been arrested, detained, assaulted, or released  on  bail.   If
         the Appellant fails to tell the truth about matters  which  are  at
         the very heart of his asylum and related protection claims he fails
         to discharge even the low burden upon him to prove that  he  is  of
         any interest to anyone if returned.  On that basis the  asylum  and
         related protection appeals of the Appellant are dismissed."

 6. Judge Dearden then went on to explain the legal basis upon which he had
    proceeded (it is to be remembered that a judge has to  start  somewhere
    in their reasoning). He took as in his words "the  basic  position"  as
    that set out in the case of AA (CG) [2009] UKAIT 00056 in which it  was
    held that all non-Arab Darfuris are at risk of  persecution  in  Darfur
    and could not reasonably be expected to relocate  elsewhere  in  Sudan.
    If that were the position still, then, it was  agreed,  this  Appellant
    would have been  entitled  to  succeed.   The  issue  was  whether  the
    situation in the Appellant's home country  had  changed  such  that  he
    could internally relocate, but Judge Dearden did not leave  matters  at
    AA.  He went on to recognise that the Upper Tribunal had considered the
    position of Sudanese nationals again in the case  of  IM  and  AI  (CG)
    [2016] UKUT 00188.  The guidance was no longer that  a  person  without
    more who was non-Arab Darfuri was at risk.  It was rather more  nuanced
    and in the course of the submissions Mr Akram accepted that the country
    guidance position was AA as qualified by IM and AI.  The head  note  in
    IM and AI which is taken from the substance  of  the  appeal  sets  out
    various considerations to which a judge is to have  regard  and  it  is
    clear at paragraph 32  that  Judge  Dearden  did  have  regard  to  the
    criteria applicable to a person such as the Appellant.

 7. There is one issue at paragraph 32 that deserves mention  and  that  is
    that Judge Dearden said:-

        "I have already indicated that I do not as a  matter  of  fact  find
         that the Appellant was detained, but even if he  was  he  seems  to
         have been detained on the basis  that  he  is  a  non-Arab  Darfuri
         rather than for any other political reason".

    Clearly, Judge Dearden at that point was focused on the criteria within
    IM and AI, but Mr Akram invited me to find that Judge Dearden had  left
    open the possibility that in fact the Appellant had been  detained.   I
    did not, for the avoidance of doubt, find that on a proper  reading  of
    Judge Dearden's Decision  and  Reasons  that  point  was  open  to  the
    Appellant, and in any event, it was not a point taken in the grounds.

 8. The question for me to resolve on 20 September 2019 was  whether  Judge
    Dearden departed from the country guidance?  Clearly the case of  SG  v
    The Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2012]  EWCA  Civ  940
    makes plain that there has to  be  cogent  reasons  for  so  doing.   I
    indicated that in my view he had but was entitled to do so.

 9. It is not now necessary for me to set out my  reasoning,  as  expressed
    before promulgation of my Decision and Reasons following the hearing of
    20 September 2019 because after that hearing but  before  promulgation,
    my attention was drawn to the case of AAR  &  AA  (Non-Arab  Dafuris  -
    return) Sudan [2019] UKUT 282, which in short stated that  AA  remained
    the country guidance position.

10. By Notice dated 18 October 2019 I directed that the  matter  should  be
    brought back before me so that further submissions could be made in the
    light of the case of AAR & AA to which neither party  referred  in  the
    earlier hearing. I should say  that  I  make  no  criticism  of  either
    representative. I too was not aware that this country guidance case had
    been published.

11. At the resumed hearing, Mr Diwnycz conceded that  he  could  no  longer
    resist the appeal. He invited me to find that Judge Dearden  had  erred
    in law and that the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  should  be
    remade such that the  appeal  in  the  first-tier  Tribunal  should  be
    allowed. Mr Akram, unsurprisingly, did not oppose such a course.

12. I should say, for my part that the position taken by Mr Diwnycz, on the
    facts of this case and given the manner in which it  had  been  argued,
    was quite proper and one with which I agreed.

Notice of Decision

BY CONSENT the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  contained  a  material
error of law and is set aside. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  is
remade such that the appeal is allowed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                              Date: 22 November 2019







Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Zucker

