
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07190/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 January 2019                             |On 11 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     SSA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr G Hodgetts, instructed by South West Law
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008 (SI 2008/2698) I  make  an  anonymity  order.   Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or court directs otherwise, no  report  of  these  proceedings
    shall directly or indirectly identify the  appellant.   This  direction
    applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and  a  failure  to
    comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

 2. The appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge  Coaster)  which  dismissed  his  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds and under Arts 2  and  3  of
    the ECHR but allowed his appeal under Art 8 of the ECHR.

 3. At the hearing, Mr Howells, who represented  the  Secretary  of  State,
    accepted that the judge's decision should  be  set  aside  and  that  I
    should remake the decision allowing the appellant's  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.

 4. The basis for that  position  is  that  the  judge  accepted  that  the
    appellant was an Iranian national (at para 47) and then  concluded  (at
    para 48) that:

         "... the appellant has discharged the low standard of proof that he
         would be detained and persecuted on arrival  in  Iran  and  in  the
         alternative that he would be subject to mistreatment in  breach  of
         Art 3".

 5. Nevertheless,  having  made  that  finding  -  which  is,  in  all  the
    circumstances, only consistent with allowing the appellant's appeal  on
    asylum and Art 3 grounds -  at  the  conclusion  of  her  decision  she
    erroneously stated that the appeal "fails" on those grounds.

 6. In the circumstances, and accepting the basis of the appellant's appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal and the  position  taken  by  Mr  Howells,  I  am
    satisfied that the judge materially erred  in  law  in  dismissing  the
    appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.  As a
    consequence, I set aside the judge's decision.

 7. In the light of the judge's finding in para 48, I remake  the  decision
    allowing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds and under  Art  3  of
    the ECHR.

 8. The judge also allowed the appellant's appeal under Art 8 of the  ECHR.
    Mr Hodgetts, who represented the appellant, indicated that  Art  8  had
    not been relied on before the judge and, in agreement with Mr  Howells,
    he invited me to set aside the decision allowing the appeal  on  Art  8
    grounds and, as a result of Art 8 not being pursued, he invited me  not
    to remake the decision in respect of Art 8.

 9. For those reasons, the judge's decision to allow the appellant's appeal
    under Art 8 is also set aside.

Decision

10. The entirety of the judge's decision is set aside.

11. I remake the decision substituting a decision allowing the  appellant's
    appeal on asylum grounds and under Art 3 of the ECHR.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                             16 January 2019
