
                               [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07892/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 March 2020                             |On 28 April 2020              |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum


                                   Between

                                     BC
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Z Harper, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis &
                    Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Jones, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
         Tribunal Mulholland (the judge) who, in a decision  promulgated  on
         16 December 2019, dismissed the  appellant's  asylum,  humanitarian
         protection  and  human  rights  appeal  against  the   respondent's
         decision of 15 July 2016 refusing his protection and  human  rights
         claim and his claim for humanitarian protection.


Background

      2. The appellant is a national of Zambia, born in  1983.  I  summarise
         his protection claim. His mother died when he  was  young  and  his
         father died  in  2003  intestate  without  but  with  some  assets,
         including a house and a car. The appellant, being  an  only  child,
         inherited this property. His paternal aunt and uncle tried to lay a
         claim to the assets. The appellant secretly sold the car,  but  his
         paternal family found out and bribed the police to detain and  ill-
         treat the appellant in an attempt to obtain information  about  the
         proceeds of the sale and the transaction.  The  appellant  received
         scars on his chest as a result of this ill-treatment.  After  being
         released the appellant became aware that his  paternal  family  had
         promised the police that they would receive 10% of the  sale  value
         of the car as a bribe.


      3. In 2004 the appellant found a buyer for the house and agreed a sale
         but kept the transaction a secret. The buyer paid a deposit and the
         appellant continued to live in the house.  After  he  received  the
         full price for the sale the appellant used some  of  the  money  to
         obtain a visa and plane tickets to the UK. He did not leave  Zambia
         until 2006.

      4. The appellant entered the UK on 27  November  2006  pursuant  to  a
         visit entry clearance granted to enable him to  attend  a  football
         tournament. He overstayed. He went to live with  G,  another  aunt.
         The appellant received indirect threats passed on by  his  father's
         family to G. He was encountered  by  immigration  officers  at  his
         place of work on 15 March 2013.  He  produced  a  passport  with  a
         counterfeit vignette. The appellant  claimed  asylum  on  25  March
         2013. Although he was initially placed in the Detained  Fast  Track
         process he was released from detention after a Rule 35  report  was
         issued in which a medical practitioner indicated concerns that  the
         appellant may have been tortured.

      5. In an effort to resolve the issue with his family  the  appellant's
         aunt G went to Zambia but passed away there in 2014. The  appellant
         believed that his father's family wish  to  seek  revenge  on  him.
         Further or in the alternative, the  appellant  maintained  that  he
         would be unable to obtain  support  or  treatment  for  his  mental
         health problems (PTSD and depression) and that he would be excluded
         from mainstream society and shunned and ostracised as a  result  of
         societal attitudes to poor mental health. He  additionally  claimed
         that his return would expose him to a  high  risk  of  suicide.  He
         further claimed that he would be  rendered  destitute  because  his
         mental health difficulties would incapacitate him from work, and he
         would not have the financial resources to access medical services.

      6. The respondent rejected the appellant's claim to  have  been  in  a
         dispute with his paternal family and rejected  his  claim  to  have
         been arrested and ill-treated by the Zambian police. The respondent
         considered that the appellant would,  in  any  event,  be  able  to
         receive a sufficiency of protection from the  Zambian  authorities,
         and  that  he  could  avail  himself  of  the  internal  relocation
         alternative. The respondent was not satisfied that the  appellant's
         removal would expose him to a real risk of Article 3  ill-treatment
         based on his medical condition.

      7. The appellant exercised his right  of  appeal  under  s.82  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002. His appeal was  first
         heard by the First-tier Tribunal on 29 September 2017 and 12  March
         2018. His appeal was dismissed in  a  decision  promulgated  on  17
         March 2018. This was set aside by the Upper Tribunal on 14 February
         2019. A fresh hearing was heard by the judge on 23 October 2019.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

      8. The judge was provided with a bundle of documents prepared  by  the
         respondent which included  the  screening  and  substantive  asylum
         interview  records,  a  manuscript  witness  statement   from   the
         appellant dated 29 February  2016,  and  the  Reasons  for  Refusal
         Letter. The judge was served with a  number  of  documents  by  the
         appellant's  representatives  including,  inter  alia,  a  detailed
         skeleton argument,  the  appellant's  witness  statement  dated  18
         October 2019, statements from RM and JC (both  family  friends),  a
         country expert report authored by Luiza Leite de Queiroz  dated  18
         October 2019, an Independent Social Worker (ISW) report authored by
         Jane Bartlett dated 15 October 2019, a Medico-Legal Report authored
         by Dr Sahota (a Consultant Forensic Psychiatrist) dated 14  October
         2019, an independent psychiatric  report  authored  by  Dr  Agarwal
         dated 3 March 2016 and an addendum psychiatric report by  the  same
         doctor dated 12 December 2017, and a joint  report  by  the  Mental
         Health Uses Network and Mental  Disability  Advocacy  Centre  (both
         NGOs) entitled "Human rights and mental health in Zambia".


      9. The judge heard oral evidence from the appellant, RM and JC and, in
         light  of  the  medical  evidence,  treated  the  appellant  as   a
         vulnerable  witness.  In  her  decision  the  judge  made  specific
         reference to the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010  and
         the decision in AM (Afghanistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 1123.

     10. The judge identified the relevant  legislative  framework  and  the
         relevant documents before her and summarised the appellant's claim.
         The judge summarised the evidence relating to Zambia, including the
         expert  country  report,  and  found  that  the  country   evidence
         supported the appellant's account of  arbitrary  arrest,  detention
         and mistreatment by the Zambian authorities, and that  his  account
         was,  in  this  respect,  plausible.  The  judge  was  not  however
         satisfied that the evidence  supported  the  appellant's  assertion
         that there was a systematic failure of state protection in Zambia.

     11. From [46] to [59] the judge considered the  medical  evidence.  The
         judge summarised the report from Dr Agrawal. At [49] the judge said
         it was clear that Dr Agrawal did not observe any of the appellant's
         claimed  symptoms  and  relied  upon  the  history  given  by   the
         appellant. At [15] the judge was satisfied that Dr Agrawal  reached
         his conclusion that the  appellant  had  PTSD  on  account  of  the
         appellant's stated history. The judge stated,

             Dr Agrawal's opinion  that  the  Appellant  lacks  insight  is
             difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  Appellant's  account   of
             suffering from mental illness. He may  have  lacked  knowledge
             that the symptoms he suffered could be because of PTSD but  he
             was clearly aware  of  his  symptoms  which  he  was  able  to
             describe. This demonstrates that he has insight.

     12. The judge noted that Dr Agrawal prepared an addendum report  on  12
         December 2017 but did not meet the appellant in preparation of  the
         report. Instead Dr Agrawal had a copy of the report by a  community
         development worker, a letter by a Consultant Psychiatrist  and  CBT
         therapist and a copy of the GP records. The  judge  summarised  the
         content of those documents noting, inter alia, that  the  appellant
         had presented at A&E, that he had been under the care of the mental
         health team and would be at increased risk of committing suicide if
         returned to Zambia.


     13. Having satisfied herself that Dr Sahota was suitably qualified, the
         judge noted Dr Sahota's medical opinion that the most likely  cause
         of the appellant's PTSD was  the  trauma  he  recounted  as  having
         experienced  and  Zambia,  "as  there   is   no   other   plausible
         explanation"  [53].  Dr  Sahota  considered  that  the  appellant's
         symptoms were characteristic of PTSD, and these were summarised  by
         the judge. At [54] the judge stated,

             However Dr Sahota was asked to consider the most likely  cause
             of his mental health conditions. He was not asked to  consider
             other possible causes, for example that  he  has  been  living
             here illegally since 2006, the death of his late aunt to  whom
             he was very close and blames himself for, and with whom he was
             living at the time; that he has had to leave  his  country  of
             origin: that he was found working  unlawfully  in  the  United
             Kingdom and detained here with a view to removal or any  other
             possibilities.  He  finds  that  the  symptoms  of  PTSD   are
             consistent with his account of being subjected  to  abuse  and
             torture in Zambia and that  the  Appellant's  account  of  the
             timing of the onset of his symptoms  is  consistent  with  his
             history of PTSD.

     14. At [55] the judge notes that  Dr  Sahota  carried  out  a  physical
         examination and concluded that two scars on the  appellant's  chest
         were highly suggestive of a traumatic injury which,  in  accordance
         with the Istanbul Protocol, was  consistent  with  the  appellant's
         account of being a victim of trauma.


     15. At [57] the judge stated,

             having considered the medical and other reports I am  prepared
             to accept that the Appellant's symptoms of PTSD are consistent
             with his account of being subjected to abuse  and  torture  in
             Zambia and that the Appellant's account of the timing  of  the
             onset of his symptoms is consistent with his history of  PTSD.
             I am satisfied that the 2 scars on the anterior chest wall are
             highly suggestive of a traumatic  injury  and,  in  accordance
             with  the  estimable  protocol,  are   consistent   with   the
             Appellant's account of being a victim of trauma.

     16. And at [58] the judge stated,

             I remind myself that being consistent does not  exclude  other
             possible causes for the scarring or PTSD and it is unfortunate
             that Dr Sahota failed to consider  the  possibility  of  other
             causes. This weakens the conclusions.

     17. After indicating that she would bear in mind the  medical  evidence
         indicating that the appellant had memory issues [59] and his mental
         health state [61], the judge  engaged  in  a  detailed  credibility
         assessment.    The    judge    identified    several    significant
         inconsistencies in the appellant's account. In his asylum interview
         the appellant claimed  he  had  been  arrested  after  selling  his
         father's car, but in his statement and in his  assessment  with  Dr
         Agrawal he claimed he  had  been  arrested  and  ill-treated  after
         selling his father's home ([62], [64]). There were  inconsistencies
         in the appellant's evidence relating to the sale  of  his  father's
         property [66] and the subject of the deposit  that  occasioned  his
         arrest [77]. The appellant gave inconsistent evidence in respect of
         his work in the UK [70], and where he resided following his release
         from detention [78].


     18. The judge additionally found various  aspects  of  the  appellant's
         account to lack plausibility. The judge did not  find  it  credible
         that, if his father's family  were  intending  to  harm  him,  they
         allowed the appellant to remain in his father's home  and  did  not
         take any further action concerning the  car  when  they  had  ample
         opportunity to do so [67], or that the  family  would  continue  to
         allow the appellant to live in his father's home and not  make  any
         attempt to grab the land before 2006 [80] & [81]. The judge did not
         find it plausible that the appellant failed to ask other people for
         advice in the years that he overstayed [69], and the judge did  not
         find plausible the appellant's  claim  that  he  had  no  idea  the
         vignette  in  his  passport  was  counterfeit  in  light   of   the
         appellant's description of the circumstances in which  he  obtained
         the vignette [71]. The judge did not  find  it  credible  that  the
         appellant was prepared to wait more than 2 years for  the  sale  of
         his father's property if his life was in danger [72].  Nor  was  it
         credible that the appellant would play a public  football  game  in
         July 2005 if, as he claimed, he was keeping a low profile [73].

     19.  The  judge  additionally  drew  an  adverse  inference  from   the
         appellant's failure to  regularise  his  immigration  status  until
         after his arrest in March 2013  when  he  was  encountered  working
         illegally and with a counterfeit vignette in his passport [68]. The
         judge additionally drew an adverse inference from  the  absence  of
         any supporting evidence of his claimed relationship with a woman AN
         and his vague account of their relationship [75], and  the  absence
         of any supporting evidence of threats made to the appellant by  his
         father's family [82], [85].

     20. At [86] the judge stated,

                  I am satisfied that the medical and other reports add some
                  weight to his claim to have suffered past trauma but  they
                  do not constitute independent corroboration of his account
                  or properly  consider  alternative  explanations  for  the
                  diagnosis made. Whilst a medical report  may  or  may  not
                  give  an  opinion   on   the   Appellant's   physical   or
                  psychological  conditions  being   consistent   with   his
                  account, they cannot be considered in isolation and cannot
                  normally be regarded as providing  clear  and  independent
                  cooperation as to how his  mental  health  conditions  and
                  injuries were brought about.

     21.  At [87] the judge stated,

                  Having considered all of the  evidence,  individually  and
                  together, and bearing in mind the Appellant  suffers  from
                  PTSD and mental illness that could affect memory, I am not
                  satisfied that the Appellant is credible and has  suffered
                  as claimed.

     22. The  judge  found  there  were  too  many  inconsistencies  in  the
         appellant  account  that  went  to  the  core  of  his  claim  and,
         considered alongside the delay in  claiming  asylum,  his  unlawful
         employment and use of a counterfeit vignette and other  credibility
         and plausibility issues,  the  appellant  had  not  discharged  the
         burden of proof,  even  to  the  lower  standard  [87].  The  judge
         rejected the appellant's account of events that caused him to leave
         Zambia. The judge found that the appellant had extended family  and
         friends in Zambia to whom he could turn to. The judge was satisfied
         that the appellant had PTSD and other mental health issues but  was
         not satisfied that this was caused in the manner  advanced  by  the
         appellant. The judge was not therefore satisfied that the appellant
         held a well-founded fear of persecution in Zambia.


     23. In  the  alternative,  the  judge  said  it  that  there  will  was
         sufficiency of protection available  to  the  appellant  in  Zambia
         [90], and that the internal  relocation  alternative  was,  in  any
         event, open to him [91], [92].

     24. The judge then considered whether  the  appellant's  removal  would
         breach Article 3 in light of his medical condition and the  medical
         evidence. The judge referred to the authorities of N v SSHD  [2006]
         UKHL 31, MV (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 2482, GS  (India)  v
         SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40, AM (Zimbabwe) v SSHD [2018]  EWCA  Civ  64
         (which considered Paposhvili [2017] Imm AR 867) and J v SSHD [2005]
         EWCA Civ 629 (giving guidance on suicide risk cases). At [104]  the
         judge indicated that she had considered all the medical  and  other
         evidence from the appellant in his witnesses but was not  satisfied
         there would be a serious and rapid decline in his health  resulting
         in intensive  suffering  to  the  Article  3  standard.  The  judge
         accepted that the appellant would have increased distress at  being
         removed but, as  the  judge  had  not  accepted  the  core  of  the
         appellant's claim to have been tortured or to be  in  fear  of  his
         ankle, she was not satisfied that a return to Zambia would increase
         his risk of suicide.

     25. The judge was not satisfied that the appellant  would  be  rendered
         destitute if removed to Zambia and gave reasons in support of  this
         conclusion [105]. The judge then considered Article 8  both  within
         and outside the Immigration Rules.  At  [114]  the  judge  was  not
         satisfied there were very significant obstacles to the  appellant's
         integration in Zambia given that he had extended family members  to
         whom he could turn for support and  given  that  he  was  born  and
         raised and educated in that  country.  The  judge  noted  that  the
         appellant was resourceful and that, even with his health  problems,
         he would be able to work as he had done so in  the  UK.  The  judge
         then found, even taking into account the appellant's health issues,
         that  his  removal  would   not   constitute   a   disproportionate
         interference with Article 8. The judge found that  the  appellant's
         physical and moral integrity would be maintained  and  promoted  by
         being with his extended family or friends in Zambia  who  would  be
         able to look  after  him  and  ensure  he  had  access  to  medical
         treatment [123]. Balancing the factors contained in s.117B  of  the
         Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act  2002  the  judge  included
         that there was no breach of Article 3 or Article  8  ECHR  and  the
         appeal was dismissed on grounds.

The challenge to the judge's decision

     26. The 1st ground contends that the judge failed to properly  consider
         the expert medical evidence in her assessment  of  the  appellant's
         credibility, or the corroborated value of the medical  evidence  in
         the credibility  assessment.  The  grounds  refer  to  the  judge's
         finding, at [57], that Dr Sahota failed to consider the possibility
         of other causes of the appellant's symptoms. This finding could not
         be sustained as the judge accepted that the doctor's assessment was
         made in accordance with the Istanbul Protocol which requires that a
         clinician consider alternative causes  and  the  possibility  of  a
         false allegation. Dr Sahota had, in any event, concluded,  after  a
         full consideration of the appellant's history and  the  documentary
         evidence medical records, that "... the most likely  cause  of  the
         PTSD is the trauma he experienced in Zambia as above, as  there  is
         no  other  plausible  explanation  for  his  symptoms."  Dr  Sahota
         therefore did consider whether there were alternative  explanations
         for the appellant's symptoms but concluded that there was no  other
         plausible explanation. The suggestion that the appellant's PTSD may
         have  been  caused  by  his  experiences  of  unlawful   residence,
         bereavement, immigration detention or leaving his country of origin
         would, according to the 1st  ground,  amount  to  an  impermissible
         clinical diagnosis (SP  (Risk-Suicide-PTSD-IFA-Medical  Facilities)
         Kosovo CG [2003] UKIAT 00017 and R v SSHD, ex parte  Kharia  [1998]
         INLR 731) , especially given that PTSD is a condition  that  arises
         as a response to a stressful event or situation of an exceptionally
         threatening or catastrophic nature. The 1st ground further contends
         that the judge erred in law in determining that Dr  Agrawal  relied
         upon  the  history  given  by  the  appellant  without   critically
         assessing the appellant's account. The judge also erred in reaching
         her finding that Dr Agrawal's  observations  did  not  support  his
         conclusions  as  she  assessed  the  consistency  of  the  doctor's
         conclusions on the appellant's insight into his  medical  condition
         with reference to her own definition of insight  in  preference  to
         the clinical explanation provided by Dr Agrawal in support  of  his
         conclusion. Although the judge accepted that the  appellant's  PTSD
         and mental illness could affect his memory, the judge erred in  law
         when considering the inconsistencies in the appellant's account  by
         failing to  appreciate  that,  as  a  symptom  of  the  appellant's
         condition, the effect of trauma and  encoding  of  memory  and  the
         reconstruction of events could not be simply overcome by  conscious
         effort.


     27. The 2nd ground contends that the judge erred in  her  consideration
         of the availability of state protection  and  internal  relocation.
         The judge failed to consider the effect of the appellant's accepted
         mental health condition in assessing the availability  of  internal
         relocation  and  state  protection,  and  she  failed  to  consider
         elements of the expert country report  identifying  an  absence  of
         procedures in the relevant legislation for members of the public to
         report and obtain  redress  from  police  abuses,  and  a  fear  of
         retaliation by claimants in light of police abuses of power.

     28. The 3rd ground contends that the judge failed to consider  or  make
         findings on the objective country  evidence  of  the  treatment  of
         mental illness in Zambia and the risks  to  the  appellant  arising
         from his condition. There was no consideration or findings made  in
         respect of the background evidence relating to those suffering from
         mental illness, including the expert country report and  the  other
         background evidence provided, particularly the joint report by  the
         Mental Health Uses Network and Mental  Disability  Advocacy  Centre
         (both NGOs) entitled "Human rights and mental health in Zambia". It
         was argued on behalf of the appellant that he faced a real risk  of
         Article 3 ill-treatment from  the  consequences  of  his  condition
         rather than simply the lack of treatment, in light of the  societal
         treatment of persons with mental  illnesses,  and  that  this  also
         qualified him for humanitarian protection. This whole argument  was
         however overlooked by the judge. The judge's  conclusion  that  the
         appellant would not  be  rendered  destitute  also  overlooked  the
         evidence of stigma and discrimination against  people  with  mental
         disorders. Nor was it reasonable to maintain that  the  appellant's
         experience of working in the UK  with  a  mental  health  condition
         would provide strong support for his ability to find work in Zambia
         in light of the different country context for  people  with  mental
         disorders. The judge's failure to consider the  societal  treatment
         of  those  with  mental   health   issues   also   undermined   the
         sustainability of her finding regarding very significant  obstacles
         to integration.


     29. The 4th ground contends that the judge erred in her approach to the
         assessment of the risk of suicide and return. There was said to  be
         no reasons why the threshold in respect of  the  severity  of  harm
         that the appellant would suffer if  removed  was  not  met  on  the
         evidence, and the judge failed to provide any reasons for departing
         from the consistent  conclusions  of  the  independent  psychiatric
         experts and the appellant's treating clinician that  his  condition
         would deteriorate significantly and escalate the risk  of  suicide.
         Dr Agrawal identified the 'very high' likelihood  of  deterioration
         in the appellant's condition with the urge to  commit  suicide  'so
         overwhelming that the risk of suicide will be imminent' if  removal
         took place,  despite  the  protective  factor  of  the  appellant's
         Christian beliefs. The judge failed to consider the findings in Y &
         Z (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2009]  EWCA  Civ  362  that  a  genuine  fear
         established by an appellant, even without objective foundation, may
         be such as to create a risk of suicide in breach of Article 3,  and
         to the medical evidence that it was the appellant's  perception  of
         imminent danger to his life that would exacerbate his PTSD symptoms
         and affect his judgemental capacity giving  rise  to  the  risk  to
         himself. Nor did the judge consider the expert country report  when
         assessing whether there were protective  mechanisms  in  Zambia  to
         mitigate the risk of suicide.


     30. Ms Harper adopted and expanded upon her for  grounds  in  her  oral
         submissions. She additionally submitted that Dr Sahota was aware of
         the  appellant's  full  history  and  found  no   other   plausible
         explanation for the symptoms. The doctor was asked an open question
         about the most likely  cause  of  the  appellant's  mental  health,
         although it was accepted there was no  specific  reference  to  the
         death of the appellant's aunt. The  fact  that  the  appellant  had
         mental health issues exposed him to a  risk  of  ill-treatment  and
         this was not adequately considered by the judge. The  judge  failed
         to adequately grapple with the country context of  the  appellant's
         diagnosis of PTSD. The appellant was mentally unwell and  perceived
         that he would be targeted by his paternal father's family, and this
         was not properly considered in the context of the suicide risk.

Discussion

     31. In respect of the 1st ground, it is apparent from the decision that
         the judge considered the medical evidence in detail.  She  accepted
         that both Dr Agrawal and Dr  Sahota  were  suitably  qualified  and
         expert in their field, and that the appellant  was  suffering  from
         moderate PTSD. The instructions to Dr Sahota were to  "...  comment
         on  the  likely  causes  of   [the   appellant's]   mental   health
         conditions".  Dr  Sahota  was  not  directly  asked   to   consider
         alternative causes of the appellant's mental health  condition  and
         did not expressly do so. Within the terms of his  instructions,  Dr
         Sahota's opinion was that the most likely cause of the  appellant's
         PTSD was the trauma he recounted as having  experienced  in  Zambia
         "as there is no  other  plausible  explanation."  The  only  direct
         explanation offered to Dr Sahota was that advanced by the appellant
         in his asylum claim. The judge nevertheless considered Dr  Sahota's
         opinion at [53], and at [54] the  judge  noted  the  terms  of  the
         instructions to Dr Sahota and accurately observed that he  had  not
         been asked to consider other possible causes. The judge's reference
         to the Istanbul Protocol at [57] was made with  specific  reference
         to the scarring on the appellant's body, and Dr Sahota's assessment
         of the appellant's mental state did not make any  direct  reference
         to the Istanbul Protocol. The judge did not explicitly  state  that
         she accepted that the assessment of the appellant's  mental  health
         symptoms by Dr Sahota was in accordance with the Istanbul Protocol.
         But even if this was not  the  case,  the  judge  was  legitimately
         entitled to identify events, such as the death of  the  appellant's
         aunt in respect of whom he was very close, his detention in the  UK
         and the difficulties of living illegally for many years,  that  may
         have been capable of causing the appellant's PTSD  and  which  were
         not specifically considered by either medical expert. This is not a
         case of the  judge  making  a  clinical  diagnosis  or  reaching  a
         clinical view contrary to that reached by a medical expert (see, in
         comparison, SP (Risk-Suicide-PTSD-IFA-Medical Facilities) Kosovo CG
         [2003] UKIAT 00017 and R v SSHD, ex parte Kharia [1998] INLR  731).
         The judge was not making clinical judgements  when  observing  that
         the medical  experts  had  not  considered  other  possible  causes
         relating to traumatic or stressful events in the  appellant's  life
         that may have accounted for his PTSD. Nor was the judge disagreeing
         with the clinical judgments. The judge could not  speculate  as  to
         what other event(s) may have caused the PTSD, nor did she engage in
         any such speculation. She was however  lawfully  entitled  to  note
         that the Dr Sahota did not consider other possible causes  for  the
         diagnosis, and that when finding that the  appellant's  account  of
         his traumatic symptoms was consistent with his account of events in
         Zambia, Dr Sahota did not expressly consider whether  other  events
         may have caused the traumatic symptoms.

     32. The  1st  ground  content  that,  as  PTSD  is  a  condition  which
         specifically arises as a response to a stressful event or situation
         of 'an exceptionally threatening or catastrophic nature', the judge
         was not reasonably entitled to find that the appellant's  condition
         might have been caused by other factors. The judge did not  however
         find that the PTSD had been caused by the death of the  appellant's
         aunt or his period in  detention  or  his  experience  of  unlawful
         residence in the UK, only that these stressful events had not  been
         specifically considered. The judge found that the PTSD  was  caused
         by an event or events other than that advanced  by  the  appellant,
         even taking into account the fact that the  appellant's  claim  was
         plausible when set against the background country evidence and  the
         medical reports. The judge was not obliged to identify  a  specific
         alternative event that gave rise to the appellant's PTSD; to do  so
         would be to engage in unwarranted  speculation.  Nor,  reading  the
         decision as a whole, is there merit  in  the  submission  that  the
         judge failed to adequately consider the appellant's  mental  health
         and  memory  problems  when  assessing  his  credibility.   It   is
         noteworthy that many of the judge's  adverse  credibility  findings
         were either not dependent on the  appellant's  memory  problems  or
         were unrelated to the diagnosis of PTSD (see,  for  example,  [65],
         [67], [69], [71], [72], [73],  [75],  [80],  [82]  and  [83]).  The
         judge, in any event, demonstrably took into account the appellant's
         vulnerability and his PTSD when assessing his credibility (see [86]
         and [87]).


     33. The 1st ground further contends that the  judge  erred  in  law  by
         approaching Dr Agrawal's evidence on the basis that the doctor  had
         accepted the appellant's account  uncritically.  There  is  however
         nothing in the judge's decision to suggest that she did approach Dr
         Agrawal's report on this basis. The judge was unarguably correct in
         observing that Dr Agrawal relied upon  the  history  given  by  the
         appellant when reaching his medical diagnosis. As was  pointed  out
         in JL (medical reports-credibility) China [2013] UKUT 00145  (IAC),
         "The more a diagnosis is dependent on  assuming  that  the  account
         given by the appellant was to be believed, the less  likely  it  is
         that significant weight will  be  attached  to  it  (HH  (Ethiopia)
         [2007] EWCA Civ 306 [23]). The judge nevertheless did attach weight
         to the medical reports and explicitly found  that  the  appellant's
         symptoms  of  PTSD  were  consistent  with  his  account  of  being
         subjected to abuse and torture in Zambia ([57] & [86]).  The  judge
         was entitled at [86] to find that, whilst the medical  reports  did
         attach some weight to the appellant's asylum claim, they could  not
         be considered in isolation. To the extent that the grounds  contend
         that  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  medical  evidence   as
         independent corroboration of the appellant's account, this  is  not
         made out. The judge did attach weight to the  medical  reports  and
         therefore treated them as corroborating  the  appellant's  account,
         even if he was ultimately unpersuaded that  the  appellant  gave  a
         truthful  account.  The  judge  found  that  Dr  Agrawal's  opinion
         relating to the appellant lacking insight into his  mental  illness
         was  difficult  to  reconcile  with  the  appellant's  account   of
         suffering from mental illness. The issue relating to the meaning of
         'insight' at [50] did not however  play  a  material  role  in  the
         judge's assessment of the reports from Dr Agrawal or the weight she
         attached to those reports. Having considered the judge's assessment
         of the medical evidence holistically, I am not persuaded  that  the
         challenges to the decision contained in the  1st  ground  are  made
         out.


     34. In light of my findings in respect of the 1st ground, I  need  only
         deal with the 2nd ground briefly. The judge gave a number of cogent
         reasons for concluding that the appellant was an incredible witness
         and accorded appropriate weight to the  medical  evidence  and  the
         appellant's  vulnerability  in  so  doing.  The  judge  made  clear
         findings of fact at [87] rejecting the appellant's  claim  that  he
         sold his father's home, his claim to have been  detained  and  ill-
         treated by the Zambian police and his claim to  fear  his  paternal
         uncle. The judge  found  the  appellant  had  extended  family  and
         friends in Zambia to whom he could turn and that he  had  no  issue
         with his paternal family. The  appellant  therefore  had  no  well-
         founded fear of persecution in his home  area.  Any  error  in  the
         judge's  assessment  of  the  availability  of  a  sufficiency   of
         protection or the availability of internal relocation was therefore
         immaterial.

     35. The 4th ground challenges the  judge's  approach  to  the  evidence
         relating to the appellant's risk of suicide. The  judge  considered
         the authority of J but did not mention Y & Z (Sri Lanka). The  test
         for establishing a breach of Article 3 in the context of a  suicide
         risk is a high one. In J the Court of Appeal held, at [25]
             25. In our judgment, there is no doubt that in  foreign  cases
             the relevant test is, as Lord Bingham said in  Ullah,  whether
             there are strong grounds for believing  that  the  person,  if
             returned, faces a real risk of torture, inhuman  or  degrading
             treatment or punishment. Mr Middleton submits that a different
             test is required in cases where the article 3 breach relied on
             is a risk of suicide or other self-harm. But  this  submission
             is  at  odds  with  the  Strasbourg  jurisprudence:  see,  for
             example, para [40] in Bensaid and the suicide cases  to  which
             we refer at para 30 below. Mr Middleton makes  two  complaints
             about the real risk test. First, he says that it leaves out of
             account the need for a causal link between the act of  removal
             and the ill-treatment relied on. Secondly,  the  test  is  too
             vague to be of any practical utility. But  as  we  explain  at
             para 27 below, a causal link is  inherent  in  the  real  risk
             test. As regards the second complaint, it is possible  to  see
             what it entails from the  way  in  which  the  test  has  been
             applied by the ECtHR in different circumstances. It should  be
             stated at the outset that the phrase  "real  risk"  imposes  a
             more stringent test than merely that the  risk  must  be  more
             than "not fanciful". The cases show that  it  is  possible  to
             amplify the test at least to the following extent.
             26. First, the test requires an assessment to be  made  of  the
             severity of the treatment which it is said that  the  applicant
             would suffer if removed. This must attain a  minimum  level  of
             severity. The court has said on a number of occasions that  the
             assessment of its severity depends on all the circumstances  of
             the case. But the ill-treatment must "necessarily  be  serious"
             such  that  it  is  "an  affront  to  fundamental  humanitarian
             principles to remove an individual to a country where he is  at
             risk of serious ill-treatment": see Ullah paras [38-39].
             27. Secondly, a causal link must be shown to exist between  the
             act or threatened act of removal or expulsion and  the  inhuman
             treatment relied on as  violating  the  applicant's  article  3
             rights. Thus in Soering at para [91], the court said:
             "In so far as any liability under the Convention is or  may  be
             incurred,  it  is  liability  incurred   by   the   extraditing
             Contracting State by reason of its having  taken  action  which
             has as a direct consequence the exposure of  an  individual  to
             proscribed ill-treatment."(emphasis added).
             See also para [108] of Vilvarajah where the court said that the
             examination  of  the  article  3  issue  "must  focus  on   the
             foreseeable consequences of the removal of  the  applicants  to
             Sri Lanka..."
             28. Thirdly, in the context of a foreign case,  the  article  3
             threshold is particularly high simply because it is  a  foreign
             case. And it is even higher where the alleged inhuman treatment
             is not the direct or  indirect  responsibility  of  the  public
             authorities of the  receiving  state,  but  results  from  some
             naturally occurring illness, whether physical or  mental.  This
             is made clear in para [49] of D and para [40] of Bensaid.
             29. Fourthly, an article 3 claim can in principle succeed in  a
             suicide case (para [37] of Bensaid).
             30. Fifthly, in deciding whether there is  a  real  risk  of  a
             breach of article 3 in a suicide case, a question of importance
             is  whether  the  applicant's  fear  of  ill-treatment  in  the
             receiving state upon which the risk of suicide is  said  to  be
             based is objectively well-founded. If the  fear  is  not  well-
             founded, that will tend to weigh against  there  being  a  real
             risk that the removal will be in breach of article 3.

             31. Sixthly, a further question of  considerable  relevance  is
             whether the removing and/or the receiving state  has  effective
             mechanisms  to  reduce  the  risk  of  suicide.  If  there  are
             effective mechanisms, that too will weigh  heavily  against  an
             applicant's claim that removal will violate his or her  article
             3 rights.


     36. Those tests were developed in Y & Anor (Sri Lanka) v Secretary of
         State for the Home Department [2009] EWCA Civ 362 in this way:


             15. There is no necessary tension between the two things.  The
             corollary of the final sentence of �30 of J  is  that  in  the
             absence  of  an  objective  foundation  for  the   fear   some
             independent basis for it must be established if weight  is  to
             be given to it. Such an independent basis may  lie  in  trauma
             inflicted in the past on the appellant in (or,  as  here,  by)
             the receiving state: someone who has been tortured  and  raped
             by his or her captors may be terrified  of  returning  to  the
             place where it happened, especially if  the  same  authorities
             are in charge, notwithstanding  that  the  objective  risk  of
             recurrence has gone.
             16. One can accordingly add to the fifth principle in  J  that
             what may nevertheless be of equal importance  is  whether  any
             genuine fear which the appellant may establish, albeit without
             an objective foundation, is  such  as  to  create  a  risk  of
             suicide if there is an enforced return.


     37. On the basis of the judge's factual findings the appellant  had  no
         genuine fear of being tortured in Zambia. He fabricated his account
         of being targeted by his paternal family and of being  detained  by
         the police. The medical reports detailing the appellant's  risk  of
         suicide and the deterioration in his mental health  if  removed  to
         Zambia were premised on  the  appellant  having  a  genuinely  held
         belief that he would be targeted by his  paternal  father's  family
         and the Zambian police. At [104] the judge stated,


             I accept that the Appellant will have  increased  distress  at
             being removed however as I have not accepted the core  of  his
             claim to have been tortured or to be in fear of his  uncle,  I
             am not satisfied that a return to Zambia  would  increase  his
             risk of suicide to the level required to engage Article 3.


     38. As the judge did not accept the appellant held a  genuine  fear  of
         being targeted on return to Zambia, the judge's assessment  of  the
         risk of suicide was legally  adequate.  The  4th  ground  does  not
         disclose a material error on a point of law in light of the judge's
         other factual findings.


     39. I am however persuaded that the judge erred on a point  of  law  in
         respect of ground 3. The judge accepted the appellant was suffering
         from PTSD.  The  skeleton  argument  prepared  for  the  First-tier
         Tribunal included submissions that  the  appellant  would  be  ill-
         treated on his return to Zambia because of his mental health issues
         as  a  result,  inter  alia,  of  societal  stigmatisation   and/or
         destitution. The grounds of appeal identify evidence  contained  in
         the appellant's bundle  of  documents  suggesting  that  there  was
         discrimination and pervasive  stigma  experienced  by  people  with
         mental health issues in Zambia (particularly in the joint report by
         the Mental Health  Uses  Network  and  Mental  Disability  Advocacy
         Centre (both NGOs) entitled "Human  rights  and  mental  health  in
         Zambia" and the country expert report). The judge failed to  engage
         with these arguments and failed to make any  relevant  findings  of
         fact. The treatment the appellant may face as a person with  mental
         health issues formed  an  independent  basis  for  the  appellant's
         Article 3/Article 8 claim, irrespective of whether his  account  of
         his fear of his paternal family was true or not. In the absence  of
         any assessment of the conditions the appellant may face  in  Zambia
         on account of his mental health issues, it cannot be said, at least
         at  this  stage,  that  the  appeal  would  inevitably  have   been
         dismissed. I am therefore satisfied that this error is material.


Remaking the decision


     40. At the close of the 'error of  law'  hearing  Ms  Harper  submitted
         that, if I find an error of law in respect of ground  3,  I  should
         adjourn for further submissions to be made. I asked Ms Harper  what
         further submissions could be made that were not already covered  in
         both the skeleton argument before the First-tier Tribunal  and  the
         grounds. She was unable  to  identify  the  basis  of  any  further
         submissions other  than  those  already  covered  in  her  skeleton
         argument prepared for the First-tier Tribunal and  the  grounds  of
         appeal. I note that the appellant's legal representatives  did  not
         seek to admit  any  further  evidence  under  rule  15(2A)  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)   Rules   2008.   In   these
         circumstances, and in light of the relatively narrow issue left  to
         be determined, the detailed skeleton argument and  grounds  already
         provided, and the particular sections of  the  background  evidence
         brought to my attention, I consider that I can  fairly  proceed  to
         remake the decision without the need for further submissions.


     41. The appellant submits that he would  suffer  ill-treatment  through
         traditional healing practices, psychiatric  treatment  in  hospital
         and social stigmatisation and/or  destitution  on  account  of  his
         moderate PTSD and depression. The appellant relies on a report from
         the Mental Disability Advocacy Centre (MDAC). The executive summary
         of this report found that "mental health care in Zambia is governed
         by an outdated legal framework",  that  "psychiatric  services  are
         chronically  under-sourced,  overly-centralised  and  dominated  by
         pharmacology", and  that  "people  with  mental  health  needs  are
         subject to pervasive stigma, often resulting in physical  abuse  in
         their  homes  and  communities."  The  report  notes  that  "formal
         psychiatric services are  inaccessible  to  the  vast  majority  of
         people",  and  that  "families  have  minimal  support  from  their
         communities, given the intense stigma of people labelled  as  mad."
         Reference was made to many people being chained in their own  homes
         or in their communities. Men had reportedly been  bullied,  teased,
         harassed and even stoned by people in their community. The head  of
         the Traditional Healers' Association told monitors that almost half
         of the association's members were "cheats masquerading as healers."
         Traditional healers may commit criminal assaults under the guise of
         treating mental health issues.  According  to  the  report  "mental
         health services are nearly non-existent at the primary health  care
         level. Instead, mental  health  services  are  highly  centralised,
         available only in 8 hospitals  across  Zambia,  a  country  with  a
         landmass larger than France." According to  a  2005  Mental  Health
         Policy there were 560 psychiatric beds in the country which  has  a
         population of 13 million. Many of  the  mental  health  wards  were
         overcrowded. Under the heading 'the home and community' the  report
         noted that families were typically the primary  carers  for  people
         with mental health issues,  and  that  people  with  mental  health
         issues may be tied up chained by family  members  during  a  mental
         health crisis. The report does not describe what a  'mental  health
         crisis' might be or identify the type of  mental  health  illnesses
         that would cause primary carers or hospitals to chain or tie up  an
         individual. The report referred to attacks  on  those  with  mental
         health issues, although the frequency of such attacks was  unknown.
         A  2008  WHO  indicated  that  people  with   mental   disabilities
         experience some of the harshest conditions of living that exist  in
         any society and were subject  to  neglect  in  harsh  institutional
         environments  and  deprived  of  basic  healthcare,  victimised  by
         physical  abuse  and  exposed  to  cruel,  inhuman  and   degrading
         treatment. Funding allocated to mental health services was said  to
         be "excruciatingly low."


     42. The report paints a distressing picture for  those  suffering  from
         mental health problems. It is however general in  nature.  It  does
         not  distinguish  between  different   types   of   mental   health
         conditions, and it does not identify  or  describe  how  serious  a
         mental health condition would need to be for someone to be admitted
         to one of the mental health hospitals.  Significantly,  the  report
         does not describe the manifestation of mental  health  difficulties
         that  are  likely  to  lead  to  an  individual  being  shunned  or
         stigmatised by society or targeted for  violence  or  discriminated
         against. The report does not identify the type  or  seriousness  of
         mental health problem that would cause a  person's  family  to  tie
         them up, or which  would  cause  a  traditional  healer  to  become
         involved. There is nothing in the report specifically  relating  to
         the  position  of  somebody  suffering  from  moderate   PTSD   and
         depression.

     43. The appellant also  relies  on  an  IRIN  News  report  dated  from
         September 2007 relating to societal stigma, but this  report  again
         is general and does not identify the characteristics or the  degree
         of seriousness of a mental health issue that  would  give  rise  to
         stigmatisation.

     44. The  appellant  additionally  relies  on  the  country  expert,  Ms
         Queiroz, who refers to the inadequacy of the  few  existing  mental
         health facilities in  Zambia.  According  to  the  expert,  "deeply
         rooted prejudices and cultural beliefs surrounding  mental  illness
         (or any disabilities at large) constitute an  incredible  challenge
         to the implementation of any policy aimed at improving the  quality
         of those who suffer with those conditions in  Zambia."  The  expert
         noted the 'out of sight, out of mind' culture that prevented people
         from discussing the issue, and that societal prejudice  was  highly
         associated with traditional tribe values. Reference is made to a UN
         Special  Rapporteur  report  referring   to   many   persons   with
         disabilities being discriminated against or excluded from community
         and society as they are considered to be incapable of carrying  out
         daily  activities.  The  expert  also  cited  an  academic  article
         published in the  African  Journal  of  Psychiatry  in  2010  which
         indicated that mental illness in the general community tended to be
         understood as 'bewitchment', 'Satanism' or 'evil spirits' and  that
         the individual had been cursed or 'possessed by demons'. The expert
         stated, "... When noting the omnipresent nature of  stigma  against
         mental illness in the Zambian society, researchers pointed out that
         family members are, quite often, both the source of more  prejudice
         and the recipients of an 'extended  guilt',  as  perceived  by  the
         community."


     45. As with the MDAC report, Ms Queiroz's report fails to  identify  or
         describe the  degree  of  seriousness  of  mental  illness  or  the
         manifestations of mental illness that would  cause  someone  to  be
         considered as incapable of carrying out daily activities or  to  be
         bewitched or possessed by  demons,  and  therefore  stigmatised  or
         discriminated against. The country expert report does not  consider
         whether someone  with  the  appellant's  particular  mental  health
         difficulties  would  face  a  real  risk   of   being   ostracised,
         stigmatised, or otherwise excluded from society.

     46. The assessment of whether the appellant would be exposed to a  real
         risk of a breach of Article 3 as a result of societal attitudes  to
         his PTSD and depression, or whether his removal would constitute  a
         disproportionate breach of Article 8 (either  as  a  free  standing
         right or by reference to paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi) of the Immigration
         Rules)  is to be approached in the context of the factual  findings
         made by Judge Mulholland. The judge found that  the  appellant  had
         fabricated his account of being targeted by his paternal family and
         that he had not been detained and ill-treated by  the  police,  and
         that the appellant did not have a  genuine  fear  of  his  paternal
         family in Zambia. The judge found that the appellant  had  extended
         family and friends in Zambia to whom he could turn for support.

     47. According to the most recent  psychiatric  report  the  appellant's
         PTSD is in the moderate range because it is chronic in  nature  and
         associated  with  a  degree  of  impairment   (sleep   disturbance,
         avoidance; Dr Sahota's report, 4.1.5). Dr Sahota  stated  that  the
         appellant avoids situations reminiscent of trauma and continues  to
         experience  hyperarousal  and  emotional  disturbance  when  he  is
         reliving past  trauma  (4.1.4),  and  that  without  treatment  the
         appellant's prognosis was a relapsing remitting disorder  in  which
         he would be vulnerable to stress and depression. The  appellant  is
         receiving anti-depressant medication and, according to the  Reasons
         for Refusal Letter, there is medical treatment available  for  PTSD
         in  Lusaka.  I  note  that  the  MDAC  report  indicated  that  the
         psychiatric services are dominated by pharmacology, suggesting that
         anti-depressant medication is available in Zambia. Dr  Sahota  does
         not comment on whether the appellant's moderate PTSD would  prevent
         him from being able to undertake employment as he had already  done
         for several years in the UK. Dr  Sahota  found  the  appellant  was
         independent in terms  of  his  occupational  functioning,  although
         dependent on emotional support from family friends, and that  there
         was no evidence that he was suggestible or suffered  from  learning
         difficulties (4.1.31 & 4.1.35). Dr Sahota found that the  appellant
         was able to attend to his  basic  needs  independently  in  the  UK
         (4.1.47).  This  suggests   that   the   appellant   can   function
         independently in terms of employment, as is clear from his  history
         of working illegally in the UK. This would suggest  that,  even  in
         the context of Zambia, the appellant  would  not  be  considered  a
         someone incapable of carrying out daily activities,  and  therefore
         he  is  less  likely  to  be  the  subject  of  stigmatisation   or
         discrimination. It is not apparent from the evidence before me that
         the manner in which the appellant's mental health  issues  manifest
         themselves would create a real risk that he would be stigmatised or
         discriminated against, or otherwise prevented  from  obtaining  and
         retaining employment in Zambia. Judge  Mulholland  found  that  the
         appellant would have family and friends to whom he could  turn  for
         support in Zambia. The appellant would not therefore be  without  a
         network of support.

     48. There is little in the evidence  before  me  to  suggest  that  the
         appellant's mental health condition, even if it deteriorated on his
         removal to Zambia, would manifest itself in  a  manner  that  would
         cause him to be shunned or stigmatised by society in general. He is
         not, for example, suffering from any  psychotic  condition  or  any
         learning disability. The most recent psychiatric  report  indicated
         that  his  symptoms  primarily   manifest   themselves   by   sleep
         disturbance and avoidance. I note once again that he  was  able  to
         work independently for a number of years in this country with these
         symptoms. I am not satisfied, based on the  generalised  background
         evidence before me, that the appellant is someone who  is  at  real
         risk of being stigmatised as a  result  of  his  moderate  PTSD.  I
         consequently find that he would not face a real risk of a breach of
         Article 3, or that he would face 'very  significant  obstacles'  to
         his integration (especially given that  he  lived  in  the  country
         until he was 23 years old and would be familiar with the  language,
         the culture and the  way  of  life),  or  that  his  removal  would
         otherwise constitute a disproportionate breach of Article 8.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed on all grounds

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  in
this appeal is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the  respondent.  Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


D.Blum

Signed                                                    Date 1 April 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Blum


                 ___________________________________________


                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




