
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07269/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 16 November 2018                   |On 05 February 2019                   |
|                                              |                              |

     Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS


                                   Between

                                     AY
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Ms A Williams, Counsel instructed by Asylum Justice
For the Respondent:     Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Suffield-
    Thompson in which she dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a  citizen
    of Azerbaijan, against the Secretary  of  State's  decision  to  refuse
    asylum and issue removal directions.


 2. We make an anonymity direction under Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    Appellant who claims asylum. This direction  prohibits  the  disclosure
    directly or indirectly (including by the parties) of  the  identity  of
    the Appellant. Any disclosure and breach of this direction  may  amount
    to a contempt of court. This direction shall  remain  in  force  unless
    revoked or varied by a Tribunal or Court.

 3. The application  under  appeal  was  refused  on  20  July  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    The appeal came before Judge Suffield-Thompson on 4  October  2017  and
    was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The application was  granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Hollingsworth on 15 December 2017 in the following terms

       At paragraph 38 of the decision the judge states that the  Appellant
       has stated that he had problems in his Home Office interviews due to
       the interpreter speaking a different  dialect.  The  judge  accepted
       this was true. The judge then referred to  appellants  raising  this
       issue time and time again at hearings.


       The judge then referred to the detailed  explanation  given  by  the
       Appellant at this  hearing  about  the  regional  differences  being
       plausible and not  having  been  challenged  in  cross  examination.
       Despite the findings made by the judge in  this  context  the  judge
       diluted the impact of such findings by referring to the  absence  of
       the provision of transcripts by the Appellant's  representatives  of
       that which the Appellant said  in  interview  to  prove  what  their
       client really said. The judge found this to be  significant  in  its
       absence.


       It is arguable that having found that it was true  that  there  were
       problems arising from the use by  the  interpreter  of  a  different
       dialect that the credibility assessment carried  out  by  the  judge
       should have been done in the light of the findings set  out  at  the
       opening of paragraph 38 of the decision and that such  findings  set
       out at the opening of paragraph 38, should not have  been  subjected
       to the dilution referred to at the conclusion of paragraph 38 before
       proceeding to carry out the credibility analysis therein after.


       The judge  has  referred  in  relation  to  a  number  of  pertinent
       credibility issues to the content of the interview evidence.  It  is
       arguable that the judge  should  have  set  out  a  full  or  fuller
       analysis in respect of any explanation offered by the  Appellant  in
       relation to the content of the interview and difficulty arising with
       interpretation before making a final credibility assessment.


       It is arguable that the judge should  have  made  it  clear  if  the
       absence or lack of adequacy of any explanation by the  Appellant  in
       relation to the strands  relied  upon  by  the  judge  incorporating
       reference  to  the  interview  evidence  affected  the   credibility
       assessment by setting out a full or fuller analysis in  relation  to
       such explanation or absence of such explanation on the part  of  the
       Appellant.


Background


 4. The history of this appeal is detailed above. The Appellant is a
    citizen of Azerbaijan born on 1 July 1983. He arrived in the United
    Kingdom on 12 April 2017 with valid entry clearance and claimed asylum
    on arrival with his wife and two children as his dependents. The basis
    of his claim was that he had been persecuted in Azerbaijan due to his
    imputed political opinion and he feared persecution on return. The
    Appellant claimed to have been the head of security for the Transport
    and Energy minister General Akif Chovdarov who reported to the Minister
    of National Security, Eldar Mahmudov. Mahmudov was sacked and those
    reporting to him including Chovdarov, his personal staff and more than
    a hundred other workers were also removed from their posts. Many,
    including the Appellant, were detained. In the course of these events
    the Appellant's house was raided and during the raid his wife was
    raped.


 5. The Secretary of  State  refused  the  claim  not  accepting  that  the
    Appellant was employed as claimed or that he was detained or  that  his
    wife was abused and therefore that he had faced persecution in the past
    or would  face  persecution  on  return.  At  the  appeal  hearing  the
    Appellant maintained his claim and he  and  his  wife  both  gave  oral
    evidence. The Judge found (paragraphs  47  and  48)  that  neither  the
    Appellant nor his  wife  were  credible  witnesses  and  dismissed  the
    appeal.


Submissions

 6. For the  Appellant  Ms  Williams  submitted  a  skeleton  argument  and
    referred to the grounds of appeal. There  are  three  grounds  and  the
    grant of permission concentrates on  ground  1  but  does  not  exclude
    grounds 2 and 3.   The  Judge  accepted  the  Appellant's  evidence  of
    difficulties  experienced  at  the  asylum  interviews.  The  screening
    interview was conducted in  Azeri  and  the  substantive  interview  in
    Russian. Despite accepting these difficulties the Judge went on to make
    adverse credibility findings on the  basis  of  answers  given  in  the
    interviews.  The Judge was wrong to suggest that  a  transcript  should
    have been provided by  the  Appellant's  representatives  and  to  take
    adverse inference from its absence.  So far as ground  2  is  concerned
    the Judge does not appear to have considered  the  Appellant's  witness
    statement and oral evidence in which he explains his knowledge  of  the
    Makarov pistol. Ground 3 asserts that in finding that  the  Appellant's
    wife was not a credible witness the  Judge  has  failed  to  take  into
    account her  oral  evidence  and  witness  statement  and  relied  upon
    irrelevant issues.


 7. For the Secretary of State Mr Howells said the  Appellant's  solicitors
    had only corrected three answers given at  the  substantive  interview.
    The issue of the gun was raised at question 96 and not corrected. There
    is nothing in the grounds to  suggest  that  the  Judge's  decision  is
    irrational or perverse. Mr Howells had no comment to make on ground 3.


 8. We said that the appeal would be allowed, and the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal set aside. A new decision would be  substituted  allowing
    the appeal. We reserved our written decision.

Decision

 9. The basis of the Appellant's claim is clearly set out  in  his  written
    witness statement and supported by a written witness statement from the
    Appellant's wife. These statements purport to address the issues raised
    by the Respondent in the refusal letter. Both  the  Appellant  and  his
    wife gave oral evidence. The Judge dismissed the appeal on the basis of
    adverse credibility  findings  in  respect  of  both  witnesses.  These
    findings are comprehensive with the exception of the Judge's acceptance
    that the Appellant had problems in his Home Office interviews  due  the
    interpreter speaking a different dialect. The three grounds  of  appeal
    refer to the basis for these  adverse  credibility  findings  asserting
    irrationality, failure to take account of material matters and  failure
    to give adequate reasons  for  a  finding  of  fact.  The  grounds  are
    admirably concise and we will deal with each of them.

10. The first ground asserts that it was irrational  of  the  Judge  having
    found that the Appellant told the truth about the difficulties he faced
    at interview due to interpretation issues to go on and  find  that  the
    answers he gave were inconsistent and to take adverse  inference  as  a
    result.

11. In our judgement this ground is made out. The finding  of  problems  at
    the interviews could not be clearer (at paragraph 38). The  Judge  then
    goes on to dilute the significance of these problems by adding

       "Time and time again at hearings  Appellants  raise  this  issue  ...
       However I do note that in cases such as this it  is  common  practice
       for  representatives  to  provide  the  Tribunals  with   their   own
       transcripts of what the Appellant said in  interview  to  prove  what
       their client really said and I find this to  be  significant  in  its
       absence".

     This addition creates a number of difficulties. Firstly  the  Appellant
    appears to be criticised on the basis of what other appellants or their
    representatives might do. Secondly it is difficult to understand how  a
    separate transcript would assist  when  the  difficulties  are  not  of
    transposition but of interpretation.  It  is  not  suggested  that  the
    answers given were wrongly recorded  rather  that  the  questions  were
    misunderstood, or the answers wrongly translated. Thirdly, and  perhaps
    of the  greatest  importance,  is  that  the  Judge  having  explicitly
    accepted that the Appellant had problems as claimed finds  the  absence
    of a transcript  significant  without  explaining  how  that  (adverse)
    significance is factored into her acceptance  of  this  truth.  In  our
    judgment this is irrational, and the irrationality is compounded by the
    findings detailed in paragraphs 39, 42, 43 and 44 that answers given at
    interview were inconsistent.

12. The second ground relates to the Makarov pistol. The  Judge  finds  (at
    paragraph 42) that the Appellant did not know how many parts the weapon
    had and, given his claimed employment, it is implausible that he  would
    not be familiar with "guns, gun care and their parts and  working".  It
    is asserted that in making this finding the Judge failed to  take  into
    account  material  evidence;  oral  evidence  in  which  the  Appellant
    disputed the account in the interview transcript.

13. In our judgement this ground is also made out. There is no  mention  in
    the decision of the oral evidence given relating to  the  gun  and  the
    response given by the Appellant at interview only (at paragraph  42)  a
    reference to the interview record. The reference is wrong. The decision
    records that at interview the Appellant

       "did not know how many parts the weapon had"

     whereas the interview record shows the question

        "How many pieces does it break down into when you clean it?"

     with the answer

         "I didn't do that personally, there was a special department at the
         ministry where we would take the weapons to be cleaned".

     Indeed, the Appellant's witness  statement  goes  into  further  detail
    explaining that the Appellant was not given the chance at interview  to
    expand on his answer and that he did know how  many  parts  the  weapon
    had.

14. The third ground concerns the evidence of the Appellant's wife found by
    the Judge not to be a credible witness. The complaint is that the Judge
    gave inadequate reasons for finding the  Appellant's  wife  not  to  be
    credible. The basis of this finding is the lack of medical evidence  or
    confirmation of a medical appointment said to have been missed.

15. In our judgment this ground is also  made  out.  The  Appellant's  wife
    gives a detailed written witness statement in  which  she  corroborates
    her husband's account and gives her own account of being assaulted  and
    raped after her husband had been taken away when their home was raided.
    The details of the rape and  its  aftermath  are  lengthy  and  without
    apparent inconsistency. A finding that she is not  a  credible  witness
    based only on a lack of medical evidence and a  missed  appointment  is
    not sufficiently reasoned.

16. The errors of law referred to above  materially  affected  the  Judge's
    decision to dismiss the appeal and for that reason we allow the  appeal
    and we set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

Remaking the decision

17. In remaking the decision, we  repeat  what  we  have  said  above.  The
    Appellant is a person who has put  forward  a  detailed  and  plausible
    claim for international protection. His account is corroborated by  his
    wife. The objective evidence contained in the Appellant's bundle  shows
    that the events forming the backdrop  to  the  Appellant's  claim  took
    place and further that there has been international concern over  these
    events and in particular the detention of  individuals  on  politically
    motivated  charges.  Human  Rights  Watch  refers   to   a   'sustained
    crackdown'. The Foreign and Commonwealth Office have issued a number of
    press releases expressing 'concern'.

18. The Judge made adverse findings in relation to the  Appellant's  wife's
    credibility which it is  not  possible  to  support.  Having  read  her
    witness statement and having heard oral evidence the  only  reason  for
    disbelieving  her  account  is  unsustainable.  She  talks  about  what
    happened to her  at  her  own  home  immediately  after  her  husband's
    detention. We can see no reason to doubt her  evidence.  The  Appellant
    gave evidence at screening and asylum interviews and  had  difficulties
    at  the  screening  interview.  Apart  from  inconsistencies  that  the
    Appellant attributes to the accepted  interpretation  difficulties  the
    only remaining issues about his account  are  that  he  does  not  know
    enough about guns and there are problems about the date his  employment
    began. In fact there are very minor inconsistences in the dates of  his
    commencing employment and the difficulty concerning the Makarov for the
    reasons given above is not a difficulty at all.

19. We indicated having set aside the decision that we proposed  to  remake
    it allowing the Appellant's appeal. On behalf of  the  Home  Office  Mr
    Howells did not object to this course.

20. We therefore remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  and  allow
    the Appellant's appeal.



Summary of decision

  21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.



  22. We remake the decision of the First-tier Tribunal and allow the
      Appellant's appeal.





Signed                                  Date: 31 January 2019

[pic]
J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal

