

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                       Appeal Number:
PA/07465/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 13th November 2017                     |On 15th November 2017          |



                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                     ES
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Deller, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S Ferguson, instructed by Ineyab solicitors

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

   Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
   (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal  or  a
   Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or  any  form  of
   publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify  the  appellant
   in this determination  identified  as  ES.  This  direction  applies  to,
   amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply  with  this  direction
   could give rise to contempt of court proceedings


   1. On 23rd November 2015, a  deportation  order  was  signed  against  ES
      pursuant to 32(5) UK Borders Act 2007. His protection and human rights
      claims made subsequent to  the  deportation  order  were  refused  for
      reasons set out in a decision dated 21st July 2017. He  appealed  that
      decision on human rights grounds and, in  a  decision  promulgated  on
      15th September 2017, First-tier Tribunal judge Ian Howard allowed  his
      appeal 'on human rights grounds and under the Immigration Rules'.


   2. The SSHD sought and was granted permission to appeal on  the  grounds,
      essentially, that the judge had failed to engage with the  immigration
      rules  or  the   statutory   requirements   in   his   assessment   of
      proportionality.


   3. The judge set out the oral and documentary  evidence  before  him.  He
      found that ES had returned to the family home in 2015, that  prior  to
      that there had been continuing contact and devotion and  that  he  and
      his partner had made a decision in  2012  that  it  was  in  the  best
      interest of the children that their relationship should  continue.  In
      paragraph 20 of his  decision  he  states  that  he  has  adopted  the
      approach in MM (Uganda) [2016] EWCA Civ 450.


   4. The judge finds, inter alia,:


                      "24.The  fact  of  his  continued  challenge  to  the
                      findings of the Crown Court informs me as to his true
                      level of contrition. The fact  remains  he  seeks  to
                      minimise his involvement. These are serious  offences
                      committed for commercial gain and  the  fact  of  his
                      continued minimising of his  role  does  not  suggest
                      even a partial understanding of the damage the supply
                      of Class A drugs or  domestic  violence  inflicts  on
                      society as a whole.
                      25.In his favour it is fair to observe  that  he  has
                      but the one conviction the  [sic]  drug  trafficking.
                      However  the  OASys  Assessment  concludes  that   he
                      presents a high risk of harm to those with whom he is
                      intimate.
                      26.The issue remains whether it is  unduly  harsh  in
                      the context of the family life, as I have found it to
                      be. That is the balancing act I  must  undertake  and
                      the balancing in turn revolves  around  the  possible
                      relocation of the family to Jamaica.  Section  55  of
                      the Borders, Citizenship  and  Immigration  Act  2009
                      requires me to consider the  need  to  safeguard  and
                      promote the welfare of all four children and reads:
                      .....
                      27.However this requirement cannot be seen as what is
                      sometimes expressed as a trump card in the  hands  of
                      the appellant......
                      28.The appellant as a feature in  the  lives  of  the
                      children with whom he lived  immediately  before  his
                      incarceration was intermittent. He was there  between
                      2009 and 2012. Was absent until  2015  and  can  have
                      spent no more than three  months  back  in  the  home
                      before he was imprisoned in March 2015. It is once he
                      is detained that the evidence of  a  real  commitment
                      starts to emerge. As a consequence I am  left  asking
                      myself whether this rediscovered devotion is  genuine
                      or for the benefit of the appeal. I am driven to  the
                      conclusion it is genuine. Not because of anything the
                      adults have said, but because of  what  the  children
                      say in their letters.....
                      29.In assessing the unduly harsh test I must look  at
                     the totality of family life.....
                      30.  The appellant's offending  is  significant,  but
                      his conviction in 2002 for drug trafficking  can  now
                      be said to have  been  an  isolated  offence  of  its
                      type....the 2015 conviction also stands in isolation,
                      of its type. I remind myself on  the  conclusions  in
                      the OASys  Assessment  but  must  see  those  in  the
                      context of the evidence......
                      31.  In  this  appeal  the  scales  are  very  finely
                      balanced, but given my findings about the nature  and
                      extent of the family life extant I am driven  to  the
                      conclusion the decision  of  the  respondent  is  not
                      proportionate."


   5. Although the judge in his  decision  set  out  the  principles  to  be
      applied, he has failed to apply them. The judge has failed to consider
      whether and if so why relocation of the family  to  Jamaica  would  be
      unduly harsh on the children/partner, factoring  in  the  criminality,
      the OASys report and ES' continued lack  of  contrition.  Further  the
      judge has failed to  make  findings  whether  the  deportation  of  ES
      leaving the children/partner behind would be  unduly  harsh  upon  the
      children/family, factoring in the criminality, OASys report  and  lack
      of contrition. It is simply insufficient to state that the decision of
      the  SSHD  is  not  proportionate.  Despite  Ms   Ferguson's   valiant
      submissions that when read as a whole in the light of  the  references
      to the relevant caselaw, the judge plainly had  in  mind  the  correct
      test, that is not the case.  It is not just the case that  there  must
      exist family life and that the family life has not been engineered for
      the appeal. Not least the judge found that ES has not shown contrition
      and yet then refers to the offences being 'one-offs'. The  remarks  of
      the sentencing judge for the 2015 conviction  do  not  appear  in  the
      determination. It is hard to  see  how  those  remarks[1]   have  been
      considered by the First-tier Tribunal judge, never mind factored  into
      his decision.


   6. I would almost go so far as to say that the decision by the First-tier
      Tribunal judge that the SSHD's  decision  was  not  proportionate  was
      perverse although it was not pleaded on that basis and I do not make a
      finding that the judge made a material error of law on that basis.

         7. The First-tier Tribunal erred in law in its decision and I  set
            it aside in total. None of  the  findings  are  preserved.  The
            scheme of the Tribunals Court and Enforcement Act 2007 does not
            assign the function  of  primary  fact  finding  to  the  Upper
            Tribunal and, in accordance with the Practice Statement I remit
            the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.


         8. Although I have continued the order for anonymity,  I  did  not
            hear submissions in this regard. It may be that the  First-tier
            Tribunal  will  consider  this  afresh,  especially  given  the
            numerous aliases used by ES.


          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law. I  set  aside  the  decision  and
    remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing.

     Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).

                                    Date 14th November 2017
[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
-----------------------
[1] "...So this is a category one case of sustained assault with a higher
culpability. I need go no further than the use of the foot...There are the
additional aggravating features that it was in her own home and her child
had to come back and find her and let the police in and you kicked her four
times..."

