
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07465/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated          |
|On 4 December 2017                 |On 20 December 2017                     |
|                                   |                                        |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE blum

                                   Between

                                UMID KABULOV
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT


                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P. Turner, Counsel, of Imperium Chambers
For the Respondent:    Ms A. Fijiwala, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

     1. This is an appeal against the decision of Judge of  the  First-tier
        Tribunal N M Paul (FtJ), promulgated on 22  June  2017,  dismissing
        the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's decision  dated  18
        July 2016 refusing his asylum and human rights claims.



   Factual Background


     2. The Appellant is a national of Turkmenistan, date of birth  23  May
        1998. He entered the UK on 2 January 2010  as  a  student  and  was
        granted further leave to remain in the same capacity until  11  May
        2013. A further application for leave to remain for the purposes of
        study was refused on 9 October  2013.  The  Appellant  withdrew  an
        appeal  against  this  decision  on  5  February  2014.  A  further
        application for leave to remain as a Tier 4 (General)  Student  was
        refused on 18 March 2014. Although an appeal before the  First-tier
        Tribunal was successful, on 24 March 2015 the  Upper  Tribunal  set
        aside  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  and  the  appeal  was
        dismissed for want of jurisdiction. Having made an  appointment  to
        claim asylum on 15 December 2015, the  Appellant  formally  claimed
        asylum on 14 January 2016.


     3. The Appellant claimed that he was born a non-practising Muslim  and
        that he converted to being a Jehovah's  Witness  in  2014/2015.  He
        claimed his mother  converted  from  Islam  to  being  a  Jehovah's
        Witness in or around 2006. The  Appellant  claimed  that,  when  he
        lived with his mother in Turkmenistan, the authorities came to  the
        family home and arrested  everyone  at  a  meeting.  Despite  being
        released because of her age the Appellant believed his  mother  was
        constantly  questioned  and  detained  by  the   authorities.   The
        Appellant  feared  returning  to  Turkmenistan  as  he  was  now  a
        Jehovah's Witness and  his  religion  was  not  permitted  in  that
        country.  He  believed  he  would  be  persecuted   and   oppressed
        particularly given that he had converted from Islam.


     4. The Respondent accepted as reasonably likely the Appellant's  claim
        to be a Jehovah's Witness, although his involvement was said to  be
        at "a low-level." The Respondent  rejected  the  Appellant's  claim
        that he was born a Muslim because he provided no information  about
        the Muslim faith. Given that the study of Islam was  compulsory  in
        Turkmenistan, and given that the Appellant attended school in  that
        country, and served in the military  between  2006  and  2008,  the
        Respondent rejected the Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  born  a
        Muslim. The Respondent noted that,  while  there  was  some  state-
        sponsored societal discrimination against Jehovah's Witnesses,  and
        that this was felt most acutely by converts from Islam, given  that
        the Appellant was not deemed to be a convert from Islam he was  not
        deemed to be at risk of persecution.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal

     5. The First-tier Tribunal judge had before him a bundle of  documents
        running to 61 pages that included, inter alia, a witness  statement
        from the Appellant, two letters of support from Jan Nechanicky (the
        Presiding Officer of the London Russian Congregation  of  Jehovah's
        Witnesses), several photographs of the  Appellant  as  a  Jehovah's
        Witness and photographs claiming to be of the Appellant when he was
        a Muslim, and 2 separate  articles  relating  to  the  position  of
        Jehovah's Witnesses in Turkmenistan. The judge heard oral  evidence
        from the Appellant and Mr Nechanicky.


     6.  In  his  'Conclusions  and  Reasons'  the   judge   accepted   the
        Respondent's concession that the Appellant was a Jehovah's Witness,
        despite referring to a striking "lack of rigour" in her  reasoning.
        From  paragraph  22  onwards  the  judge  considered  whether   the
        Appellant's conversion was  genuine.  At  paragraph  23  the  judge
        stated, "I have to consider  whether  or  not  the  timing  of  his
        conversion was tactical or genuine."  At  paragraph  26  the  judge
        concluded  that  the  Appellant  had  not  provided  any   sensible
        explanation as to why, having arrived in the UK, it never  occurred
        to him to undergo training to  become  a  Jehovah's  Witness  until
        2014. At paragraph 27 the judge stated that the Appellant's  family
        "... may have had some connection with  Jehovah's  Witnesses",  and
        stated, "The truth is that he came from a background which might be
        vaguely described is [sic] having an interest and/or  participation
        in the  faith  of  Jehovah's  Witnesses."  The  judge  appeared  to
        conclude that the Appellant's family were never active as Jehovah's
        Witnesses in such a way  that  would  bring  them  to  the  adverse
        attention of the authorities and that  being  a  Jehovah's  Witness
        formed part of the  Appellant's  'DNA',  much  like  a  person  who
        described themselves as  a  Christian  because  they  came  from  a
        Christian country but without  engaging  in  any  proselytising  or
        other kind of evangelical activity.


     7. The judge proceeded to find that the Appellant's "association  with
        becoming a Jehovah's Witness" (at paragraph 28) had nothing  to  do
        with any proselytising zeal on  his  part,  and  that  his  claimed
        activity as a Jehovah's Witness was "a smokescreen that simply  did
        not provide the Appellant with any hard evidence on which  to  hang
        his claim on being a genuine participating Jehovah's Witness."  The
        judge concluded,  although  accepting  that  the  Appellant  was  a
        Jehovah's witness, that he did not engage in any kind  of  activity
        that would render him at risk if returned to Turkmenistan.

The grounds of appeal and the error of law hearing

     8. The grounds of appeal variously assert that  the  judge  failed  to
        have any or adequate regard to the evidence of Mr Nechanicky,  that
        there was no adequate consideration of the  Appellant's  activities
        as a Jehovah's Witness, that the judge failed to  consider  whether
        the Appellant would face a risk of persecution in Turkmenistan as a
        Jehovah's Witness, and that there was an absence  of  consideration
        of the background evidence. Permission was granted on all grounds.


     9. At the outset of the 'error of law' hearing I asked Ms Fijiwala  to
        draw my attention to the part of the judge's determination in which
        he resolved the dispute of fact as to whether the Appellant  was  a
        convert from Islam, as he claims, or that he was born  a  Jehovah's
        Witness, as claimed by the Respondent. Ms Fijiwala  was  unable  to
        point to any part of the  decision  where  the  judge  specifically
        resolved this dispute of fact. She submitted  that  the  judge  had
        accepted the Respondent's position that the  Appellant  had  always
        been a Jehovah's Witness, but  accepted  that  the  judge  did  not
        provide any reasons for adopting the Respondent's position.


    10. I heard brief submissions from Mr Turner  and  then  Ms  Fijiwala's
        reply. I indicated, having considered the representations from both
        parties, that I was satisfied that  the  judge  had  made  material
        errors of law rendering the decision unsustainable.

Discussion

    11. The Appellant consistently maintained that he was  born  a  Muslim,
        but that he did not practice  his  religion.  He  claims  that  his
        mother became a Jehovah's Witness around 2006, and that  he  became
        interested in converting in 2014. The Respondent did not accept the
        Appellant's claim that he  was  a  Muslim.  This  was  because  the
        Appellant was unable to answer  even  rudimentary  questions  about
        Islam in his asylum interview. As a consequence, the Respondent did
        not accept that the Appellant underwent a  genuine  conversion  and
        concluded that he had always been a Jehovah's Witness,  albeit  not
        one who appeared to practice his religion with any zeal.


    12. There was therefore a clear  dispute  between  the  parties  as  to
        whether the Appellant was born a Jehovah's Witness or a Muslim, and
        whether he would  be  perceived  as  an  apostate  if  returned  to
        Turkmenistan. The judge's decision is however unclear, both  as  to
        whether the Appellant did undergo a conversion, and as  to  whether
        the judge rejected the Appellant's claim to have been born  Muslim.
        Paragraphs 23 and 24 suggest  that  the  judge  accepted  that  the
        Appellant underwent a conversion, but paragraph  27  suggests  that
        the Appellant already had a connection with Jehovah's Witnesses and
        that he  came  from  a  background  "...  which  might  be  vaguely
        described is [sic] having an interest and/or participation  in  the
        faith of Jehovah's Witnesses." It is  unclear  what  the  judge  by
        this. Moreover, nowhere does the judge adequately  resolve  one  of
        the principal disputes between the parties. Ms  Fijiwala  submitted
        that the judge accepted the Respondents position that the Appellant
        was born a Jehovah's Witness and that he was  not  a  convert  from
        Islam. If this was the case, then the judge does  not  provide  any
        reasons for rejecting the Appellant's claim to  have  been  born  a
        Muslim. This much was accepted by the presenting  officer.  Without
        resolving this material dispute of fact,  and  without  giving  any
        reasons for preferring the Respondents  position,  I  am  satisfied
        that the judge materially erred in law.


    13. I am additionally satisfied that the  judge  failed  to  adequately
        engage with the evidence of Mr  Nechanicky.  At  paragraph  18  the
        judge noted that Mr Nechanicky  had  no  formal  contact  with  the
        Appellant as part of his training, and that the person who acted as
        the Appellant's mental, Mr Vitali Ostapenko, had not been called as
        a witness. The judge properly noted that Mr Nechanicky  "...  could
        only speak as to what he understood the position  to  be",  but  Mr
        Nechanicky gave what appeared to be a  first-hand  account  of  the
        nature and extent of the  Appellant's  activities  as  a  Jehovah's
        Witness. While the judge was entitled to raise  concerns  that  the
        mentor who undertook the Appellant's training to become a Jehovah's
        witness was not giving evidence, the evidence  from  Mr  Nechanicky
        was still relevant when determining whether  the  Appellant  was  a
        genuinely active Jehovah's  Witness,  and  required  the  judge  to
        engage with the evidence and provide reasons for rejecting it.  The
        judge's approach to Mr Nechanicky's evidence is deficient. There is
        no assessment as to whether the Tribunal found this witness  to  be
        credible or not, and there was  no  evaluation  of  this  witness's
        evidence.


    14. I  am  satisfied,  for  the  reasons  given  above,  that  the  FtJ
        materially erred in law. Both parties were in agreement that, given
        the absence of any material finding as  to  whether  the  Appellant
        would be perceived as being an apostate, and in the absence of  any
        satisfactory engagement with the evidence from Mr  Nechanicky,  and
        the absence of any engagement with the background  evidence  as  to
        whether the Appellant would face a real risk of persecution  simply
        for being a Jehovah's Witness, it  was  appropriate  to  remit  the
        appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, to  be  heard  by  a  judge
        other than Judge of the first-tier Tribunal N M Paul.



Notice of Decision

The First-tier Tribunal decision is vitiated by material errors of law.  The
case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a fresh (de  novo)  hearing,
to be heard by a judge other than Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  N  M
Paul.


[pic]                               4 December 2017

Signed                                  Date
Upper Tribunal Judge Blum
