
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)              Appeal Number: PA/07868/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport  |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 27 April 2018                  |On 3 May 2018                       |
|                               |                                      |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                               SUCHAN MAHARJAN
                        (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:      No appearance
For the Respondent:     Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Kainth in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant, a citizen  of
    Nepal, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse  asylum  and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application under  appeal  was  refused  on  4  August  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge Kainth on 20 September  2017
    and was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission  to  appeal  to
    the Upper Tribunal.  The application was granted by First-tier Tribunal
    Judge Keane on 31 October 2017 in the following terms

       The appellant applied in time for permission to appeal  against  the
       decision of Judge of the first-tier Tribunal Kainth promulgated on 2
       October 2017 in which the judge  dismissed  the  appeal  on  asylum,
       humanitarian protection and human  rights  (Articles  2,  3  and  8)
       grounds. The grounds disclosed an arguable  error  of  law  but  for
       which the outcome of the appeal might have been different. Given the
       chronology of relevant events and the  appellant's  conduct  it  was
       arguably unfair of the judge to have exercised his discretion so  as
       to refuse the appellant's request for an adjournment.  The  decision
       under appeal had been made on 4 August 2017, the appellant acting in
       person gave notice of appeal against the respondent's decision on 16
       August 2017 and the judge heard the appeal  on  20  September  2017.
       Such a  timescale  was  arguably  "tight".  The  judge  recorded  at
       paragraph 6 of the judge's decision that the appellant had contacted
       four law firms with a view to securing representation.  Two  replied
       and  two  did  not  respond.  The  appellant  was   fairly   to   be
       characterised as a litigant in person who  was  doing  his  best  to
       secure legal representation. The judge arguably should have  granted
       his request for an adjournment. The application  for  permission  is
       granted.




 3. By a rule 24 response dated 17 November 2017 the Respondent opposed the
    appeal arguing that  the  Judge  directed  himself  appropriately.  The
    response asserts that the grounds of appeal are a disagreement with the
    findings and that the adjournment request was properly considered.


 4. This appeal was first listed for hearing before the Upper  Tribunal  on
    27 February 2018. There was no appearance by the  Appellant.  The  file
    note shows that the Judge considered that it was  appropriate  to  give
    the Appellant a further  chance  to  attend  as  he  had  showed  every
    intention until that  time  to  pursue  his  appeal.  The  hearing  was
    therefore adjourned.


 5. At the hearing before me Mr Hibbs appeared for the Respondent and there
    was again no appearance by or on behalf of  the  Appellant.  The  court
    file showed that notice of the adjourned hearing had been  served  upon
    the Appellant at his last known address.  No  additional  documentation
    had been filed by the Appellant and indeed the court file shows that no
    documentation had been filed by the Appellant since his application for
    permission to appeal against the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision.  In
    these circumstances I considered that it was appropriate to proceed.




Background

 6.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen of  Nepal  born  on  26
    June 1988. He left Nepal arriving in the United Kingdom on 10 September
    2009 with a Tier  4  student  visa  valid  until  8  January  2013.  On
    application in December 2012 this was extended until 27 July 2014  when
    his leave to remain expired. The Appellant was encountered  on  2  June
    2017 working illegally and he claimed asylum following his detention on
    8 June 2017.


 7. The basis  of  the  Appellant's  claim  for  asylum  was  his  fear  of
    persecution due to his political opinion and activity.  He  claimed  to
    have been youth district president of the King Saver party in Nepal, to
    have published articles in his local newspaper and to have organised  a
    rally. He claims that this activity caused him to come to  the  adverse
    interest of the Young Communist league and to have  been  attacked  and
    injured on two occasions. The Appellant claimed that it was  this  fear
    of persecution that caused him to leave Nepal.  He  also  claimed  that
    since arriving in the United Kingdom he had written a  book  which  had
    been sent to Nepal and seized by officials prior to publication.



 8. At the hearing on 20 September 2017 the Appellant was unrepresented. He
    applied  for  an  adjournment  on  the  basis  that  he  wished  to  be
    represented. He said that he had contacted four law firms two  of  whom
    had replied and said they were unable to represent him  and  the  other
    two had not responded. The Judge refused the adjournment request noting
    that in his  judgement  the  Appellant  had  sufficient  time  to  make
    arrangements to be represented. The Judge noted that the Appellant  was
    not seeking to rely upon any  additional  documentation  and  concluded
    that the appeal could proceed fairly and justly without there being any
    prejudice to the Appellant.


 9. The Judge went on to hear evidence and submissions and he reserved  his
    decision.  In  dismissing  the  appeal,  the  Judge  made  an   adverse
    credibility noting in particular the substantial delay by the Appellant
    in submitting his  claim,  the  Appellant's  conduct  in  entering  and
    remaining in the United Kingdom under a false premise and  the  failure
    of the Appellant to submit any documentation in support  of  his  claim
    when such documentation should have been readily available




Submissions


10. In the absence of the Appellant the only submissions on his behalf  are
    those contained in the notice of  appeal.  The  Appellant  submits,  in
    terms, that the refusal to grant an adjournment to  enable  him  to  be
    legally represented was unfair. The Appellant adds  that  the  findings
    are flawed because of inadequate reasoning and undue weight being given
    to discrepancies and inconsistencies in his account.


11. Mr Hibbs relied upon the rule 24 response.


12. I reserved my decision.

Decision


13. The issues involved in this appeal are limited. The first  issue,  that
    upon which permission to appeal was granted, is whether the Appellant's
    application for an adjournment was unfairly refused. In my judgement it
    was not. The  Appellant  applied  for  an  adjournment  to  seek  legal
    representation. He had been in the United Kingdom for almost 8 years at
    the time of his detention and had been unlawfully present for the  last
    three years. He clearly knew that he needed permission  to  be  in  the
    United Kingdom and, according to his account, he had known the need  to
    claim asylum throughout his time in this  country.  He  had  sufficient
    time to seek legal advice. He was detained on 2 June 2017  and  claimed
    asylum shortly thereafter. His application  was  refused  on  4  August
    2017. There was clearly sufficient time for him to secure legal  advice
    and representation between the time that he was detained and  the  time
    of the Respondent's decision. Following the Respondent's decision,  the
    Appellant remained in detention and he lodged his notice of  appeal  on
    16 August 2017 and  the  appeal  did  not  come  to  hearing  until  20
    September 2017. Again, this is more  than  sufficient  time  to  secure
    legal  advice  and,  if  appropriate,  representation.  The   Appellant
    confirmed to the Judge that he had sought such advice and that  two  of
    the four firms that he  had  approached  had  declined  representation.
    There was no indication that if the matter was adjourned representation
    would have been secured. Indeed, although this for obvious reasons  was
    no part of the Judge's decision, the Appellant has  still  not  secured
    legal representation. The Judge carefully  considered  the  application
    and I find no error of law in the decision to  refuse  the  adjournment
    request.


14. The second issue concerns the Judge's findings. The grounds  of  appeal
    in this respect are not entirely  clear  but  suggest  that  the  Judge
    failed to give adequate reasons  and  attributed  too  much  weight  to
    discrepancies and inconsistencies. In fact, the decision of the  First-
    tier Tribunal is, in my judgement  well-reasoned  and  inevitable.  The
    Appellant claimed that he was president of the King Saver  party,  that
    he published articles in his local newspaper and that he had written  a
    book opposing the current Nepalese government. These  are  all  matters
    capable of corroborative evidence and the Appellant failed  to  produce
    any documentary evidence whatsoever in support his  claims.  The  Judge
    quite rightly self directs to TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 at
    paragraph 54 of his decision.  The  Appellant  was  not  even  able  to
    remember the name of the local newspaper in which he  claimed  to  have
    published articles or the name of the hospital that he claimed to  have
    attended for treatment. In these respects, the grounds of appeal are no
    more than a disagreement with the Judge's findings.  It  is  of  course
    pertinent to note that no additional  documentary  evidence  was  filed
    with the appeal to the Upper Tribunal and nothing has been filed since.
    There is no error of law and this appeal must fail.




  Summary

15. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error of law. I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.  The  decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal stands.






Signed:                                 Date: 27 April 2018


[pic]


J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
