
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07620/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20 March 2018                              |On 5 April 2018               |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                    [a a]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Slatter, Counsel instructed by Warnapala &
Company
For the Respondent:    Mr P Nath, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision of  the  Judge
    of the First-tier Tribunal Turquet who in a  determination  promulgated
    on 15 February 2017 dismissed the appellant's appeal against a decision
    of the Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.   The appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan, born  on  [  ]  1987,  entered
    Britain as a student in 2010.  He had leave  to  remain  firstly  as  a
    student and thereafter outside the Rules until August 2015.  In Britain
    he formed a relationship with a British citizen,  [RT].   They  have  a
    child who was born on [ ] 2015.

 3.  It was the appellant's claim that he,  having  completed  his  studies,
    decided to go  to  Afghanistan  in  July  2015  to  work  there  before
    returning to Britain for the birth of his son.  He claimed that as soon
    as he arrived in Kabul he obtained work with a NGO in Nangahar Province
    and went to live there.  There he met men  with  whom  he  had  various
    political discussions.  He was then targeted by the Taliban because  he
    had criticised their rule. He was forced to leave Nangahar  and  return
    to Kabul. He then returned to Britain and  was  given  leave  to  enter
    because he still had a current visa. He claimed  asylum  shortly  after
    return.

4.   Judge Turquet heard the appellant's evidence which she set out in  some
    detail  in  paragraphs  6  onwards  of  the  determination.   She  also
    considered a statement from [RT] which stated that  their  relationship
    had started in January 2015 and referred to the strong bond  which  the
    appellant had with his  son.   Her  evidence  was  that  the  appellant
    visited her and his son every one or two weeks.  The judge  also  noted
    statements from a friend of the  appellant  from  Afghanistan  who  had
    stated that the Taliban had "dropped" a letter for the appellant saying
    that they were seeking to arrest him and bring him to justice and  that
    he should give himself up or face serious consequences.

5.   In paragraphs 21 through 26 the judge noted  the  reasons  for  refusal
    which referred to the fact that the letter from  the  Taliban  had  not
    been produced and stated that although the appellant had a copy of  the
    letter from the Taliban that had not been  submitted  -  the  appellant
    blamed his legal representative for  this  -  and  that  therefore  the
    Secretary of State placed  no  weight  thereon.   She  noted  that  the
    Secretary of State had stated that the appellant had not  provided  any
    evidence to show that the men whom he claimed  had  watched  his  house
    were involved with or connected to the Taliban and  that  the  problems
    which he claimed to have suffered did not  amount  to  persecution.  In
    paragraph 27 she noted that the respondent argued  that  the  appellant
    had not provided sufficient evidence that his  partner  was  a  British
    citizen and that even if it were accepted that she  was  it  was  noted
    that he did not live with her. The letter of refusal also  stated  that
    there was insufficient evidence to show that the appellant's son was  a
    British citizen and that the appellant did not live with him.   It  was
    asserted that he  could  not  show  family  life  as  set  out  in  the
    provisions of Article 8 of the ECHR.

6.   In paragraphs 32 onwards of the determination the  judge  set  out  her
    findings of fact.  She did not accept that the appellant had worked  in
    Nangahar  and  said  that  although  he  produced  a  contract  no  job
    description had been provided.  She did not accept that he  would  have
    had a political conversation there shortly after arriving in  Nangahar.
    She entirely discounted his claim of what had happened in  Afghanistan.



7.   Turning to the issue of the rights of the appellant under Article 8  of
    the ECHR the judge stated that she accepted that the  appellant  had  a
    son but went on to say  that  she  could  not  accept  the  appellant's
    reasons for not living in Cardiff with his partner and  his  son.   She
    said that the accounts of the frequency of the visits varied  from  two
    to three days a week to once a week to once every two weeks to one  day
    a month.  She accepted that the appellant bought  some  food  and  said
    there was little evidence of the appellant  having  day-to-day  contact
    with his son.  She concluded that the appellant  had  not  demonstrated
    that he intended to take an active role in the child's  upbringing  and
    therefore she concluded that  he  did  not  meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph R-LTRPT.1.1(d)(ii) with reference to E-ELPRT.2.3 and  2.4  as
    he failed to meet the eligibility requirements.  She  went  on  to  say
    that as he failed in the eligibility requirements he could not  benefit
    from  criteria  set  out  in  EX.1  and  therefore  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of Appendix FM as a partner or a parent.

8.   She then found that the appellant could not meet  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE under the Rules.  There  was  nothing  exceptional  or
    compelling in his circumstances.

9.   In paragraph 54 she stated that she had taken into account  the  public
    considerations in Section 117B of the 2002 Act.  She then went  through
    the requirements (1) through (5) of that section.  What is of  note  of
    course is that the judge made no reference to the provisions of Section
    117B(6).

10.  In paragraph 55 she stated that the facts of the case  had  not  tipped
    in the proportionality balance in the appellant's favour and  therefore
    he could not benefit from the provisions of Article 8  of  the  ECHR  -
    there would be nothing disproportionate in his removal.

11.  The judge having dismissed the appeal the  appellant  appealed  to  the
    Upper Tribunal.  The grounds of appeal first argued  that  the  judge's
    findings on the issue of credibility were Wednesbury  unreasonable  and
    that she had not placed any weight on the fact that had  been  accepted
    by the Secretary of State that the  appellant's  story  was  internally
    consistent and that she had erred  in  not  giving  the  appellant  the
    benefit of the doubt.  She had ignored the fact that there was evidence
    the appellant had continually chased his representative to provide  the
    letter containing the threats made by the Taliban.  Moreover the  judge
    had specifically criticised the appellant for his  claim  that  he  had
    gone to Nangahar but this had not been put to  the  appellant  nor  was
    this a point that had been taken up by the Secretary of  State  in  the
    letter of refusal.  It was therefore an error of law for the  judge  to
    have based her findings on that conclusion.

12.  With regard to the issue of the rights of the appellant  under  Article
    8 it was argued that the judge had erred by placing no  weight  on  the
    evidence which showed  visits  of  at  least  two  per  month  made  by
    appellant to Cardiff let alone the evidence of the  appellant  and  his
    partner.  It was also argued that the judge had not properly considered
    the issue of the rights of the appellant's child under  Section  55  as
    she had not  considered  the  child's  best  interests  which  were  to
    continue his relationship with his father.   The  judge  had  erred  in
    stating that the appellant could continue his relationship with his son
    via Skype and Facetime.

13.  Permission to appeal was granted by Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Landes.  Principally Judge Landes considered the judge may  have  erred
    in not considering the rights of the appellant and  of  his  son  under
    Article 8 correctly and furthermore that the judge had erred by finding
    that the appellant had not been to Nangahar when that had not been  put
    to the appellant.  Judge Landes went on to say that the judge had erred
    by making no finding that the appellant would not be at risk  in  Kabul
    or even being targeted by the Taliban.

14.  At the hearing before me Mr Slatter stated  there  was  no  finding  on
    whether the appellant had a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with
    [RT].  With regard to the issue of the appellant's fear of  persecution
    he accepted that not all documents were before the judge but  asked  me
    to take  the  view  that  the  judge's  conclusions  thereon  had  been
    unreasonable.

15.  I am concerned that the judge did not properly consider the  provisions
    of Section 117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  That reads as follows:

         "6.  In the case of a person who is not liable to  deportation  the
             public interest does not require the person's removal where -


             (a)  the person has a genuine subsisting parental relationship
                  with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child  to  leave
                  the United Kingdom."

16.  In this case the reality is that the appellant's child is a  qualifying
    child - he is British.  Moreover the child could hardly  reasonably  be
    expected to live in Kabul or in Afghanistan particularly given that  he
    has his mother and five siblings here.  These are very  strong  factors
    in the appellant's favour.  While it is the case  that  the  judge  did
    very carefully go through  the  terms  of  the  Immigration  Rules  the
    Statute is of course paramount.  I consider that it is a clear error of
    law for the judge not to have reached findings and conclusions  on  the
    application  of  Section  117B(6)   to   the   appellant's   particular
    circumstances and the issue of whether  or  not  the  appellant  has  a
    genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his son.

17.  With regard to the appellant's right to  asylum  I  consider  that  the
    conclusions of the judge are also in error - the judge  has  not  dealt
    with the issue of internal relocation.  It appears to be what  she  has
    said is that the appellant would be safe in Nangahar but that is not  a
    clear conclusion as in fact it is the judge's conclusion  that  he  did
    not visit Nangahar.  It may be the judge's conclusion is that there  is
    nowhere in Afghanistan that the appellant would not be  safe  but  that
    does not appear to be her decision.    Moreover,  with  regard  to  the
    evidence produced by the appellant the judge appears to have  dismissed
    it out of hand.  The reality is that she has not  given  clear  reasons
    for stating why she did so.  If she did not believe that the  appellant
    had been in Nangahar then she was entitled to state that  she  did  not
    believe that the letters from the NGO stating that he had been employed
    there for a period of time were not genuine but she did not do so.   In
    all I consider that there is a lack of clarity about  the  findings  of
    the judge which mean that her findings on the appellant's asylum  claim
    cannot be upheld.

18.  Having found material errors of law in the determination of  the  judge
    I set aside her decision and  direct  the  appeal  proceed  to  hearing
    afresh in the First-tier.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier tribunal for a  hearing  afresh  on
all issues.

No anonymity direction is made.





Signed   [pic]                          Date: 4 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
