


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07188/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                            |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 11 September 2019                            |On 19 September 2019          |

                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL

                                   Between

|           |X Y                                               |Appellant    |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |
|And                                                                         |
|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Respondent   |

                                  Anonymity


I make an order under r.14(1) of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of  any  matter  likely
to lead members of the public to identify the appellant. No report of  these
proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify  him.   This  direction
applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all  other  persons.
Failure to comply with this  direction  could  lead  to  contempt  of  court
proceedings.
I make this order because  this  is  a  protection  claim.  The  parties  at
liberty to apply to vary or discharge the anonymity order at any time.

Representation:
For the appellant:     Mr A Mahmood, of Counsel (Direct Access)
For the respondent:    Mr T Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.

                            DECISION AND REASONS

A. Introduction

 1. The appellant is a national of Pakistan, born in 1994. He  was  granted
    permission to appeal the decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal V
    A Cox (hereafter the "judge") who  dismissed  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision of 1 June 2018 to refuse his asylum claim.

 2. Following a hearing before me on 9 May 2019 (when Mr  Mahmood  appeared
    for the appellant and Mr D Clarke, Senior Presenting Officer,  for  the
    respondent), I concluded that the judge had materially erred in law  in
    her assessment of the future risk of  persecution  and  set  aside  her
    assessment. My  reasons  are  given  in  a  "Decision  and  Directions"
    promulgated on 22 May 2019 (the "Error of law decision").

 3. In the Error of law decision, I directed  that  the  re-making  of  the
    decision on the appellant's appeal be limited to  the  future  risk  of
    persecution and the appellant's related Article 3 claim. At para 46,  I
    stated that the judge's assessment of the future risk at paras  81  and
    82, which had been found to be in  error,  could  not  stand.  However,
    there were aspects of her risk assessment which  either  had  not  been
    challenged or had not been found to be in error and in respect of which
    I said, at para 47 of the Error of law decision, that it was open to me
    to adopt or reject her assessment depending on the submissions  I  hear
    at the resumed hearing.

 4. At para 47 of the Error of law decision, I directed  that  the  judge's
    findings of fact should stand. These were set out in bold at para 48 of
    the Error of law decision. At para 49, I stated that the  judge's  very
    detailed summary of the  oral  evidence  she  heard,  at  paras  18-50,
    stands.

 5. The resumed hearing was listed before me on 11 September 2019.

 6. At the  resumed  hearing,  I  heard  further  oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant concerning, inter alia,  events  that  had  occurred  in  the
    period between the hearing that took  place  before  the  judge  on  31
    August 2018 and the resumed hearing.

 7. When I wrote the Error of law decision, I took the view that  it  would
    be  inappropriate  to  detail  the  appellant's  immigration   history.
    Accordingly, at para 2 of the Error of law decision,  I  cross-referred
    to the immigration history described at paras  22-29  of  the  decision
    letter.

B. The judge's decision

(i) Summary of the appellant's case before the judge

 8. Before the judge, the appellant's asylum claim was based on his  strong
    views, expressed on social media and in articles he has  written  which
    have been published on the internet,  against  the  blasphemy  laws  in
    Pakistan,  amongst  other  issues.  The  appellant  said  that  he  had
    developed these views during his studies in the United Kingdom in 2016.
    He first started writing such articles in 2016, after he commenced  his
    university studies in the United Kingdom in 2016. Since  then,  he  has
    returned to Pakistan as follows: (i) on 1 May 2016  for  two  days,  in
    order to attend a family event; (ii) on 14 July 2016 for two months for
    his summer holiday during which time he did  not  socialise  and  spent
    time with his family; and (iii) on 14 July 2017 for three days in order
    to attend a family event in July 2017 (the "2017 family event").

 9. The appellant received a threatening telephone call when he returned to
    Pakistan to attend the 2017 family event. Following his return  to  the
    United Kingdom,  his  brother  received  a  threatening  letter  on  18
    November 2017. As a result, his  father  and  brother  filed  a  "First
    Information  Report"  (FIR)  which  was  dated  4  December  2017   but
    registered with the police on 5 March 2018. The threats  were  from  an
    unknown person or persons although the appellant suspected the Tehreek-
    e-Labaik ("TLP"). On 5  March  2018,  his  brother  received  a  second
    threatening letter. If he returned to Pakistan, he  would  continue  to
    express his views about Pakistan's blasphemy laws.

(ii) Summary of the judge's findings

10. The judge had before her two experts reports, one dated  26  June  2018
    from Mr Shah Khawar Law Associates and one dated 2 July  2018  from  Mr
    Aziz A Munshi  who  was  the  Attorney-General  of  Pakistan  for  four
    separate terms and ex-Chairman of the Pakistan Bar Council.

11. In relation to credibility, the judge accepted the core aspects of  the
    appellant's  account  but  she  also  made  some  adverse   credibility
    comments, for example at para 99 of her decision.

12. The judge accepted that the appellant comes from a well-known and well-
    to-do family and that his father had held various  important  posts  in
    the civil service in Pakistan under  varying  governments.  She  found,
    inter alia, that the appellant had publicised the views he said he  had
    publicised and that, if the appellant returned to  Pakistan,  he  would
    continue to publicise his views against the blasphemy laws of Pakistan.



13. The judge accepted that the appellant had received a  threatening  call
    at the 2017  family  event  and  that  his  brother  had  received  two
    threatening letters. She did not accept that his views were  as  widely
    known as he had claimed and she found that he was one amongst many  who
    had expressed such  views  in  what  she  described  was  the  "obvious
    atmosphere in political debate and discussion" (para 95). She  accepted
    that he was a supporter of a former Prime Minister but found that  many
    millions of people in Pakistan were as well.

14. The judge drew an adverse credibility inference from the fact that  the
    appellant had not produced witness statements from his parents.

C. The resumed hearing

15. The bundle before me contained, inter alia, a further  report  dated  8
    July 2019 from Mr Khawar and a  report  dated  10  July  2019  from  Mr
    Munshi. It also  contained  witness  statements  from  the  appellant's
    parents, further articles and  social  media  posts  published  by  the
    appellant and social media conversations about his  published  articles
    and his views.

16. There was also a copy of a third threatening letter which the appellant
    said his brother had received. He (the appellant) was told  about  this
    letter on 17 December 2018.

(i) Summary of oral evidence

17. The appellant said that the third threatening letter was  addressed  to
    his brother and received by post at his father's house. His father sent
    the original to him in the United Kingdom. The original  of  the  third
    threatening letter and the envelope in which it  was  received  at  his
    father's house were shown to me at the hearing.

18. The appellant said that the  conversations  at  pages  133-139  of  the
    bundle show that a Major in the Pakistani army was  throwing  venom  at
    him by saying that he (the appellant) was trying to please  his  Indian
    friends by criticising the Pakistani military on a public platform.

19. The appellant  said  that  he  has  written  articles  that  have  been
    published on public platforms which are critical of the blasphemy  laws
    of Pakistan, the military in Pakistan and the  current  Prime  Minister
    and which support the human rights of minority groups like the Ahmadis.
    For example, in the articles at pages 91-98 of the bundle, he had  said
    that  the  Pakistani  military  establishment  has  a  connection  with
    terrorist groups. They harbour terrorist groups on Pakistani  soil  and
    use them as proxies against other countries,  specifically  India.  The
    current Prime Minister has promised a new Pakistan which the  appellant
    has referred to as a 'mirage' because the military is still running the
    country. Members of the Pakistani military live luxurious lives at  the
    expense of Pakistani tax payers. In the article at page 93, he had said
    that the Pakistani military has 'promoted' terrorist groups  to  become
    political organisations and that the military is linked to  the  groups
    that punish those who are accused of breaching the blasphemy laws.

20. The appellant said that, if he returns to Pakistan, he  would  continue
    to write such articles because it is right to do so. He could not  just
    sit back and watch what happens. It possesses his life. He thinks about
    it. He writes about it. He would continue  to  publish  his  works  and
    voice his opinions. He  would  voice  his  opinions  on  any  available
    platforms. The platforms available in Pakistan are Facebook, Wordpress,
    Youtube and Twitter. He has set up accounts on these networks which are
    active and which can be accessed from Pakistan.

21. The appellant said that he would take his articles  to  the  mainstream
    news channels and mainstream newspapers and try to have them  published
    although there is censorship of the press in Pakistan. He would  do  so
    even if this placed him at risk. He  would  counter  the  ignorance  in
    Pakistan and voice his  opinions  at  gatherings  and  whatever  social
    platforms that were available.

22. Whilst studying at university in the United Kingdom,  he  confronted  a
    Major in the Pakistani army who was a student at the university for one
    year. He has placed photographs of himself  on  the  internet  with  an
    Indian General. Whilst this may be considered normal behaviour,  it  is
    not normal in Pakistan because of the military tension between Pakistan
    and India. He had  agreed  with  the  Indian  General  that  'the  real
    pesticides' in Pakistani were the Generals in the  Pakistani  army  who
    not only stifle freedom of  speech  but  harbour  terrorist  groups  on
    Pakistani soil, which has become a safe haven for terrorist groups. The
    economic wealth of an Indian General going  into  retirement  does  not
    depend upon whether or not there is a war between  India  and  Pakistan
    whereas Pakistani Generals accumulate  wealth  by  having  a  war  with
    India. That is the reason why Pakistani Generals want  war  with  India
    because they benefit economically from it.

23. I asked the appellant how he would behave if he  returned  to  Pakistan
    and heard about  individuals  in  Pakistan  being  falsely  accused  of
    blasphemy. He said that, if the person was in jail, he would go and see
    him and offer him every assistance to save him even if this risked  his
    own safety.

24. Mr Mahmood asked the appellant why he would place himself at risk given
    that he has had a privileged upbringing and that  he  could  return  to
    Pakistan and enjoy a very good standard of living. The  appellant  said
    that "I would have to keep my head low and ignore all  these  grotesque
    things". He said that he found it difficult to live away from his  home
    and that he misses his family but it was a sacrifice he was willing  to
    make. He was willing to sacrifice all the comforts  that  life  has  to
    offer him. He feels he has to stay alive and safe  in  order  to  fight
    these injustices.

25. I asked the appellant why he was happy to keep his head down during his
    two-month holiday in Pakistan in 2016 but says that he  would  continue
    with his activities if he is returned to Pakistan  now.  The  appellant
    said that he began to study human rights law and  Islamic  law  in  the
    2015/2016 academic year. When he returned to Pakistan in 2016,  he  had
    not yet been appointed the President of the Pakistani  Society  at  the
    university in the United Kingdom. This was the position that  gave  him
    the platform from which to voice his  opinions.  He  said  that,  after
    being appointed President of the Pakistani Society at  the  university,
    "it took me some time to find my voice".  2016 was the year in which he
    was studying and researching about human rights. It took him time to do
    his research and form his opinions. His quiet behaviour during the two-
    month holiday in Pakistan in 2016 was normal for the person he  was  at
    that time. He laughs now when he recalls how little he knew then.

26. The appellant said that the judge was  incorrect  in  stating  that  he
    first published an article in 2016. His first article was published  in
    2018, after he had returned from Pakistan in 2017. Before this  article
    was published, he had voiced his opinion in 2016. The reason why he was
    quiet when he returned to Pakistan in 2016 was that it  took  him  some
    time to get the confidence and courage to voice his opinions.  At  that
    time, he had voiced his opinion "here and there  but  I  was  not  100%
    courageous. It was still very new to me."

27. The appellant confirmed that he has not been critical of Islam  or  the
    Prophet Mohammed but he believes in the rights  of  people  to  express
    their opinions if they wish to do so.

28. The appellant  said  that,  if  returned  to  Pakistan,  he  fears  the
    following:

      (i)   The  persons/group  responsible  for  the  threatening  call  he
           received in 2017 and the  three  threatening  letters.  This  is
           because they have explicitly threatened him as an infidel.

      (ii)   The  Pakistani  military  establishment  and  the  intelligence
           services. This is because he has criticised them and he is  pro-
           India when it comes to the military tensions between  India  and
           Pakistan.

      (iii) Every person in Pakistan who is of  an  extremist  mindset;  for
           example, those who are against the Ahmadis or  who  support  the
           blasphemy laws. They would torture or kill him  because  of  his
           views about Pakistan's blasphemy laws, the rights of  minorities
           and freedom of speech and religion.

29. The appellant said that he does not fear  the  government  because  the
    government is acting completely on the instructions  of  the  military.
    The government itself does not exist.

(ii) Submissions

30. I have the benefit of a skeleton argument from Mr Mahmood.

31. I heard submissions in brief from Mr  Mahmood  and  Mr  Tarlow.  It  is
    unnecessary for me to set out the submissions in any great detail  save
    to say the following:

32. It became evident that it would be  necessary  for  me  to  assess  the
    credibility of the appellant's evidence  concerning  his  behaviour  on
    return to Pakistan, in view not only of the fact that the judge did not
    accept that his evidence was entirely  credible  but  also  because  it
    appears to be inconsistent with the fact that he  kept  a  low  profile
    when he returned to Pakistan in 2016 for a two-month holiday.  I  asked
    Mr Tarlow what his position would be in the event that I found that the
    appellant's evidence about his behaviour on return to  Pakistan  to  be
    credible.

33. Mr Tarlow accepted that, if I found the appellant's  evidence  in  this
    respect credible, then he is entitled to protection under  the  Refugee
    Convention. He agreed that it would  then  be  unnecessary  for  me  to
    engage with the background material in order to assess whether it shows
    that the appellant would be at real risk of persecution.

34. However, Mr Tarlow submitted that the appellant's evidence  about  what
    he would do on return to Pakistan was not credible because it was self-
    serving. When I said that I may need a little  more  in  reasoning,  Mr
    Tarlow said that he would leave the matter in my hands.

35. Mr Mahmood submitted that the  headings  under  which  the  appellant's
    asylum claim falls are as follows:

      (i)   Political opinion, on account of the opinions he  had  expressed
           against the Pakistani government.

      (ii)  Political opinion, on account of the opinions he  had  expressed
           against the Pakistani military.

      (ii)  Religion, in the sense that, although he is  a  Muslim,  he  has
           religion imputed to him because he is seeking  to  help  Ahmadis
           and other minority groups and he is against the blasphemy  laws.
           He is therefore regarded to be against Islam.

      (iv)  His minority ethnic origin.

36. I asked Mr Mahmood how (iv)  could  assist  the  appellant,  given  his
    evidence to the effect  that  he  is  from  a  privileged  and  wealthy
    background and that his father had worked at a high  level  within  the
    civil service under various governments in Pakistan.  Mr  Mahmood  said
    that (iv) was a minor point.

37. I reserved my decision.

D. Assessment of the evidence and re-making the decision on the appeal

38. It is for the appellant to establish that he has a well-founded fear of
    treatment amounting to persecution in Pakistan. This is a low  standard
    of proof and is the same as "a serious possibility"  or  "a  reasonable
    likelihood".

39. In the particular circumstances of this case, if the appellant succeeds
    in his asylum claim, his Article 3 claim  would  also  succeed  but  he
    would not be entitled  to  humanitarian  protection.  If  he  fails  to
    establish his asylum  claim,  he  would  also  fail  to  establish  his
    humanitarian protection claim  and  his  Article  3  claim.  For  these
    reasons, I limited the re-making of the decision on his appeal  to  his
    asylum claim and his Article 3 claim.

40. The appellant's claim based on his ethnic origin simply cannot succeed.
    I am aware of his ethnic origin although I have not mentioned it in  my
    decision in case this taken together with other circumstances mentioned
    in my decision helps to  identify  him  or  his  family.  Whatever  the
    situation of other persons belonging to his ethnic group, the  fact  is
    that he has not given any evidence  at  all  that  shows  that  he  has
    encountered any difficulties or discrimination on account of his ethnic
    origin and/or that it is reasonably likely that he will  be  persecuted
    on that account. To the contrary, his evidence is that he comes from  a
    privileged  and  well-to-do  family.  His  father  has  held  important
    positions in the civil service in Pakistan. The family live in a  well-
    known area with security guards. His brother, who lives in a  different
    town, has a good job and is doing well. His  entire  family  have  done
    well in life. On his own evidence, if he were to return to Pakistan, he
    would be able to enjoy a very good standard of living if he could  keep
    his head down and avoid the  activities  he  is  engaged  in  (para  24
    above). My attention was not drawn to  anything  in  the  social  media
    conversations that shows that any  of  the  adverse  responses  he  has
    received to his published views were motivated, even in  part,  by  the
    fact that he belongs to a particular ethnic group.

41. In these circumstances, I have no hesitation in finding not  only  that
    there is no reasonable likelihood of the appellant being  subjected  to
    any ill-treatment in Pakistan on account of his ethnic origin but  also
    that, if he does experience any ill-treatment for any reason, there  is
    no reasonable likelihood of such ill-treatment being motivated  in  any
    way by his ethnic origin.

42. I turn to assess the credibility of the oral evidence I heard.

43. The appellant said at the hearing  that  the  judge  was  incorrect  in
    stating that he had first published an article in  2016  and  that  his
    first article was in fact published in 2017. However, the  only  ground
    that contended that the  judge  had  misapprehended  the  evidence  was
    ground 1 (summarised at para 18(i) of the Error of law decision)  which
    I concluded had not been established (paras 23-28 of the Error  of  law
    decision). Furthermore, it is clear from the  judge's  decision,  as  I
    explained at paras 24-25 of the Error of law  decision,  that  she  was
    relying upon the fact that the appellant had expressed his views  about
    the blasphemy laws of Pakistan from 2016 onwards which is not the  same
    as saying that he had published his first article in 2016.

44. The judge found that, if the appellant returns, he  would  continue  to
    publicise his views. That finding stands, as I said at the Error of law
    decision. His evidence before me went further when he said, in response
    to my question, that, if  he  returned  to  Pakistan  and  heard  about
    individuals who have been falsely accused of blasphemy, he would  offer
    the person every assistance and go and  see  the  person  in  jail,  if
    he/she was in jail, even if he risked his own safety.

45. This evidence may be seen to raise a credibility issue for two reasons.
    Firstly, it appears to be inconsistent with the fact  that  he  plainly
    kept a low profile when he returned to Pakistan for a two-month  summer
    holiday in 2016. Secondly, he portrays a deep desire to draw  attention
    to the injustices in Pakistan which he says he  would  continue  to  do
    even if he risks his own safety if he were living in  Pakistan  but  at
    the same time he is plainly not willing in fact  to  place  himself  at
    risk by returning to Pakistan. He wishes instead to continue  to  carry
    out his activities from the safety of the United Kingdom.

46. I take into account that the  judge  found  the  core  aspects  of  the
    appellant's  evidence  credible,  although  she   made   some   adverse
    credibility comments. She accepted that he had written the articles she
    had read and that he said he had written.  She  accepted  that,  if  he
    returned to Pakistan, he would continue to publicise his views  against
    the blasphemy laws of Pakistan. I draw the inference that she  accepted
    not only that he held a genuine  belief  that  the  blasphemy  laws  of
    Pakistan were wrong but also that he was motivated by a genuine  desire
    to bring about change in Pakistan in that regard.

47. I am able to go further in my findings. The appellant's views  are  not
    limited to the blasphemy laws of Pakistan but extend to  the  situation
    of ethnic minorities in Pakistan and also the  role  of  the  Pakistani
    military in Pakistan's long-running dispute with India.

48. I had the benefit of seeing and hearing this young man,  who  impressed
    me, give oral evidence. He was able to explain his  reasoning  for  his
    views about the military in Pakistan. It was plain to me that they were
    genuinely held views; he was not merely  repeating  what  he  had  read
    about on the internet. I have read his articles which I found  detailed
    and coherent albeit at times emotive. I have taken  the  precaution  of
    not describing his articles in any detail. Although it is obvious  that
    his name is in the public  domain  and  that  the  articles  have  been
    published in his name, the fact that he has claimed asylum  is  not  in
    the public domain, as far as I am aware, notwithstanding that  some  of
    the adverse comments he has received on  social  media  accuse  him  of
    having claimed asylum. There may be security or other implications  for
    his family if it were to become known that he has claimed asylum.

49. Having had the  benefit  of  reading  the  articles  and  social  media
    conversations and having had the benefit of seeing and hearing him give
    oral evidence, I entirely accept that, after the  appellant  began  his
    university studies and started learning  about  human  rights  law  and
    Islam, he began an intellectual journey and that, when he  returned  to
    Pakistan for his two-month summer holiday in 2016, he did not have  the
    same courage and confidence that he now has. Indeed, it  is  reasonably
    likely that he did not have the same  level  of  conviction  either.  I
    accept his explanation for adopting a low profile during that visit.  I
    do not therefore draw any adverse credibility inference from  the  fact
    that the evidence he gives of his intentions if he were  to  return  to
    Pakistan now is not consistent with his behaviour during his  two-month
    summer holiday in 2016.

50. Importantly, I also accept that the appellant is  entirely  sincere  in
    his belief that he needs to fight from a place of safety  against  what
    he perceives to be injustices in Pakistan. Having listened  to  him,  I
    have no hesitation in finding that such is his nature that, if he  were
    to be in Pakistan, he would  be  unable  to  stop  himself  from  being
    actively involved in fighting those perceived  injustices  even  if  he
    thereby places himself at risk. Having listened to  him  and  read  his
    articles, I accept that his work in this regard consumes  him;  in  his
    words, "it possesses him". I accept that he  genuinely  sees  it  as  a
    sacrifice that he is unable to return to Pakistan to be with his family
    without placing himself at risk.

51. I do not accept that the three threatening letters and the  threatening
    calls during the 2017 family event demonstrate that the appellant is at
    real risk of persecution. Like the judge, I find that  the  appellant's
    evidence that the threats were from the TLP is speculative. I  have  no
    hesitation in accepting the remainder of the appellant's evidence and I
    make my findings of fact accordingly.

52. I find that, if the appellant is returned, the risk to him arises:  (i)
    from non-state actors in relation to his behaviour in Pakistan when  he
    is confronted with or comes to know  about  what  he  perceives  to  be
    injustices in Pakistan against those he perceives to have been  falsely
    accused of blasphemy or against  ethnic  minorities;  (ii)  from  state
    actors in relation to the views he has expressed and will  continue  to
    express against the Pakistani military. As a consequence  of  (ii),  he
    would be unable to look to the  Pakistani  authorities  for  sufficient
    protection in relation to (i).

53. Mr Tarlow accepted that, in  the  event  that  I  were  to  accept  the
    appellant's evidence that, if he were to return to Pakistan,  he  would
    continue to express his views and behave in the way  that  he  said  he
    would behave, he would be entitled  to  protection  under  the  Refugee
    Convention. He agreed that it would  then  be  unnecessary  for  me  to
    engage with the background material. Mr Tarlow did take any issue  with
    the fact that the appellant's family have not experienced any problems.
    In view of the fact that this was something the judge  relied  upon  in
    assessing whether there was a reasonable likelihood of  persecution  in
    the future, it is appropriate  that  I  should  deal  with  this  issue
    notwithstanding that Mr Tarlow did not take the point.

54. The appellant's father has had a long history of public service. He  is
    able to provide for the security  of  his  family  by  having  security
    guards.  He and the rest of his family in  Pakistan  have  not  brought
    themselves to the adverse attention of the authorities or any  factions
    of society. In all of these circumstances and having given such  weight
    as I consider appropriate to the four expert reports, the fact that the
    appellant's family have not experienced  any  problems  is  neutral  in
    assessing the risk of persecution if the appellant were  to  return  to
    Pakistan, in my view.  Having  said  that,  his  father's  position  in
    society is very unlikely to shield him when non-state actors and  state
    actors are confronted by an  articulate,  well-read  and  strong-minded
    person in their midst pronouncing his adverse in no uncertain terms.

55. In all of the circumstances and for the reasons  given  above,  I  find
    that, if  the  appellant  were  to  return  to  Pakistan,  there  is  a
    reasonable likelihood that he would  be  subjected  to  treatment  that
    amounts  to  persecution  or  treatment  that  amounts  to  inhuman  or
    degrading treatment. I stress that this decision is very case-specific.
    Not  only  was  there  a  wealth  of  evidence  that  demonstrated  the
    appellant's publicly expressed  views,  he  was  able  to  explain  his
    thinking. This is not someone who has merely  researched  these  topics
    for the sole purpose of bolstering his asylum claim.

56. The applicable Refugee  Convention  reason  is  political  opinion,  by
    reason of the political opinions he has expressed against the Pakistani
    military. I agree with Mr Mahmood that religion is also applicable.  He
    will have religion imputed to him because he is seeking to  help  those
    accused of breaching the blasphemy laws in Pakistan.

57. I therefore re-make the decision on the appellant's appeal by  allowing
    it on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds (Article  3).  As  his
    asylum  claim  has  succeeded,  he  is  not  entitled  to  humanitarian
    protection.

58. I am grateful to Mr Tarlow who made my task easier than  the  task  the
    judge had by conceding that the background material established a  real
    risk if I accepted the appellant's evidence of his behaviour on  return
    to Pakistan.



    Decision

    The decision of Judge of the First-tier Tribunal V A Cox  involved  the
    making of errors of law sufficient to  require  it  to  be  set  aside.
    Accordingly, the decision was set aside. I re-make the decision on  the
    appellant's  appeal  against  the  Secretary  of  State's  decision  by
    allowing it on asylum grounds and on human rights grounds (Article  3).
    I dismiss the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

[pic]Upper Tribunal Judge Gill               Date: 18 September 2019
