
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07294/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Field House                                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th March 2018                             |On 7th March 2018             |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                    F M K
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                  Respondent


                                CONSENT ORDER



 1. The Appellant, a Kenyan national  appealed  the  Secretary  of  State's
    decision to refuse her protection claim.  In  a  Decision  and  Reasons
    promulgated on 11th  September  2017  the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
    Shiner) dismissed the appeal. The decision was made on  the  papers  at
    the request of both parties.

 2. The Appellant sought and was granted permission to appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.

 3. The Secretary of State has accepted, by email dated 2nd February  2018,
    that she ought to have provided the Rule 35 report to the Tribunal  and
    her failure to do so rendered the proceedings unfair.  That  unfairness
    amounted to a material error of law, albeit through  no  fault  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 4. The Secretary of State accepts on that  basis  that  the  Decision  and
    Reasons should be set aside and the matter remitted to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a rehearing on all issues.

 5. The Appellant's representatives have indicated that  they  are  content
    with that.

 6. Rule 39 of the Tribunal Procedure Rules (Upper Tribunal)  2008  permits
    the Tribunal to make a consent order disposing of the proceedings if it
    considers it appropriate and  the  parties  have  agreed.   Rule  39(2)
    permits this to be done without a hearing.

Notice of Decision

 7. The Appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is allowed to  the  extent
    that the decision is set aside and the matter is remitted to the First-
    tier Tribunal for a full rehearing on all matters.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 6th March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Martin









