

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07894/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 29th August 2017                   |On 30th August 2017                  |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE COKER

                                   Between


                                     HS
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Bedford,  instructed by Sultan Lloyd solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the original
Appellant/parties in this determination identified as HS. This direction
applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to comply with this
direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings

   1. The appellant sought permission to appeal the decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Lodge, promulgated on 8 March 2017 on the grounds that it was
      arguable the judge had failed  to  have  adequate  or  any  regard  to
      country background material, failed to make any or  adequate  findings
      as to the medical evidence, failed to assess the evidence as  a  whole
      but rather rejected  the  medical  evidence  because  of  his  adverse
      findings with regard to the appellant's credibility.


   2. The First-tier Tribunal judge found that  there  was  no  evidence  of
      forcible recruitment by the  Taliban  and  the  appellant's  evidence,
      claiming he had been forcibly  recruited  was  inconsistent  with  the
      background material. The judge referred to the COIR dated 17th January
      2013. As submitted by the appellant's representatives, that report pre-
      dated the UNHCR report of 2013 and 2016 which refers to men  and  boys
      of  fighting  age  were  at  risk  of  forcible  recruitment  by  Anti
      Government Elements in contested areas or areas where AGE's  exercised
      effective control. There is no reference in the  judge's  decision  to
      the expert reports of Dr Schuster. The appellant comes from Nangahar.

   3. In addition to GP reports,  the  appellant  relied  upon  two  medical
      reports, one dated 13 July 2016 and a further report dated 11 February
      2017 which confirmed, inter alia, the appellant suffered from  hearing
      loss and scarring. The later medical report  confirmed  in  accordance
      with the Istanbul Protocol that the scarring was  "highly  consistent"
      with injuries intentionally and unwillingly caused by a  third  party.
      The judge noted the doctor had not been provided with a  copy  of  the
      reasons  for  refusal  letter,  asylum  interview  of  asylum  witness
      statement. The lack of production  of  such  documents  to  a  medical
      examiner may well have the consequence of reducing the weight that can
      be placed upon that report but cannot  lead  to  a  dismissal  of  the
      report without reasons, particularly when the report has been prepared
      by  an  experienced  doctor  and  addresses  the  medical  issues   in
      accordance with the Istanbul Protocol. There is no reference to the GP
      reports which show initial concerns being raised about his health  and
      nightmares.

   4. In paragraph 31 of the decision  the  judge  states  that  he  is  not
      satisfied the doctor's conclusions (presumably he  means  opinion)  is
      "internally consistent and supported by evidence".  The  inconsistency
      referred to is that the doctor refers to it being difficult  to  "age"
      scars with any accuracy and yet also saying the  scars  the  appellant
      presented  with  were  no  more  than  one  year  old.  There  is   no
      inconsistency in those two statements. It is unclear  what  the  judge
      means by the conclusions not being supported by evidence. He does  not
      identify what evidence he is referring  to  and  does  not  call  into
      question the doctor's opinion on identification of  scars  or  hearing
      loss.


   5. In dismissing the doctors  opinion  on  self-inflicted  injuries,  the
      judge, incorrectly, states that


             "given  the  nature  of  SIBP  it  is  only  general  lack  of
             credibility in the appellant's account  that  might  count  as
             evidence against the appellant....having  nothing  other  than
             the appellant's account [the doctor] is not in a  position  to
             come to the conclusion that SIBP is a remote possibility."


        There are a  number  of  issues  that  might  be  held  against  an
        appellant in SIBP matters,  not  "only"  general  credibility.  The
        judge does not, in reaching his conclusions consider the opinion of
        the doctor as regards scarring and hearing loss.


   6. The judge discounts the  medical  opinion  having  already  reached  a
      finding that the appellant's account was not credible having  in  turn
      taken account of out dated background material.


   7. I am satisfied the First-tier Tribunal judge erred in law  in  failing
      to have  adequate  regard  to  background  material  in  reaching  his
      decision and failing to have any or adequate  regard  to  the  medical
      evidence before  him.  He  reached  his  conclusions  on  the  medical
      evidence having already reached conclusions on the credibility of  the
      appellant's account.

   8. I set aside the decision to be remade in its entirety.

     9. When I have set  aside  a  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
        s.12(2) of the TCEA 2007 requires me to remit the case to the First-
        tier with directions or remake it for myself.

    10. The Practice Statement dated 25th September 2012 of the Immigration
        and Asylum Chamber First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal states:


                  7.2 The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion  to
                         proceed  to  re-make  the  decision,   instead   of
                         remitting the  case  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
                         unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

                  (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party
                  before the First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other
                  opportunity for that party's case to be put to and
                  considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or

                  (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding
                  which is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal
                  to be re-made is such that, having regard to the
                  overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit
                  the case to the First-tier Tribunal.


  11. I am satisfied that the nature and extent  of  judicial  fact  finding
      required for the decision in this appeal to be remade  is  such  that,
      having regard to the overriding objective, it is appropriate to  remit
      this case to the First-tier Tribunal.




          Conclusions:

    The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law.

     I set aside the decision

     I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade.



    Anonymity


    The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of  the
    Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


    I continue that order (pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008).






[pic]

                                    Date 29th August 2017
Upper Tribunal Judge Coker
