
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Numbers: PA/07336/2018
                                                             & PA/04663/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 27 November 2019                  |On 29 November 2019                  |


                                   Before:

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GILL


                                   Between

|           |The Secretary of State for the Home Department    |Appellant    |
|                                                                            |
|And                                                                         |
|           |Mr X Y                                            |Respondent   |
|           |(ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)                            |             |


Anonymity
I make an order under r.14(1) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
Rules 2008 prohibiting the disclosure or publication of any matter likely
to lead members of the public to identify the original appellant. No report
of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  I make
this order because this is a protection claim.
This direction applies to both the appellant and to the respondent and all
other persons. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
of court proceedings.
The parties at liberty to apply to discharge this order, with reasons.


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr L Tarlow, Senior Presenting Officer.
For the Respondent:    Mr B Haseldine, of Counsel, instructed by Howe & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to a decision dated 16 October 2019, served on the parties  on
    23 October 2019, Designated Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  McClure
    granted the Secretary of  State  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal in these two appeals. By a 'decision' dated 17  October  2019,
    sent to the parties on  12  November  2019,  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Saffer purported to grant the Secretary of State permission to
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal in these two appeals. Both  Judge  McClure
    and Judge Saffer granted permission on the respondent's  (sole)  ground
    which was that Judge of the First-tier Tribunal K. R. Moore  had  erred
    in allowing the appeals on asylum grounds  by  failing  to  identify  a
    Geneva Convention reason. The Secretary of State did not challenge  the
    decision of Judge Moore to allow the appeals on  human  rights  grounds
    (Article 3 of the ECHR), nor did the Secretary of State challenge Judge
    Moore's finding that Mr X Y (hereafter the "claimant") was  a  credible
    witness or his decision to accept the claimant's account as the factual
    basis of his determination (para 35 of Judge Moore's decision).

 2. Given that Judge McClure had already granted the Secretary  of  State's
    application for permission to appeal, the 'decision'  of  Judge  Saffer
    had no legal effect as the First-tier Tribunal was "functus officio" by
    the grant of permission by Judge McClure.

 3. The appeal reference PA/07336/2018 was the  claimant's  appeal  against
    the Secretary of State's decision of 21 May 2018 to refuse  his  asylum
    claim of 9 September 2014. The appeal reference  PA/0463/2019  was  the
    claimant's appeal against the Secretary of State's decision  of  1  May
    2019 to refuse his asylum claim of 3 April 2019. Both decisions  stated
    that there was no applicable Geneva Convention reason in the claimant's
    claim (para 28 of the decision letter dated 21 May 2018 and para  1  of
    the decision letter dated 1 May 2019).  Judge Moore determined the  two
    appeals in one decision, allowing the appeals on asylum grounds and  on
    human rights grounds (Article 3).

 4. Accordingly, the sole issue before me is whether Judge Moore materially
    erred in law by failing to identify a Geneva Convention reason.

 5. I considered  whether  to  provide  a  summary  of  the  basis  of  the
    claimant's asylum claim.   In  view  of  the  fact  that  there  is  an
    outstanding case in Pakistan (referred to, for example, at paras 18 and
    28 of the decision of Judge Moore), the unusual nature of the case  and
    the fact that my decision will be published  on  the  Upper  Tribunal's
    website, I decided that any summary of the  case  risks  revealing  the
    identity of the claimant notwithstanding the fact that I have given him
    the acronym "X Y" which I chose at random. I have therefore decided not
    to summarise his case at all. This is set out in sufficient  detail  in
    the decision of Judge Moore which is not published  on  the  Tribunal's
    website.

Submissions

 6. As Judge Moore's credibility assessment had not been challenged by  the
    Secretary of State, I indicated to the parties at the  commencement  of
    the hearing my provisional view that it would be permissible for me  to
    consider the claimant's accounts of the basis of his asylum  claim  and
    decide whether they establish an applicable Geneva  Convention  reason.
    Mr Tarlow did not object to my adopting this approach, nor do I see how
    he could have done so in the absence of any challenge to  the  positive
    credibility assessment by Judge Moore.

 7. I therefore asked Mr Haseldine to take me  to  relevant  parts  of  the
    claimant's accounts in support of his  submissions  as  the  applicable
    Geneva Convention reason(s).

 8. Having been given an  opportunity  to  consider  the  evidence  in  the
    various bundles that had been submitted to the First-tier Tribunal,  Mr
    Haseldine submitted that the applicable Geneva Convention reasons  were
    as follows:

         (i)  The claimant is a member of a  particular  social  group,  the
         social group in question being his family. He is at real risk  from
         the Taliban on account of his relationship  with  his  father,  his
         brother and his mother.

         (ii) The claimant is at real risk of persecution on account of  his
         religion. At para 4 of his witness statement dated 23 August  2019,
         he had said that his family belong to  a  particular  sect  of  the
         Sunni Muslims, that his father was the head of his tribe  and  that
         the Taliban, who are mainly Sunni Dubandi, had stated that  it  was
         not a crime and a good thing to  kill  members  of  the  claimant's
         tribe.

         (iii)    The claimant was at real risk of persecution on account of
         his actual or perceived political  opinion.  Question  5.5  of  his
         screening interview (page B15 of the Secretary of  State's  bundle)
         and the claimant's answer to question 5.5 read:

             Qn:  Have you ever said or written anything which: Praises  or
             justifies  terrorism;  or  tries   to   make   others   commit
             terrorist/serious criminal acts; or encourages hatred  between
             communities?

             Ans: speaking in public places against the Taliban

         Mr Haseldine invited me to draw the inference, from the  claimant's
         answer to question 5.5 and his entire course of conduct in relation
         to the ongoing case in Pakistan including the reason why  the  case
         remained pending in Pakistan as well as the  observation  of  Judge
         Moore in the second sentence of para 33 of his  decision,  that  he
         has established that he has an ongoing opposition  to  the  Taliban
         and that he is at real risk of persecution on account of his actual
         or perceived political opinion.

 9. Mr Tarlow did not advance any submissions in response, stating that  he
    was "in my hands".

Assessment

10. I am satisfied that Judge Moore did err in law by failing to identify a
    Geneva Convention reason. He was obliged to  do  so,  especially  given
    that this issue was specifically raised in the two decision letters.  I
    am satisfied that this error was material because he was  not  entitled
    to allow the appeals on asylum grounds in  the  absence  of  a  clearly
    identified Geneva Convention reason.

11. I therefore set aside the  decisions  of  Judge  Moore  to  allow  both
    appeals on asylum grounds. His decisions to allow the appeals on  human
    rights (Article 3) stand.

12. I proceed to re-make the decisions  on  asylum  grounds.  I  accept  Mr
    Haseldine's submission that the claimant is at real risk of persecution
    on account of his  actual  or  perceived  political  opinion,  for  the
    reasons he gave, summarised at my para 8.(iii) which I adopt as my own.
    I make my decision that there is an applicable Geneva Convention reason
    principally on this ground. However, in addition, I am  satisfied  that
    the Geneva Convention reasons described at paras 8(i)  and  8(ii)  also
    apply.

13. I re-make the decisions on the  appeals  by  allowing  the  appeals  on
    asylum grounds.

14. Following the purported grant of permission by Judge Saffer, the  Upper
    Tribunal listed appeal number PA/04663/2019 for hearing on 11  December
    2019. Mr Haseldine agreed that I should make one decision dealing  with
    both appeals. Mr Tarlow  did  not  object.   I  have  dealt  with  both
    appeals.

15. Accordingly, it is now necessary to vacate the hearing of appeal number
    PA/04663/2019 on 11 December 2019. Mr Haseldine agreed. Mr  Tarlow  did
    not object.




    Decision

    The decisions of the First-tier Tribunal on the  two  appeals  involved
    the making of an error of law sufficient to require  the  decisions  on
    both appeals to be set aside.

    I re-make the decisions in the  appeals  by  allowing  the  appeals  on
    asylum grounds. The decisions of Judge Moore to allow  the  appeals  on
    human rights grounds (Article 3) stand.


[pic]

Signed   Date: 27 November 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Gill

