


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/07551/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                     | Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 20 December 2019                      | On 23 December 2019            |
|                                            |                             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                                     VT
                            (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, of Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr L Tarlow, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

       1. In a determination dated 25 October 2019, I set aside, in certain
          respects, the determination of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Wylie,
          promulgated on 12 July 2019 following a hearing at  Harmondsworth
          on 24 June 2019. Full details are provided in my decision of that
          date.


       2. The appellant is a Sri Lankan national born on 1 December 1977. He
          first entered the UK in 1999/2000 and made an unsuccessful  asylum
          claim which  led  to  an  unsuccessful  appeal  before  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Chohan, following which  he  was  returned  to  Sri
          Lanka in 2003. He then made  an  unsuccessful  application  for  a
          visit visa using a false identity. In September 2009, he travelled
          to Malaysia where he stayed two months. He then entered the UK  on
          29 November 2009 using a false British passport and claimed asylum
          some months later. That was refused and  his  appeal  was  finally
          dismissed in July 2013 by Upper Tribunal Judge Craig. Two sets  of
          further submissions were made; the refusal of the second resulting
          in these proceedings. The appellant claims to have  mental  health
          problems and suffers from epileptic seizures.

       3. The appellant married in 2004 but he has not seen his  wife  since
          2007. She entered the UK using a false passport on  18  June  2008
          and claimed asylum the following day.  Her  appeal  was  heard  by
          First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Drummond-Farrell  and  allowed  on  29
          October 2008 following a hearing at Taylor House on 29 August 2008
          (AA/05964/2008).

       4. Judge Wylie took  the  previous  determinations  as  her  starting
          point. She  also  carefully  examined  the  medical  evidence  and
          concluded that it did not support the assertion that there  was  a
          valid explanation for the appellant's inconsistent evidence at the
          earlier hearings (at 89). She took account of the determination of
          the appellant's wife's appeal. She noted that the wife had  stated
          that the appellant's brother had been suspected by the authorities
          of passing information to the LTTE and that he had been  shot  and
          killed. She noted that this accorded with what the  appellant  had
          earlier claimed, and that documentary evidence had been adduced to
          confirm the death. She accepted that the appellant's  brother  had
          been killed in August 2007 (at 105).   She also accepted  that  he
          had attended three or four demonstrations in the UK  but  that  he
          stopped going when he lost his appeal in 2013 (at  120).  He  then
          went to a few more  in  2017  (122).  She  found,  however,  after
          considering GJ and  for  reasons  set  out  at  106-136  that  the
          appellant would  not  be  of  interest  to  the  authorities  and,
          accordingly, the appeal was dismissed.


       5. Permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis  that  the  judge
          arguably erred in failing to consider what  impact,  if  any,  the
          appellant's brother's death would  have  on  him  were  he  to  be
          returned. The other parts of that ground 4 were found to  be  less
          persuasive but permission was given to argue them. They were  that
          the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  whether   the   appellant's
          attendance at pro-Tamil protests would impact on how he  would  be
          perceived by the authorities on return.


       6. When the matter came  before  me  on  21  October  2019,  I  heard
          submissions from Mr Eaton for the appellant and Ms Everett for the
          respondent and set aside the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal
          Judge on the basis that although Judge Wylie had accepted that the
          appellant's wife had corroborated his account that his brother had
          been killed by the Sri Lankan authorities for his support for  the
          LTTE, she had failed to make any findings on how this would, if at
          all, impact upon the appellant on return. The  following  findings
          were preserved: the judge's assessment of the appellant's physical
          and mental health and her conclusions at 86-89,  her  findings  at
          105 that the appellant's brother was shot and killed  and  at  112
          that the appellant was not raped. Due to the lack  of  clarity  in
          her finding over the appellant's claimed detention in October 2007
          (at 105 and 115) I directed that the question of  whether  or  not
          the appellant was arrested and detained in 2007 would have  to  be
          reassessed.


          The Hearing


       7. The appellant was present at the hearing before me on 20  December
          2019 but  was  not  called  to  give  oral  evidence.  The  matter
          proceeded on the basis of submissions only.


       8. For the appellant, Mr Eaton submitted  that  there  were  accepted
          findings of fact which were sufficient to discharge the burden  on
          the appellant to prove to the lower  standard  that  he  would  be
          adversely viewed by the authorities  if  returned  to  Sri  Lanka.
          These factors were: that  his  brother  had  been  killed  by  the
          authorities for his alleged activities for the LTTE, that his wife
          had been  detained  in  2007  and  tortured,  that  she  had  been
          questioned about the appellant and what action  he  had  taken  in
          respect of his brother's death and that he had  been  involved  in
          some pro=Tamil activities. Mr Eaton submitted that the appellant's
          wife had been found credible in her appeal and he pointed out that
          her appeal had been heard in isolation from  the  appellant  after
          they had been separated in 2007.  He submitted  that  her  account
          corroborated the appellant's story. He argued  that  the  evidence
          suggested that the appellant would be interrogated on  return  and
          asked about his sur place activities. He could not be expected  to
          lie and so his activities, whatever they might be, would be  taken
          into account with his background and  his  brother's  killing  and
          would give rise to a suspicion that he was a risk to the integrity
          of the state. Mr Eaton referred me to the  expert  report  on  the
          situation for returnees and the view that the authorities took. He
          asked that the appeal be allowed.


       9. Mr Tarlow submitted that there had been unchallenged  findings  of
          fact made in the appellant's favour and that  his  wife's  account
          corroborated his evidence. He submitted that it was possible  that
          the appellant and  his  wife  had  been  in  touch  and  were  not
          estranged at all, and that it was a matter for the Tribunal as  to
          whether the account was believed.
      10. Mr Eaton did not wish to respond.


      11. At the conclusion of the hearing  I  indicated  that  I  would  be
          allowing the appeal. I now give my reasons for so doing.


          Discussion and Conclusions


      12. In reaching my decision I have had full regard to the  submissions
          made and the evidence submitted on behalf of the appellant.


      13. Although I take Mr Tarlow's point that it  is  possible  that  the
          appellant and his wife were not estranged at all and had concocted
          their accounts, there is no evidence before  me  to  support  that
          suspicion. Whilst it may well be so, it has never been put to  the
          appellant or his wife and no challenge was made to the  successful
          outcome of the appellant's wife's appeal. I also find that had the
          appellant and his wife been in collaboration as is suggested, then
          it makes no sense that a copy of her determination  was  not  made
          available in support of the appellant's past appeals. It  was  not
          adduced until the recent hearing before Judge Wylie even though it
          had been promulgated well before the  hearings  before  First-tier
          Tribunal Judge Wyman and Upper Tribunal Judge Craig. I am not told
          how the determination eventually came to  be  in  the  appellant's
          possession.

      14. The evidence before me is largely  unchallenged  and  despite  the
          strong adverse credibility findings made against the appellant  in
          the past, the determination of his wife's appeal in 2008,  impacts
          heavily on those conclusions and provides a compelling  basis  for
          departing from them. The First-tier Tribunal,  after  hearing  the
          appellant's  wife's  appeal,  made  several  positive  credibility
          findings and I agree with Mr Eaton that the finding over detention
          in 2007 must be read in that context.

      15. I, therefore, find that the appellant was detained along with  his
          wife  in  October  2007  and  that  both  were  released,   albeit
          separately, upon payments of  bribes.  His  wife's  account  fully
          corroborates his and since hers was accepted and no  reasons  have
          been argued as to why those should not stand, I conclude that  the
          appellant is able to rely on the positive fact  finding  by  Judge
          Drummond-Farrell.

      16. I am satisfied having regard to the guidance in MP [2014] EWCA Civ
          829, UB (Sri Lanka) [2017] EWCA Civ 85  and  GJ  (post-civil  war:
          returnees,  Sri  Lanka)  CG  [2013]  UKUT  00319  (IAC)  that  the
          appellant would be questioned on return.  I  find  that  it  would
          emerge that he was a person whose brother had been killed for  his
          involvement with the LTTE, who had been detained as  a  person  of
          interest, who obtained his release by illegal means  and  who  had
          taken part in pro-Tamil activities in the UK. I find that in light
          of the guidance  of  those  judgments  and  the  other  background
          evidence including the  expert  report,  that  those  factors  are
          sufficient to give rise to a real risk of persecution by  the  Sri
          Lanka authorities would are likely to consider the appellant to be
          a real threat to the unity of the Sri  Lankan  state.  The  appeal
          therefore succeeds on asylum and article 3 grounds. No submissions
          were made on humanitarian protection or article 8 grounds.




          Decision


      17. The appeal is allowed on asylum and article 3 grounds.








          Anonymity


      18. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


          Signed






                 Upper Tribunal Judge

            20 December 2019

