
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07429/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27 January 2020                            |On 7 February 2020            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  ms M S F
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     In person
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of the Philippines born  on  1  June  1958.
    She appeals against the decision of the Respondent dated 19  July  2019
    refusing to  grant  her  asylum  and  seeking  to  remove  her  to  the
    Philippines.  The decision also refused her claim with reference to the
    Immigration Rules and Article 8 and compassionate circumstances.

 2. The Appellant appealed against this decision and her appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Rothwell for hearing  on  4  September
    2019.  The Appellant gave  evidence  and  in  a  decision  and  reasons
    promulgated on 10 October 2019 the appeal was dismissed.

 3. The Appellant's then representatives sought permission to appeal to the
    Upper Tribunal in time on the basis of a  number  of  points,  none  of
    which amount to an arguable legal submission showing an error of law in
    the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Kekic  in  a
    decision dated 18 December 2019 in the following terms

         "Although not raised as a ground for permission it is arguable that
         the judge erred in commencing her  assessment  of  the  claim  with
         Section 8 and the finding that the credibility of  the  Appellant's
         asylum claim was damaged because of her delayed asylum application.
          Arguably that was the wrong approach  and  tainted  the  remaining
         findings."

     Hearing

 5. At the hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal,  the  Appellant  appeared
    without a representative, stating that she could not afford to instruct
    one to attend court.  I explained the procedure to the  Appellant  and
    that I would give her the opportunity to address the points made by the
    First tier Tribunal Judge; Ms Everett would then  make  submissions  on
    behalf  of  the  Secretary  of  State  and  that  she  would  have  the
    opportunity to respond to those submissions.

 6. The Appellant submitted that, in terms of what the judge had said about
    damaging her credibility, she did not claim  asylum  when  she  arrived
    because she did not know she was coming to the UK, her brother arranged
    it, a friend of his collected  her,  she  had  left  her  sons  in  the
    Philippines and had not seen them since; that  she  claimed  asylum  in
    2016 because she had previously been diagnosed with cancer in 2015  and
    thought that she was dying, her father had also died in  2015  and  she
    wanted to regularise her stay.  In respect  of  previous  applications,
    she had had a partner in 2014 who said he would apply  for  papers  for
    her but she did not know the basis of this claim.  In relation  to  her
    claim to have been a victim  of  trafficking  she  was  interviewed  in
    respect of this.  Her previous partner had also been abusive.  She  was
    interviewed by the police but did not want  to  support  a  prosecution
    because she was concerned about the safety of  her  nieces  because  he
    knew where they lived.

 7. At that point I asked the Appellant whether  she  had  a  copy  of  the
    conclusive grounds decision dated 15 April 2019 as it was  not  on  the
    Tribunal file.  The Appellant stated she had seen this decision but did
    not have it with her.  It was  with  her  former  representatives.   Ms
    Everett was then able to access virtually the Appellant's  Home  Office
    file and provided copies by e-mail.

 8. Ms Everett in her submissions stated that in  terms  of  the  grant  of
    permission that this was not explicitly contained within the grounds of
    appeal.  She submitted even if the judge had  misdirected  herself,  it
    had not made a material difference to the outcome.  The  judge  had  at
    [14] looked at  the  totality  of  the  evidence  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's claim and considered  it  in  the  round.   She  also  made
    findings in the alternative.  Consequently, the section 8 point was not
    determinative and did not exclude or preclude the judge from coming  to
    other credibility findings. In any event, the judge found in favour  of
    the Appellant in relation to her evidence that she had  been  subjected
    to domestic violence by her former husband [43].  The Judge  then  went
    on to consider the claim at its highest at [45].  Even if the Judge was
    wrong as to the ability of the authorities to protect the Appellant  or
    the ability of her former husband to  find  her,  she  found  that  the
    Appellant could internally  relocate  [48].   Consequently  Ms  Everett
    submitted there was no error of  law,  material  or  otherwise  in  the
    judge's decision.

 9. In response, the Appellant said she had read the decision.  The  timing
    of her asylum application depended on  her  situation.   She  had  been
    through a lot and sought advice.  Essentially,  she  said  if  she  had
    known she would have sought asylum sooner.  For clarity, I enquired why
    the Appellant's family members, i.e. her nieces had  not  attended  the
    hearing at the First-tier Tribunal  to  which  she  responded  that  as
    nurses for the NHS they work on a schedule and by the time the  hearing
    notice was received it was too late for them to change their schedule.

     Findings and Reasons

10. It is apparent from the grounds of appeal as drafted that they  do  not
    raise any material errors of law.  These provide as follows

    "1.  The  First-tier  Tribunal  made  error  in  making  the  decision.



    2.   The judge also erred in appreciating the genuine request  made  by
         the Appellant.

    3.   It is submitted that the unawareness of the Appellant with  regard
         to making initial  claim  for  the  asylum  was  misjudged  by  the
         honourable judge.  The honourable judge at  [41]  of  the  decision
         questioned the credibility of the Appellant.

    4.   It is submitted that the Appellant genuinely was not aware of  the
         asylum claim.  She  was  mainly  focused  on  the  issue  of  human
         trafficking which  adversely  affected  her  life.   This  incident
         happened in the UK.

    5.   The Appellant submits that the submitted documents and initial NRM
         report confirmed that she was the victim of  human  trafficking  in
         the UK.

    6.   The Appellant submits that she was also  the  victim  of  domestic
         violence back in Philippines and the honourable judge at First-tier
         Tribunal accepted this at [43] of the court decision.  Even  though
         the honourable judge accepted the domestic violence  back  home  it
         was painful that the judge did not even  give  importance  to  this
         issue however and erred in applying relevant law.   The  honourable
         judge mentioned in the decision that the background evidence  notes
         that there is domestic violence against the Appellant.

     7.  The Appellant submits she has been living here  in  the  UK  since
         2002 and developed private and family life in the UK.

     8.  The Appellant submits she has been helped by  her  family  members
         for her daily needs  here  in  UK.   She  has  provided  sufficient
         documents to prove her relationship with her family members in  UK.
         Even though the Appellant provided with the  documents  the  First-
         tier Tribunal Judge refused the same and mentioned in paragraph  48
         that the burden of proof is on the applicant.

    9.   The Appellant submits that in paragraph 52  the  honourable  judge
         accepted that the Appellant has developed a private  life  here  in
         the UK as she has been living here in the UK since seventeen years.
          But failed to apply Article 8 in favour of the Appellant.

     10. Therefore it is submitted that the notice of  decision  to  refuse
         the Appellant's application is not in accordance with  the  law  or
         facts.

     11.  It  is  also  submitted  that  there  are  above  errors  in  the
         determination of the First-tier Tribunal.

    12.  In the  circumstances  we  most  humbly  request  this  honourable
         Tribunal to allow permission to appeal."

11. The First tier Tribunal Judge accepted  that  the  Appellant  had  been
    subjected to domestic violence by her former husband at [43]  but  went
    on to find  that  she  could  access  sufficient  protection  from  the
    authorities [45]  or  internally  relocate  [46].  There  has  been  no
    challenge to these findings, which stand.

12. Thus the Appellant's core credibility  was  not  in  issue,  given  the
    Judge's acceptance of the basis of her claim i.e. a fear of persecution
    from her former  husband  who  previously  subjected  her  to  domestic
    violence.

13. The further difficulty is that, even upon the ground identified by  the
    judge as a basis to grant permission  at  [4]  above,  I  have  serious
    doubts whether the nature of that ground falls within the remit of  the
    guidance set out in AZ [2018] UKUT  00245  (IAC)  at  [61]  or  Durueke
    [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC) ie. it is Robinson obvious or raises a point of
    general importance. I find that the point raised by the Upper  Tribunal
    Judge granting permission ie. that it was arguable that  by  commencing
    her assessment with consideration of section 8 and  the  delay  by  the
    Appellant in claiming asylum this  infected  the  First  tier  Tribunal
    Judge's decision was neither Robinson obvious nor did it raise a  point
    of general importance.

14. I have for  completeness  also  considered  the  other  aspect  of  the
    Appellant's claim, that she was trafficked in the UK for  the  purposes
    of  forced  labour.  I  have  had  regard  to  the  conclusive  grounds
    consideration minute, helpfully provided  by  Ms  Everett,  where  this
    claim was rejected because the Appellant was not held against her will.

15. It follows that I find no material errors of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge, whose decision is upheld.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 5 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 5 February 2020

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

