
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07298/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1st October 2018                           |On 8th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE BRUCE
                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR


                                          Between

                                     P A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Eaton, Counsel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

              DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. This is a challenge by the Appellant against the decision of First-tier
    Tribunal Judge R L Walker (the judge), promulgated on 12 July 2018,  in
    which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
    refusal of his protection and human  rights  claims.   The  Appellant's
    case  had  been  based  upon  alleged  involvement,  or  perception  of
    involvement, with the LTTE in Sri Lanka and resulting  detentions.   It
    had been said that an arrest warrant had been issued  against  him  and
    there had been harassment of family members as a consequence of that.



The judge's decision

 2. The judge, having  set  out  various  aspects  of  the  evidence,  made
    numerous adverse findings set out in [32]-[49].  The  findings  related
    to issues under section 8 of the Asylum and Immigration  (Treatment  of
    Claimants, etc.) Act 2004, doubts over the reliability  of  documentary
    evidence and the process by which this  was  obtained,  the  manner  in
    which the Appellant claims to have left Sri Lanka, and the contents  of
    an expert medical report.  As a result of his findings the judge  found
    that the Appellant would not be at risk on return  and  duly  dismissed
    the appeal.



The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 3. The grounds of appeal put forward a number of challenges to the judge's
    decision related to his treatment of, or perhaps more specifically  his
    failure to address, corroborative evidence, the way in which the  judge
    dealt with medical evidence, the issue of risk on return,  and  country
    information on the possibility of individuals leaving Sri Lanka via the
    airport notwithstanding an adverse interest in them by the authorities.



 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge  Page  on
    20 August 2018.



Decision on error of law

 5. Following what was clearly a useful and sensible pre-hearing discussion
    between the representatives, Mr Clarke has  in  our  view  very  fairly
    acknowledged that the judge did materially err in law.  Mr  Clarke  has
    specifically accepted that grounds 1 and 4 have been made  out,  namely
    that the judge failed to  deal  adequately,  or  indeed  at  all,  with
    various items of corroborative evidence, and failed to have due  regard
    to country information as regards the ability of the Appellant to  have
    left through the airport.

 6. In our view, in addition to  Mr  Clarke's  realistic  concessions,  the
    other grounds are made out as well, in particular ground 2.  The judge,
    in our view,  failed  to  deal  adequately  with  the  medical  report,
    treating it as something of an afterthought rather than particular  and
    parcel of the evidence as a whole. In any  event,  he  also  failed  to
    direct himself correctly to the contents of the  report.   It  was  the
    view of the expert that not  only  was  the  Appellant  suffering  from
    mental health problems, but that scarring on his body was "typical"  of
    particular injuries alleged to have  been  caused  by  the  Sri  Lankan
    authorities, and not simply "consistent", as the judge stated  in  [47]
    of his decision.

 7. The errors are clearly material and the judge's decision  must  be  set
    aside.




Disposal

 8. It is clear to us, and indeed  the  representatives  agree,  that  this
    matter must be remitted to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  a  complete
    rehearing with no findings of fact preserved.  In  light  of  paragraph
    7.2 of the Practice Statement this is the appropriate  course  to  take
    and appropriate directions will be issued for the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains errors of law  and  is  set
aside.

The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.





Directions to the First-tier Tribunal

   1. This appeal is remitted for a complete re-hearing  with  no  preserved
      findings;

   2. The appeal shall not be re-heard by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  R  L
      Walker;

   3. The central issues  in  the  appeal  remain  the  credibility  of  the
      Appellant's account and risk on return.



Signed   [pic]             Date: 4 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
