
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07652/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 7 February 2019                            |On 27 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LATTER


                                   Between

                                     YD
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Broadfoot QC and Mr R Jesurum, counsel.
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is an appeal by the appellant against a decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the  respondent's  decision
    of  27  July  2017  refusing  to  grant  him  asylum  or   humanitarian
    protection.

Background

2.    The appellant is a citizen of Kenya born on 23 March  1965.   He  last
    arrived in the UK in 2009 and on 17 June 2010 he applied for a visa  as
    a spouse.  His application was refused as was a subsequent  application
    made on 12 January 2011.  He was served with  notice  that  he  was  an
    illegal entrant and liable to removal on 13 September 2013.  Meanwhile,
    two extradition requests in respect of allegations of  fraud  had  been
    made by the Kenyan government in 2011 and 2013.

3.    The appellant challenged both  requests  and  an  extradition  hearing
    took place before a district judge, heard over  a  period  of  11  days
    between 10 December 2012 and 23 July 2014.  On  3  September  2014  the
    district judge dismissed all the challenges.  There was  an  appeal  to
    the High Court, but this was dismissed  in  a  judgment  issued  on  11
    December 2015.  On 16 February 2016 the appellant  applied  for  asylum
    claiming that the  criminal  proceedings  against  him  in  Kenya  were
    politically motivated by the fact that he was an Indian  Kenyan  and  a
    supporter of an opposition leader.

4.    His appeal was heard by the First-tier Tribunal  on  31  October  2018
    and judge's decision was issued on 28 November 2018.  The judge was not
    satisfied that the appellant was at real risk of persecution by  reason
    of being an Indian Kenyan for the  reasons  set  out  in  [33]  of  her
    decision or that the criminal proceedings  in  Kenya  were  politically
    motivated for the reasons set out at [36]-[39].  She, therefore,  found
    that the appellant would not be at  real  risk  of  persecution  for  a
    Convention reason.

5.    The judge went on to consider the  position  under  article  3  noting
    that the district judge had found that removing the appellant to  Kenya
    would not be a  breach  of  article  3  on  the  basis  of  the  prison
    conditions in which he would be held and that that  decision  had  been
    upheld by the High Court.  It was argued on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    that she should depart from those findings for the  following  reasons:
    prison conditions generally in Kenya breached article 3; there had  not
    been a visit to the part of Kamiti prison in which the appellant  would
    be held; the  assurances  given  by  the  Kenyan  government  that  the
    appellant would be held in Kamiti prison and  in  a  single  cell  were
    unreliable as illustrated by the Kenyan authorities treatment of GD,  a
    Kenyan citizen extradited to Kenya after assurances were given  by  the
    Kenyan government, and that, in consequence, there was a real risk that
    the appellant would be held elsewhere  than  in  Kamiti  prison  or  in
    conditions there which breached article 3.  The  respondent  sought  to
    argue that it was not open to the judge to take a different view  under
    article 3 from the decision made by the High Court in  2015  (see  [26]
    and [46]).

6.    The judge accepted that the prison conditions in Kenya were harsh  and
    could be life threatening and in breach of article 3.   She  noted  the
    reports of the visit made by Lord Ramsbotham[1] that the prisons he had
    inspected in Kenya  were  "basically  healthy"  albeit  with  room  for
    improvement.  She was satisfied that Lord Ramsbotham had inspected  the
    prison where the appellant would be held in compliance with  assurances
    given by the Kenyan authorities.   It  was  argued  on  behalf  of  the
    appellant that those assurances were unreliable in the light of the way
    GD had been treated when he was returned.

7.    The judge was satisfied that specific assurances  had  been  given  in
    GD's case that on remand he would be housed  in  the  special  unit  at
    Kamiti Maximum Prison in a single cell which he would occupy alone  and
    that, if sentenced, he would be housed in  the  special  units  of  the
    prison in a single cell which  he  would  occupy  alone.  Evidence  was
    produced in the form of a statement from someone describing himself  as
    GD's lawyer but, for the reasons given  in  [47],  the  judge  was  not
    satisfied that this showed  that  GD  had  been  held  in  shared  cell
    accommodation in excess of one  year.   However,  the  second  item  of
    evidence on this issue was a news article dated 11 August 2017, setting
    out a complaint by  GD  that  in  breach  of  the  Kenyan  government's
    assurances, he was held in a dirty room with 11 other people.

8.    At [48] the judge said:

         "... Based on this report and in the absence  of  anything  on  its
         face undermining its reliability  and  of  any  evidence  from  the
         respondent challenging the contents of this report I find  that  on
         return to Kenya GD was held in shared prison accommodation for  six
         days in breach of assurances which had been  given  by  the  Kenyan
         government."

9.    The judge then said at [49]:

         "The High Court in (the appellant's appeal) was satisfied  in  2015
         on the basis of Kenyan assurances that the appellant would  not  be
         held in conditions breaching  article  3  of  the  1950  Convention
         period. In light of the subsequent evidence relating to GD  I  find
         that there is a real risk that on return  to  Kenya  the  appellant
         would not be held in keeping with the Kenyan  assurances  given  to
         the High Court but would be held in conditions breaching article  3
         of the 1950 Convention."

10.   The judge then set out her decision  in  the  notice  of  decision  as
    follows:

         "51.     The appeal is dismissed (article 3 only)

         52.      The appeal on asylum grounds is dismissed.

         53.      The appeal on Article 2, 6 and 8 grounds was  not  pursued
             by the appellant."

The Grounds of Appeal and Submissions

11.   The appellant applied for permission to appeal against  this  decision
    on the basis that  the  disposal  was  inconsistent  with  the  judge's
    unchallenged findings and, therefore, unlawful.  The appellant  had  to
    proceed by way of an appeal rather than an application under  the  slip
    rule in the light of the Upper Tribunal  decision  in  Katsonga  ("Slip
    rule"; FtT's general powers) [2016] UKUT 00028.  Permission  to  appeal
    was granted by the  First-tier  Tribunal  on  the  basis  that  it  was
    arguable that there was an inconsistency in the decision where  on  the
    one hand the judge appeared not to seek to challenge  the  decision  of
    the High Court on extradition and found reasons why the later  evidence
    relating to another case was less  than  satisfactory  but  found  that
    there was a risk of a breach of article 3 but, nevertheless,  dismissed
    the appeal.  The judge said this was not an obvious  slip  of  the  pen
    situation as suggested in the grounds of appeal, but  it  was  arguable
    that the inconsistency was such that it did amount to an arguable error
    of law.

12.    Ms  Broadfoot  submitted  that  it  was  clear  that  the  judge  had
    mistakenly dismissed the appeal under article 3.  The  decision  itself
    had been very methodical and there were clear findings that  conditions
    in Kenyan jails were harsh and could be life-threatening [43] and  that
    an assurance given in GD's extradition proceedings had not been kept by
    the Kenyan authorities [48].  On this basis,  it  was  clear  that  the
    judge had found that the assurances given  in  the  present  case  were
    unreliable and, in consequence, there would be a real risk of a  breach
    of article 3.  In the light of her finding that there was a  real  risk
    that the assurances given would not be complied with, it  must  follow,
    so she submitted, that a decision to allow the appeal was the only  one
    which could properly be made.  She submitted that the error had, in all
    likelihood, simply been a clerical error and did not in any way  affect
    the substance of the decision.

13.   Mr Tufan submitted that it was not at all clear  what  the  judge  had
    intended to decide.  In the light of the extensive adverse findings  by
    the judge, the appeal should not have been allowed simply on the  basis
    of the findings at [48] and [49].  The judge's reliance on one  on-line
    article was not sufficient to go behind the findings of the High Court.
     The decision was sufficiently confused, so he  submitted,  to  justify
    the merits being looked at afresh.

Assessment of the issues

14.   I am satisfied that there is an error in [51]  of  the  decision  when
    the judge said that the article 3 appeal was dismissed.  A decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on article 3 grounds is entirely  inconsistent  with
    the judge's findings at [48] that  there  had  been  a  breach  of  the
    assurances given by the Kenyan authorities in relation to  GD  and  the
    conclusion in [49] that, in the light of subsequent evidence, there was
    a real risk that the appellant on return to Kenya would not be held  in
    keeping with the assurances given to the High Court but would  be  held
    in conditions breaching article 3.

15.   I have taken into account the comment made  by  the  First-tier  judge
    when granting permission to appeal that this was not an obvious slip of
    the pen situation as suggested in the grounds of appeal and Mr  Tufan's
    submission that judge's decision is such that it is not clear what  she
    intended to decide.  However, I am satisfied that the  judge's  factual
    findings are clear and that when the decision is read as  a  whole  the
    only rational conclusion can be that the judge intended  to  allow  the
    appeal under article 3 and that she simply made  a  clerical  error  in
    [51]. This conclusion is supported by the fact that the judge added  in
    brackets "article 3 only" at the end of [51] and to a lesser extent  by
    the fact that she appears to have considered whether there should be  a
    refund of the fee award but noted that according to the records on  the
    file no fee had been paid.  There would have been no need  to  consider
    the question of a fee refund if the intention had been to  dismiss  the
    appeal in its entirety.

16.   The error is an error of law requiring the decision to  be  set  aside
    and remade.  I also accept that the only part of the decision  affected
    by the error is the  clerical  error  at  [51]  and  that  the  judge's
    findings in the body of the  decision  are  unaffected.   I  have  been
    referred to the guidance of Latham LJ in DK  (Serbia)  v  Secretary  of
    State [2008] 1 WLR 1246 that findings not infected by the error fall to
    be preserved and of Sedley LJ in Mukarkar v Secretary of  State  [2006]
    EWCA Civ 1045 that it is wrong in principle  to  dismantle  the  entire
    edifice of the decision if a defect can be remedied by a  more  limited
    intervention.

17.   I was at one stage concerned by whether the respondent  had  been  put
    at a disadvantage by the fact that an appeal has been necessary as this
    error could not be put right under the "slip rule" within  rule  31  of
    the Tribunal Procedure (First-tier Tribunal)  (Immigration  and  Asylum
    Chamber) Rules 2014, when an amended decision would  have  been  issued
    giving rise to a right of appeal.  At one point in his  submissions  Mr
    Tufan raised the issue of whether  the  respondent  had  been  able  to
    appeal because he was not the loser.  That was the position  under  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002  governing  the  right  of
    appeal to the Immigration Appeal  Tribunal  (see  AN  (only  loser  can
    appeal) Afghanistan [2005] UKIAT 97).  However, those  provisions  were
    superseded by the coming into force of s.11(2) of the Tribunals, Courts
    and Enforcement Act 2007 making it clear that any party to  a  decision
    has the right of appeal to the Upper Tribunal.

18.   In the present case the respondent has not  sought  to  challenge  the
    decision by seeking permission to  appeal,  to  maintain  it  on  other
    grounds by filing a rule 24 notice setting out any grounds on which  he
    seeks to rely or  by  filing  a  skeleton  argument  to  challenge  the
    substance of the judge's decision.  I have also been  referred  to  the
    recent reported decision in PAA (FtT: oral decision - written decision)
    Iraq [2019] UKUT 13, which, whilst dealing with a different issue,  the
    effect  of  an  oral  decision  given  by   the   First-tier   Tribunal
    inconsistent with subsequent written reasons, nonetheless confirms  the
    importance of challenging a decision in accordance  with  the  relevant
    procedure rules.  No such challenge has been made.

19.   The judge clearly intended to allow the appeal for reasons set out  in
    her decision.  Accordingly, I substitute a decision allowing the appeal
    on article 3 grounds.

Decision

20.   The First-tier Tribunal erred in law and the decision  is  set  aside.
    I substitute a decision allowing the appeal on article 3 grounds.


Signed:                        H            J            E            Latter
                 Dated: 21 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Latter
-----------------------
[1] Lord Ramsbotham, former HM Chief Inspector of Prisons from 1995-2001
was asked to produce a report on prison conditions in two prisons in Kenya
to assist the then Home Secretary in deciding the application for
extradition by the Kenyan government in respect of GD

