


                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA079452016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at : Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated    |
|On : 29 August 2017                    |On: 31 August 2017                  |
|                                       |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEBEDE


                                   Between

                                     MR
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Khan, instructed by Abbey Law
For the Respondent:    Mr P Singh, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals, with permission, against the decision of  the  First-
tier Tribunal dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision of  15
July 2016 to refuse his protection and human rights claim.

The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh, born on [ ] 1994.  He  arrived  in
the UK on 25 March 2014 with a Tier 4 student visa. On 11 June 2015 he  made
an application for leave to  remain  on  family  life/private  life  grounds
which was refused. On 16 December 2015 he made an appointment with the  Home
Office and claimed asylum on 15 January 2016 at the Asylum  Screening  Unit.
His claim was refused on 15 July 2016.


The appellant appealed against that decision and his  appeal  was  heard  in
the First-tier Tribunal on 14 February 2017 and was dismissed in a  decision
promulgated on 23 February 2017.

The Appellant's Case

The appellant claims to be at risk on return to Bangladesh as  a  result  of
being gay. His case is that he had a sexual relationship with a boy to  whom
he became attracted when he was 12-13 years of  age  and  attending  school.
They were caught on two occasions and as a  result  he  was  beaten  by  his
father and uncle. He left his home area of Habiganj and went to Dhaka  where
he lived for one and a half to two years. He worked as a private  tutor.  He
was attracted to the relative of one of his tutees but  was  too  scared  to
express his feelings because of his past experiences. He came to the  UK  on
a Tier 4 student visa. He initially kept his sexuality to himself  but  when
he saw men kissing and holding hands he became more open and met a man  with
whom he entered into a casual relationship and attended gay clubs.

The respondent, in refusing the appellant's claim, accepted that he was  gay
and that he had been caught having sex with his partner twice, and  accepted
that he had a genuine subjective fear of return to Habiganj,  but  concluded
that he  could  safely  and  reasonably  relocate  to  Dhaka  where  he  had
previously resided without problems and where there was  more  tolerance  to
the LGBT community. It was not  accepted  that  his  removal  to  Bangladesh
would breach his human rights.

The appellant's  appeal  against  that  decision  was  heard  by  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Walker. The judge noted that the starting position  was  that
the appellant's history in Bangladesh and the fact that he was gay had  been
accepted by the respondent. The judge  accepted  that  the  appellant  would
have difficulties returning to his home area of Habiganj but found  that  he
could relocate to Dhaka.  He  noted  that  the  appellant  had  changed  his
evidence about his experiences in Dhaka and, having said  in  his  interview
that he had no problems whilst living there, had said in his  oral  evidence
that he was threatened by local lads. Given the change  in  the  appellant's
evidence he did not accept the most recent account  of  threats.  The  judge
concluded that the appellant would not be at risk on return to Dhaka and  he
dismissed the appeal on all grounds.

The appellant sought permission to appeal Judge  Walker's  decision  to  the
Upper Tribunal on two grounds. The first ground asserted that the judge  had
failed properly to apply the test in HJ (Iran) v Secretary of State for  the
Home Department (Rev 1) [2010] UKSC 31, that he  had  failed  to  apply  the
correct standard of proof to the  evidence  and  that  he  had  ignored  the
objective evidence supporting  the  appellant's  claim  to  be  at  risk  in
Bangladesh as a gay man. The second  ground  asserted  that  the  judge  had
failed to consider the private life aspect of the appellant's claim and  had
failed to consider Article 8 within and outside the immigration rules.


Permission to appeal was granted by the First-tier Tribunal  on  the  second
ground only.

Appeal hearing and submissions

The appeal came before me on 29 August 2017. Both parties made  submissions.


Mr Khan submitted that the  judge's  failure  to  consider  the  appellant's
Article 8 claim was a material error of law. Given  the  judge's  acceptance
of the references in the background information to harassment  and  violence
suffered by LGBT people, consideration should have  been  given  to  whether
there were very serious obstacles to the appellant's  integration  in  Dhaka
and whether exceptional circumstances existed outside the rules.


Mr Singh accepted that the judge had failed to consider paragraph  276ADE(1)
and Article 8 outside the rules but submitted that  there  was  no  material
error as he had considered the question  of  harassment  and  risk  and  had
rejected the appellant's account of having been threatened in Dhaka.


Both parties agreed that if the judge was found to have materially erred  by
failing to make findings on Article 8 the decision could be re-made in  that
respect without the need for further evidence or submissions, since all  the
relevant materials were already available.

Consideration and findings.

It was accepted by Mr Khan that the only arguable ground of appeal  was  the
judge's failure to  consider  the  appellant's  private  life  claim,  there
having been no application to the Upper Tribunal to renew the  first  ground
challenging the judge's application  of  the  test  in  HJ  (Iran)  and  his
conclusion on risk on return following the  refusal  of  permission  in  the
First-tier Tribunal.

It  was  Mr  Khan's  submission  that  the  failure  to  consider  paragraph
276ADE(1)(vi) and exceptional circumstances outside  the  immigration  rules
was a material error of law in light of the  references  in  the  background
information, as accepted by the judge, to reports of violence  against  LGBT
persons and to prejudice and harassment.


However,  it  is  not  the  case  that  the  judge  omitted  to   give   any
consideration to, or make any findings on, Article  8.  At  [40]  the  judge
found that the respondent's decision did not breach  the  appellant's  human
rights. He therefore did consider Article 8. It is  relevant  to  note  that
the evidence before the Tribunal of the appellant's private life in  the  UK
was very limited and the submissions made with respect  to  Article  8  were
extremely brief, with the main focus of the appeal being on the question  of
risk on return.


I do accept that that paragraph would have benefitted from a  more  detailed
analysis of the appellant's claim in the context of paragraph  276ADE(1)(vi)
and compelling  circumstances  outside  the  immigration  rules,  given  the
nature of the appellant's claim. Nevertheless I do not consider the  absence
of such an analysis to be material, given the judge's  findings  in  respect
to the appellant's asylum claim which he specifically stated at [40]  formed
the basis of his conclusion on Article 8. What is particularly  relevant  is
that, having found that the appellant could internally  relocate  to  Dhaka,
the judge implicitly, albeit not explicitly, concluded that it would not  be
unreasonable to expect him to live in Dhaka.  At  [22(5)]  he  set  out  the
respondent's view in that regard. Having found as such,  the  judge  plainly
contemplated there to  be  an  absence  of  very  significant  obstacles  to
integration or other compelling circumstances and his conclusion at [40]  is
thus consistent with the findings made in regard to the asylum claim.


In any event,  on  the  judge's  findings  overall  it  is  plain  that  the
appellant could not demonstrate very significant  obstacles  to  integration
or exceptional or compelling circumstances  so  as  to  make  out  a  viable
Article 8 claim. The judge did not accept  the  appellant's  claim  to  have
experienced threats or difficulties whilst living in Dhaka  for  up  to  two
years. He was entitled to conclude as such and that  finding  has  not  been
challenged. Whilst the appellant claimed at his interview that  he  did  not
tell anyone in Dhaka that he was gay, his oral  evidence  was  that  he  was
known in Dhaka as being gay. Accordingly, on the basis  of  the  appellant's
own lack of difficulties when living as a gay  man  in  Dhaka,  and  on  the
judge's analysis of the background information,  which  included  references
to Dhaka providing a more tolerant attitude to the  LGBT  community  despite
the existence of prejudice and discrimination, the  appellant  simply  could
not show that he met the requirements in paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi)  and  could
not establish compelling  circumstances  so  as  to  succeed  on  Article  8
private life grounds either within or outside the immigration rules.


Accordingly, and for all of these reasons, I find no error  of  law  in  the
judge's decision requiring  it  to  be  set  aside.  I  uphold  the  judge's
decision.

DECISION

The appellant's appeal is accordingly dismissed. The making of the  decision
of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  on  a  point  of  law
requiring the decision  to  be  set  aside.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the
appellant's appeal therefore stands.

    Anonymity

    The First-tier Tribunal made an order for anonymity.  I  maintain  that
    order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008.
Signed   [pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Kebede                               Dated: 30 August
2017
