

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/07723/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport      |     Determination Promulgated          |
|On 27 April 2018                      |     On 03 May 2018                     |

                                   Before

                 DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J F W PHILLIPS

                                   Between

                                     BA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation

For the Appellant:      Ms L Gardner, Counsel instructed by Migrant Legal
Project
For the Respondent:     Mr K Hibbs, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal against the decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    O'Rourke in which he dismissed the appeal of the Appellant,  a  citizen
    of Iran, against the Secretary of State's decision to refuse asylum and
    issue removal directions.


 2. The application  under  appeal  was  refused  on  28  July  2017.   The
    Appellant exercised his right of appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    This is the appeal which came before Judge  O'Rourke  on  11  September
    2017 and was dismissed. The Appellant applied for permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.   The  application  was  granted  by  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Kelly on 24 November 2017 in the following terms

       It is not arguable that it was "perverse" for the tribunal to attach
       weight to inconsistencies in the  appellant's  testimony  concerning
       the number of occasions on which he attended a house church in  Iran
       when assessing his  overall  credibility  as  a  witness  of  truth.
       Neither is it arguable that the decision in R (on the application of
       SA (Iran) v SSHD [2012] EWHC 2527  (Admin)  contains  any  generally
       applicable principle of law (whether binding upon  the  tribunal  or
       otherwise)  or  that  the  tribunal  was  obliged  to   assess   the
       credibility of the appellant's claimed conversion to Christianity by
       reference to his church activities alone rather than by reference to
       other matters that were capable of  undermining  it.  Permission  to
       appeal on the  grounds  contained  within  paragraphs  3  to  11  is
       accordingly refused.


       It is however arguable that the tribunal was wrong to find that  the
       appellant had  not  submitted  any  corroborative  evidence  of  his
       claimed  evangelising  in  the  United  Kingdom,   with   particular
       reference to the written  evidence  of  the  Reverend  Rees.  It  is
       further arguable that this  was  material  to  the  outcome  of  the
       appeal. Permission to appeal is accordingly granted on  the  grounds
       contained within paragraphs 12 to 14 of the application.


    At the hearing before me Ms Gardner  leave  to  amend  the  grounds  of
    appeal to include assertions that there had been material  misdirection
    of law in respect of the  Appellant's  sur  place  activities  and  the
    evidence of Reverend Rees as well as procedural unfairness in  reaching
    a conclusion that Reverend Rees had been 'duped' without affording  him
    the opportunity to respond. Mr Hibbs did not  object  to  the  proposed
    amendment. I gave leave to amend on the basis that the amended  grounds
    were, in reality, merely an enhancement of the existing grounds and did
    not raise discrete issues.




Background

 3.  The  history  of  this  appeal  is  detailed  above.  The  facts,  not
    challenged, are that the Appellant is a citizen  of  Iran  born  on  15
    December 1976. He left Iran on 10 December 2016 arriving in the  United
    Kingdom on 19 April 2017 and claimed asylum  on  or  immediately  after
    arrival. The basis  of  his  claim  was  his  fear  of  persecution  on
    religious grounds due to his conversion from Islam to Christianity.  He
    claimed that his conversion took place in  Iran  where  he  attended  a
    house church. His attendance at  this  church  and  his  possession  of
    Christian  leaflets  and  other  materials  was   discovered   by   the
    authorities who sought to detain him. The Appellant left Iran  in  fear
    of persecution and travelled via Turkey to the United  Kingdom.  Having
    arrived in the United Kingdom and claimed asylum  the  Appellant  began
    attending a local evangelical Christian church and his involvement with
    the church locally was confirmed by the Pastor.



 4. At the hearing on 11 September 2017 the Appellant  was  represented  by
    counsel and gave oral evidence. The Pastor  of  his  local  church  had
    proposed to give oral evidence but was unavoidably  engaged  elsewhere.
    The Judge refused an adjournment application to enable  the  Pastor  to
    give oral evidence noting (at paragraph 5 of  his  decision)  "Reverend
    Rees is a frequent witness in this Tribunal and  his  written  evidence
    would stand in good stead of his attendance."



 5. In dismissing the appeal the Judge found that the Appellant was  not  a
    credible witness so far as events in Iran were concerned and that  this
    affected his  credibility  generally  and  so  had  an  impact  on  the
    genuineness of his activities in the UK which included attending church
    although his claim to evangelise was uncorroborated.




Submissions


 6. For the Appellant Ms Gardner referred to the grounds of appeal and said
    that the Judge failed to have regard to relevant evidence. It was clear
    that there was  corroborative  evidence  of  evangelising  contrary  to
    paragraph 29(iii) of the decision. Further this makes it clear that the
    Appellant was not simply attending church contrary to paragraph 29(ii).
    In this respect the accounts of the Appellant  and  Reverend  Rees  are
    corroborative of each other. The Judge materially  misdirected  himself
    by starting his assessment of the Appellant's sur place  activities  by
    referring to his credibility  generally  rather  than  considering  the
    supporting evidence. Further again there  is  a  material  misdirection
    amounting to unfairness in the specific finding at  paragraph  30  that
    Reverend Rees has been duped. This was not put to the Appellant and  it
    was not raised by the Judge during the course of the hearing. The Judge
    had the opportunity to adjourn the proceedings and hear  from  Reverend
    Rees. It may have been acceptable  for  the  Judge  to  attach  limited
    weight to the evidence of Reverend Rees but to specifically  find  that
    he had been duped when this had  not  been  raised  amounts  procedural
    unfairness.


 7. Mr Hibbs responded to say that credibility should be considered in  the
    round and if the Appellant's account of his conversion in Iran was  not
    credible then the  judge  was  entitled  to  find  that  his  Christian
    activities in the UK were not genuine.  Mr  Hibbs  said  that  the  two
    aspects of the Appellant's  claim,  his  conversion  in  Iran  and  his
    activities in the UK were parasitic upon one another. Mr Hibbs went  on
    to correct himself to suggest that it was only the activities in the UK
    that were parasitic on his claimed activities in  Iran.  The  Appellant
    never claimed to have converted in the UK so if his conversion in  Iran
    was not credible the rest of his claim falls away. In  fact  the  Judge
    makes an alternative  finding  at  paragraph  29  (iii),  even  if  the
    Appellant had participated in Christian  events  in  Cardiff  this  was
    unlikely to bring him to the attention of the Iranian  authorities.  Mr
    Hibbs accepted that the findng that the Reverend Rees  had  been  duped
    was not put to him or raised in submissions or otherwise.



 8. I said that the  appeal  would  be  allowed  and  reserved  my  written
    decision. It was clear that the Judge had  failed  to  have  regard  to
    material evidence, that he had  drawn  conclusions  on  Reverend  Rees'
    evidence that were not put to him or to the Appellant and that  he  had
    failed to consider whether the Appellant's  activities  in  the  United
    Kingdom cast light on his claim to have converted  to  Christianity  in
    Iran.


Decision


 9. The first issue in this appeal is  the  Judge's  consideration  of  the
    evidence that was before him. At  paragraph  29(iii)  the  Judge  finds
    "there was no corroborating evidence as to any evangelising activity by
    the Appellant (Reverend Rees does not mention any)".  At  paragraph  29
    (ii) the Judge finds "simply attending a church cannot be,  of  itself,
    sufficient". These findings  are  wholly  contrary  to  the  letter  of
    September 1, 2017 from Reverend Rees. This letter was before the First-
    tier Tribunal and attests not only to the Appellant's church attendance
    and the genuineness of his Christianity but also to  his  participation
    in other church activities including evangelising. The Judge's  failure
    to consider this evidence must  have  been  material  to  his  decision
    because the only other reason given for doubting the genuineness of his
    Christian  activities  in  the  United  Kingdom  was  the   Appellant's
    credibility generally, in other words the  Judge's  assessment  of  his
    activities in Iran.


10. In this regard Mr Hibbs first submission, before correction,  that  the
    two aspects of the Appellant's claim were parasitic upon each other was
    in my finding correct. Just as his activities in Iran cast  light  upon
    the credibility of his activities in the United Kingdom his  activities
    in United Kingdom must cast light upon the credibility of  his  account
    of his activities in Iran. In this regard it is pertinent to note  that
    the Judge did not make a specific finding as to whether  the  Appellant
    had converted to Christianity in Iran only that his account  of  events
    in Iran was not plausible.


11. In my judgement the Judge's treatment of the evidence of Reverend  Rees
    was further at fault in his finding that the  Reverend  Rees  had  been
    duped. At the outset of the proceedings an adjournment application  was
    made specifically because Reverend Rees could not attend. He wished  to
    attend but was attending instead a speed awareness  course.  The  Judge
    refused the application  noting  that  Reverend  Rees  was  a  frequent
    witness in this tribunal and that his written evidence would  stand  in
    good stead of his attendance. The  Judge  further  excused  the  strict
    application of Dorodian on the basis  that  Reverend  Rees  would  have
    attended if he could. Having made this decision to treat  the  Reverend
    Rees' written evidence in good stead of his attendance it  was,  in  my
    judgement, unfair of the Judge to make a finding that Reverend Rees had
    been duped. If Reverend Rees had given  oral  evidence  the  suggestion
    that he had been duped could have been put to him and no doubt he would
    have had a response.


12. For all the reasons above it is my judgement that the Judge  fell  into
    error of law and that his decision  cannot  stand.  I  have  considered
    whether the Judge's findings in respect of the  Appellant's  activities
    in Iran can nevertheless be preserved and it is my judgement that  they
    cannot for the very reason put forward by Mr Hibbs, the two aspects  of
    the Appellant's claim are indeed parasitic upon one another and  it  is
    impossible to make a reasoned finding on the one without  consideration
    of the other. Indeed this is a further aspect where the Judge fell into
    error in that he considered the effect of the Appellant's activities in
    Iran upon the credibility of his account of his  activities  in  United
    Kingdom whilst he did not consider the fact of the Appellant's accepted
    activities in the UK when considering his account of his activities  in
    Iran.



  Summary

13. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making  of  errors
    of law material to the decision to dismiss  the  appeal.  I  allow  the
    Appellant's appeal and as the errors of law  involved  the  credibility
    findings made it is appropriate that this matter  is  remitted  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal for hearing de novo with no findings preserved.


Signed:                                 Date: 29 April 2018

[pic]

J F W Phillips
Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
