



Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07560/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 5 April 2019                       |On 7 May 2019                       |
|                                      |                                    |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                     HS
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:      Mr J Draycott (Counsel)
For the Respondent:     Mr M Diwnycz (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

    1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper  Tribunal,  brought  with
       the permission of a Judge of the Upper Tribunal, from a decision  of
       the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made  on  20  July
       2018, following a hearing of 17 July 2018, and which it sent to  the
       parties on 24 July 2018. The tribunal's decision was to dismiss  the
       claimant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of State  made
       on 1  June  2018,  refusing  to  grant  the  claimant  international
       protection.

2.    Shorn of all of the essentials, the background  circumstances  are  as
follows: The claimant is a national of Afghanistan and  he  was  born  on  1
January 1959. He resided in the Helmand Province in Afghanistan.  But  on  6
February 2009 he entered the United Kingdom (UK) and he claimed  asylum.  On
24 September 2009 the Secretary of State refused his claim. He  appealed  to
the tribunal but, on 18 November 2009, his appeal was dismissed. He did  not
leave the UK, despite the  dismissal  of  his  appeal,  and  in  due  course
further representations were made on his behalf to the Secretary  of  State.
Ultimately, that resulted in the Secretary of State deciding  to  refuse  to
grant international protection and that, in turn, led to the hearing  before
the tribunal and its dismissal of his appeal. In  asserting  entitlement  to
international protection, the claimant said that if he were to  be  returned
to Afghanistan he would  be  persecuted  or  seriously  ill-treated  by  the
Taliban and the Afghani authorities. It was also contended, on  his  behalf,
that he could not return to Helmand Province because if he did, he would  be
at risk of indiscriminate violence due to  an  internal  armed  conflict  so
that he satisfied the requirements, contained within Article 15c of  Council
Directive 2011/95/EU. The  claimant  also  argued  that,  given  his  health
difficulties, he would be at risk of committing suicide such that  he  could
successfully rely upon Article 3 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
(ECHR). Further, he asserted that he would not be able to take advantage  of
an internal flight alternative within Afghanistan and that that was  so,  in
part at least, due to those mental health difficulties. He  also  sought  to
rely upon Article 8 of the ECHR in the context of private life and what  was
described as his "mental integrity".

3.     It  follows  from  the  above  that  the  tribunal  was  tasked  with
considering a whole range of arguments.  Indeed,  it  was  provided  with  a
skeleton argument addressing those matters which  ran  to  some  twenty-nine
pages.  The  tribunal's  written  decision,  unsurprisingly  therefore,  was
lengthy too. It ran to thirty-two pages. As noted,  the  tribunal  dismissed
the claimant's appeal. It found  the  account  he  had  relied  upon  to  be
untruthful and it found that the medical evidence did not  demonstrate  that
there was a real risk of him committing suicide if returned to  Afghanistan.
It accepted that he could not return to Helmand because of the  Article  15c
risk but it concluded he could internally relocate either to Kabul or  to  a
place called Pakyta where it concluded his wife was residing.

4.    The grounds of application for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
Tribunal were extensive and a wide range of points were taken.  I  have  not
found it necessary to deal with all of them. But I would  like  to  say,  at
this stage, that  in  general  terms  it  seems  to  me  that  the  tribunal
undertook a most careful and thorough evaluation of  the  evidence  and  the
extensive and sometimes difficult arguments  which  had  been  made  to  it.
Permission to appeal was originally refused by a  judge  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal but was subsequently granted by a judge of the Upper  Tribunal  who
relevantly said this:

           "It is arguable that the F-tT J took an  incorrect  approach  to
           the medical evidence and that  this  may  have  had  a  material
           impact on the conclusions, for example that the appellant  could
           relocate on return to Afghanistan and be expected to  find  work
           on return".


5.    Permission having been granted the  case  was  listed  for  a  hearing
before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could  be  decided  whether
or not the tribunal had erred in law and, if it had, what should  flow  from
that. Directions also facilitated the possible remaking of the  decision  by
the Upper Tribunal should that be necessary or  appropriate.  Representation
at  that  hearing  was  as  stated  above  and  I  am   grateful   to   each
representative. Mr Draycott, for the claimant, provided me with a bundle  of
authorities and other materials which  was  helpful.  His  having  taken  me
through various of the  arguments  contained  in  the  grounds,  Mr  Diwnycz
indicated that he would accept the tribunal's decision did contain an  error
of law. That has circumvented matters somewhat.

6.    The tribunal, as noted, did accept that the  claimant  was  unable  to
return to his home area (indeed the Secretary of  State  had  accepted  that
that was so) due to the Article 15c risk. So, it was  necessary  for  it  to
consider whether he could take advantage of an internal  flight  alternative
(see paragraph 71 of the tribunal's written reasons). It  decided  it  would
not be unduly harsh to require him to relocate to Kabul or  to  Pakyta.  One
of the matters it  considered  with  respect  to  internal  flight  was  the
claimant's mental health. It had before it  the  previous  decision  of  the
tribunal which had been made in 2009. But it also  had  a  large  volume  of
documentary medical evidence concerning the claimant's medical health  which
had been produced after that tribunal decision had been made.  So,  although
the principles set out in the well known case  of  Devaseelan  [2001]  UKIAT
702 applied, it was able to reach its own view as to the nature  and  extent
of the  mental  health  difficulties  on  the  basis  of  that  more  recent
evidence. What is said about  mental  health  in  the  specific  context  of
relocation is this:

            Whilst the appellant does suffer  medical  problems,  I  do  not
           accept upon the evidence before me that he  is  not  capable  of
           work. I note  that  he  has  experience  as  a  mechanic.  I  am
           therefore satisfied that if he was to return to  Afghanistan  he
           would be able to support  himself  by  obtaining  employment  or
           commencing self-employment upon which  he  will  earn  money  to
           support himself and to purchase suitable medication".

7.    Pausing there, there was also evidence  of  physical  health  problems
but I think the tribunal probably had  in  mind,  primarily  at  least,  the
mental health difficulties. Anyway, its assessment  as  to  internal  flight
and the relevance of the mental health difficulties  in  that  context,  was
the subject of criticism in the grounds.

8.    Mr Draycott referred, in particular, to  a  psychiatric  report  which
had been prepared by one Professor Katona on 16 October 2013.  I  note  that
in that report (page 7) it is said that the claimant is suffering from post-
traumatic stress disorder and "major depressive episode". A component of  Mr
Draycott's argument was to the effect  that  in  the  Secretary  of  State's
written decision of 1 June 2018, it had been accepted that  those  diagnoses
were correct. Mr Draycott suggested that that was  apparent  from  what  was
said at paragraph 61 and paragraph 63 of that decision.  But  the  tribunal,
it  was  argued,  had  effectively  disregarded  what  had  amounted  to   a
concession as to all of that when it  decided  that  the  claimant's  mental
health difficulties were not  sufficient  to  impact  upon  his  ability  to
internally relocate.

9.    I do not read those paragraphs in the way that Mr  Draycott  argues  I
should. It seems to me that the point being made at paragraph 61 is  that  a
number of medical practitioners, including Professor Katona should not  have
unquestioningly accepted  the  historical  account  that  the  claimant  has
given. That reasoning might well be subject to some criticism but  I  cannot
see that it constitutes any acceptance of what Professor Katona had to  say.
As to paragraph 63 that, at best, might amount to an implied  acceptance  of
some degree of medical difficulty but is  very  far  from  amounting  to  an
acceptance of any specific medical diagnosis.

10.   Having said the above, and although  the  medical  evidence  regarding
mental health problems was not all that recent (the most recent having  been
prepared in 2016), it was capable of suggesting mental  health  problems  of
real substance. The tribunal did give specific  consideration  to  Professor
Katona's evidence albeit more in the context of the claim regarding  suicide
risk. It said it accepted "that the appellant has a history of PTSD"  though
it also said that it was reducing the weight it should attach to the  report
because of its age and because it was based on one consultation. But  in  my
judgment, whatever it did or did not make of the  suicide  risk  contention,
it was obliged to make a finding as to the nature and extent of  any  mental
health difficulties insofar as they  impacted  upon  the  reasonableness  of
internal flight as at the date  it  was  hearing  the  appeal.  It  did  not
actually do that. I suppose it might have been open to  it  (my  not  having
accepted Mr Draycott's submissions regarding a concession by  the  Secretary
of State) to have said that the primary  medical  evidence  was  simply  too
dated to be informative as to the current position. But it did not do  that.
I have concluded, therefore, that the tribunal did  err  in  not  adequately
considering the evidence regarding mental health problems and in not  making
clear  findings  about  their  nature  and  extent,  when  considering   the
reasonableness or undue harshness of relocation either to  Kabul  and/or  to
Patyka. It also seems to have limited itself, as to its evaluation of  these
problems, to the impact they might have  upon  the  claimant's  capacity  to
work. That was too  narrow  an  approach.  So,  and  reminding  myself  that
setting aside was not opposed on behalf of the Secretary of  State,  I  have
concluded that I should set aside the  tribunal's  decision  notwithstanding
the obvious diligence which it brought to its task.

11.   I did wonder whether I should simply go  on  to  remake  the  decision
myself on the basis of the material currently in front  of  me.  However,  I
have decided that I should not do that. It does seem to  me  that  there  is
scope for further findings to be made with respect to the current  state  of
the claimant's mental health and that that is a task best undertaken by  the
tribunal which is, after all, the expert fact-finding body  in  this  field.
Remitting will also afford  the  claimant,  if  wished,  an  opportunity  to
obtain more up to date medical evidence.

12.   I have considered whether I should preserve  some  of  the  tribunal's
careful findings of fact. I have decided not to do so because, having  taken
the decision to remit, it does seem to me that I should allow  the  tribunal
to make what it will of all of the evidence and the arguments in  this  case
without my effectively placing it in a straightjacket. So,  I  have  decided
to remit for an entirely fresh hearing where all matters  of  fact  and  law
will be considered anew.

13.   Since I have set aside the tribunal's decision and decided to remit I
am now statutorily obligated to issue directions for the remaking of the
decision. However, I shall merely direct, as to that, there shall be an
oral rehearing of the appeal, that all matters shall be decided afresh, and
that the tribunal rehearing the appeal shall be differently constituted to
the tribunal which dismissed the appeal. Any other directions regarding
listing and the provision of further evidence can be best dealt with by the
tribunal itself.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error of
law and is set aside. Further, the case is remitted to the tribunal for a
complete rehearing.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. I continue that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
2008. Accordingly, no report of these proceedings shall identify the
claimant or any member of his family. The grant of anonymity applies to all
parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court
proceedings.


Signed:                      Dated: 2 May 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Hemingway

