
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07551/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 6 July 2017                           |On 17 July 2017                     |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SHERIDAN


                                   Between

                                     VR
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr P. Lewis, Counsel instructed by Theva Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T. Wilding, Home Office Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
(SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant.
This direction applies to, amongst others, all parties. Any failure to
comply with this direction could give rise to contempt of court
proceedings.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Sri Lanka born on 13 July 1985. In March
    2011 he came to the UK as a student where he remained with leave (after
    an extension) until 18 October 2014. Thereafter, he remained in the UK
    unlawfully.


 2. On 11 January 2016 the appellant claimed asylum. His application was
    rejected by the respondent on 7 July 2016.  The appellant appealed to
    the First-tier Tribunal where his appeal was heard by Judge George. In
    a decision promulgated on 30 January 2017, the appeal was dismissed.
    The appellant is now appealing against that decision.


 3. The basis of the appellant's claim is that he would be at risk on
    return to Sri Lanka because he was a member of the LTTE and the
    authorities have an ongoing interest in him. He claims, inter alia,
    that in December 2013 the authorities visited his mother's house and
    told her that they had discovered he had helped process LTTE money
    through his bank account. He claims that the authorities found money
    transfer records with his name on them in the home of a more senior
    LTTE member, by the name of Mani, to whom he had reported. He also
    claims that he is suspected of having worked with high level LTTE
    members to revive and regroup the LTTE and that, although he was a
    "normal" LTTE member, he is suspected of being a high profile member.

 4. Judge George did not find the appellant credible. He took issue with
    several aspects of the appellant's account, including:

     a) The judge found the appellant was evasive when asked about his
        alias in the LTTE, and found his lack of knowledge about use of
        aliases surprising given his "high level of involvement with the
        LTTE."
     b) The appellant claimed to have given his real name and address to
        the Money Transfer Bureau when acting for the LTTE but the judge
        was of the view that this did not fit with having an alias. The
        judge described as "incredible" that he would use his real name and
        address.
     c) The appellant claimed the authorities found incriminating receipts
        at the house of Mani. The judge thought it unlikely Mani would have
        kept such receipts for seven years.
     d) The judge found the appellant was unclear if he was saying he was a
        high level LTTE member.


 5. The judge also rejected the psychiatrist report adduced by the
    appellant on the grounds that it was based on what the appellant told
    the psychiatrist, without a sufficient assessment of whether it could
    have been feigned or exaggerated.


 6. Although a range of grounds were raised, the central - and most
    compelling - argument made by Mr Lewis was that the judge erred by
    finding the appellant had claimed to be, or had been ambiguous about
    whether he was, a high level member of the LTTE and by finding the
    appellant lacked credibility because of his apparent ignorance of
    matters a senior LTTE member could be expected to understand. Mr Lewis
    argued that the appellant had been consistent in saying that he was
    only a normal or low level member. Mr Wilding's response to this point
    was that there was some disparity in the evidence and the judge was
    entitled to find a lack of clarity about the appellant's level in the
    LTTE.


 7. Having reviewed the evidence that was before the First-tier Tribunal I
    am satisfied that the appellant has been consistent and clear in his
    claim that he has only ever been a low level member of the LTTE. The
    following are examples of where the appellant has commented on his
    rank/level in the LTTE:

     a) At paragraph 53 of his witness statement he stated: "I was a normal
        ordinary member of the LTTE meaning I did not hold any high ranking
        within the LTTE."
     b) At paragraph 62 of the witness statement he said "I accept that I
        had a low level involvement with the LTTE".
     c) At paragraph 26 of the decision, the judge recorded Mr Lewis's
        submissions as being that the appellant "has not suggested he has a
        high profile role in the LTTE and he persistently refers to low
        level activity".
     d) In his asylum interview, at paragraph 45, the appellant answered
        the question "What was your rant in the LTTE?" by stating "Normal
        member."
     e) At paragraph 68 of the asylum interview the appellant was asked
        "Other than storing medicine and collecting money, did you
        participate in any other activities for the LTTE?" He answered:
        "That is all I did."
     f) At paragraph 98 of the asylum interview the appellant was asked to
        comment on country information stating that the Sri Lankan
        authorities are not interested in low ranking LTTE members.  His
        answer was that he is suspected of being a high profile member.


 8. In the decision, the judge made several references to the appellant's
    level and involvement in the LTTE, including:

     a) At paragraph 3 of the decision the judge stated that the appellant
        is claiming asylum because he fears persecution due to his
        involvement with the LTTE "as he is a high level member".
     b) At paragraph 41 the judge stated that the appellant "asserts a high
        level of involvement with the LTTE".
     c) At paragraph 47 the judge stated that he "was left unclear whether
        the appellant was saying that he was a high level member of the
        LTTE or not as both options were put forward by the appellant in
        the course of the documentary and oral evidence".
     d) At paragraph 51 the judge stated that he was "not satisfied that he
        is a member of the LTTE as claimed, whether at a higher or lower
        level of membership."


 9. In my view, the judge has made an error of law by mischaracterising the
    appellant's claim. The appellant has always maintained that he was a
    low level LTTE member who faces risk in Sri Lanka because he is
    mistakenly perceived by the authorities as having (or having had) a
    high level in the LTTE. However, the judge has approached the appeal on
    the basis that the appellant was claiming to have had a high level in
    the LTTE or was being ambiguous about his level, which is not the case.


10. The error is material because the case turned on the appellant's
    credibility and the appellant's claimed level in the LTTE was central
    to the evaluation of his account. For example, at paragraph 41 the
    judge found damaging to the appellant's credibility that he was unable
    to explain why the LTTE used aliases. The reason the judge appears to
    have expected the appellant to be aware of this was that he had
    asserted "a high level of involvement with the LTTE". Although someone
    at a low level in an organisation can have a high level of involvement
    in the sense they are very involved, the clear implication is that the
    appellant's lack of knowledge about LTTE procedures was inconsistent
    with someone of his claimed level/rank in the organisation.


11. As the error concerns the assessment of the appellant's credibility,
    the factual findings of the First-tier Tribunal cannot stand and the
    appeal will need to be remade in its entirety. In these circumstances,
    I consider it appropriate for the appeal to remitted to the First-tier
    Tribunal to be heard by a different judge.


Decision


12. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a material error of
    law such that it should be set aside in its entirety and the appeal
    heard afresh.


13. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for hearing afresh
    before a judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge George.


    |                                     |                                     |
|Signed                               |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |
|Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Sheridan |                                     |
|                                     |Dated: 14 July 2017                  |









