
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07313/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely by Teams              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 June 2021                       |On 29 June 2021                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     ZA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Bedford
For the Respondent:    Mr Whitwell, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision promulgated on 13 October 2017, I found that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal had erred in law and set aside its decision.  My  reasons
    were as follows:

         1.   The appellant, ZA, was born in 1985 and is a citizen of  Iraq.
         By a decision dated  28  June  2016,  the  respondent  refused  the
         appellant's application for asylum  and  made  directions  for  his
         removal from the United Kingdom.  The  appellant  appealed  to  the
         First-tier Tribunal (Judge Graham) which, in a decision promulgated
         on 23 February 2017,  dismissed  the  appeal.   The  appellant  now
         appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

         2.   In this appeal, Judge Graham was not assisted by the confusion
         which appears to have arisen in the written evidence  and  also  at
         the oral hearing as to whether or not the appellant lived in Kirkuk
         or in Kurdistan (otherwise the Independent Kurdish Region  -  IKR).
         The appellant claimed to come from Rahemwa but had stated variously
         in the course of his claim and  appeal  that  he  was  from  Kirkuk
         which, as the judge correctly records [29] is not in the  IKR.   In
         his written statement of 9 January 2017, the appellant claimed that
         he  was  from  Kurdistan.   Ultimately,  the  judge  resolved   the
         confusion by finding that (i) the appellant is a Kurd (ii) that  he
         is from Kirkuk and (iii) that Kirkuk is not part of the IKR.

         3.   Whilst that part  of  the  analysis  was  correct,  the  judge
         appears then to have fallen into error.   The  judge  set  out  the
         country guidance contained in AA (Article  15(c))  Iraq  CG  [2015]
         UKUT 00544 (IAC).  Sometime after the promulgation of the appeal in
         June 2017, that country guidance  was  modified  by  the  Court  of
         Appeal in AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944. The  guidance  at  present
         is, therefore, as follows:

             "A.  INDISCRIMINATE VIOLENCE IN IRAQ:  ARTICLE  15(C)  OF  THE
             QUALIFICATION DIRECTIVE

             1.   There is at present a state of internal armed conflict in
             certain parts of Iraq, involving government  security  forces,
             militias of various kinds, and the  Islamist  group  known  as
             ISIL. The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called
             "contested  areas",  comprising  the  governorates  of  Anbar,
             Diyala, Kirkuk, (aka Ta'min), Ninewah  and  Salah  Al-din,  is
             such that, as a general matter, there are substantial  grounds
             for believing that any  civilian  returned  there,  solely  on
             account of his or her presence there, faces  a  real  risk  of
             being  subjected  to  indiscriminate  violence  amounting   to
             serious  harm  within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the
             Qualification Directive.

             2.   The degree of armed conflict  in  certain  parts  of  the
             "Baghdad Belts" (the urban environs around  Baghdad  City)  is
             also of the intensity described in paragraph 1 above,  thereby
             giving rise to a generalised Article 15(c) risk. The parts  of
             the Baghdad Belts  concerned  are  those  forming  the  border
             between  the  Baghdad  Governorate  and  the  contested  areas
             described in paragraph 1.

             3.   The degree of armed conflict in  the  remainder  of  Iraq
             (including Baghdad City) is  not  such  as  to  give  rise  to
             indiscriminate violence amounting  to  such  serious  harm  to
             civilians, irrespective of their  individual  characteristics,
             so as to engage Article 15(c).

             4.   In accordance with the principles set out in Elgafaji (C-
             465/07) and QD (Iraq)  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2009] EWCA Civ 620, decision-makers in Iraqi cases
             should assess the individual  characteristics  of  the  person
             claiming  humanitarian  protection,  in  order  to   ascertain
             whether those characteristics are such as to put  that  person
             at real risk of Article 15(c) harm.

             B.   DOCUMENTATION AND FEASIBILITY OF RETURN (EXCLUDING IKR)

             5.   Return of former residents of the  Iraqi  Kurdish  Region
             (IKR) will be to the IKR and  all  other  Iraqis  will  be  to
             Baghdad. The Iraqi authorities will allow  an  Iraqi  national
             (P) in the United Kingdom to  enter  Iraq  only  if  P  is  in
             possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating  to
             P, or a laissez passer.

             6.   No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if not in
             possession of one of these documents.

             7.   In the light of the Court  of  Appeal's  judgment  in  HF
             (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of State for the Home Department
             [2013] EWCA Civ 1276, an international protection  claim  made
             by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm
             arising from an absence of a current or expired Iraqi passport
             or a laissez passer, if the Tribunal finds that P's return  is
             not currently feasible on account of a lack of  any  of  those
             documents.

             8.   Where P is returned  to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or
             expired passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at  the
             point of return by reason of not having a current passport.

             C.   The CSID

             9.   Regardless of the feasibility of P's return, it  will  be
             necessary to decide whether P has a CSID, or will be  able  to
             obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq. A  CSID  is
             generally required in order for an Iraqi to  access  financial
             assistance  from  the  authorities;   employment;   education;
             housing; and medical treatment. If P shows there are no family
             or other members  likely  to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
             support, P is in  general  likely  to  face  a  real  risk  of
             destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the  time  any
             funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her agents to
             assist P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely
             that P will still have no CSID.

             10. Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
             should as a general matter be able  to  obtain  one  from  the
             Civil Status Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an
             Iraqi passport (whether current or expired), if P has one.  If
             P does not have such a passport, P's ability to obtain a  CSID
             may depend on whether P knows the page and  volume  number  of
             the book holding P's information (and that of P's family). P's
             ability to persuade the officials that P is the  person  named
             on the relevant page is likely to  depend  on  whether  P  has
             family members or other individuals who are prepared to  vouch
             for P.

             11. P's ability to obtain a CSID  is  likely  to  be  severely
             hampered if P is unable to go  to  the  Civil  Status  Affairs
             Office of P's Governorate because  it  is  in  an  area  where
             Article 15(c) serious harm is occurring. As a  result  of  the
             violence,  alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar   and
             Saluhaddin have been established in Baghdad and  Kerbala.  The
             evidence does not  demonstrate  that  the  "Central  Archive",
             which exists in Baghdad, is in practice able to provide  CSIDs
             to those in need of them. There is, however, a National Status
             Court  in  Baghdad,  to  which  P  could  apply   for   formal
             recognition of identity. The precise operation of  this  court
             is, however, unclear.

             D.   INTERNAL RELOCATION WITHIN IRAQ (OTHER THAN THE IKR)

             14.  As a general matter,  it  will  not  be  unreasonable  or
             unduly harsh for a person from a contested area to relocate to
             Baghdad City or (subject to paragraph  2  above)  the  Baghdad
             Belts.

             15.  In assessing  whether  it  would  be  unreasonable/unduly
             harsh for P to relocate to Baghdad, the following factors are,
             however, likely to be relevant:

                  (a)  whether P has a CSID or will be able  to  obtain  one
                      (see Part C above);

                  (b)  whether P can speak Arabic (those who cannot are less
                      likely to find employment);

                  (c)  whether P has family members or  friends  in  Baghdad
                      able to accommodate him;

                  (d)  whether P  is  a  lone  female  (women  face  greater
                      difficulties than men in finding employment);

                  (e)  whether P can find a sponsor to access a  hotel  room
                      or rent accommodation;

                  (f)  whether P is from a minority community;

                  (g)  whether there is support available for P  bearing  in
                      mind there is  some  evidence  that  returned  failed
                      asylum  seekers  are  provided   with   the   support
                      generally given to IDPs.

             16.  There  is  not  a  real  risk  of  an  ordinary  civilian
             travelling from Baghdad airport to the southern  governorates,
             suffering serious harm en route to  such  governorates  so  as
             engage Article 15(c).

             E.   IRAQI KURDISH REGION

             17.  The Respondent will  only  return  P  to  the  IKR  if  P
             originates from the  IKR  and  P's  identity  has  been  'pre-
             cleared' with the IKR authorities. The authorities in the  IKR
             do not require P to have an expired or  current  passport,  or
             laissez passer.

             18.  The IKR is virtually violence free. There is  no  Article
             15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.

             19.  A Kurd (K) who does not originate from the IKR can obtain
             entry for 10 days as a  visitor  and  then  renew  this  entry
             permission for a further 10 days. If K finds employment, K can
             remain for longer, although K will need to register  with  the
             authorities and provide details of the employer. There  is  no
             evidence that the IKR authorities  pro-actively  remove  Kurds
             from the IKR whose permits have come to an end.

             20.  Whether K, if returned  to  Baghdad,  can  reasonably  be
             expected to avoid any potential undue harshness in  that  city
             by travelling to the IKR,  will  be  fact  sensitive;  and  is
             likely to involve an assessment of  (a)  the  practicality  of
             travel from Baghdad to the IKR (such as to Irbil by air);  (b)
             the likelihood of K's securing employment in the IKR; and  (c)
             the availability of assistance from family and friends in  the
             IKR.

             21.  As a general matter, a non-Kurd who is at real risk in  a
             home area in Iraq is unlikely to be able to  relocate  to  the
             IKR.

             F. EXISTING COUNTRY GUIDANCE DECISIONS

             22.  This decision replaces all existing country  guidance  on
             Iraq"

         4.   It is clear from the country guidance that  where  a  Kurd  is
         returned to Baghdad (because he or she is not originally  from  the
         IKR) the question arises as to whether or not  such  an  individual
         avoid possible ill-treatment in Baghdad by  travelling  on  to  the
         IKR.  As the country guidance observes, that analysis will be fact-
         sensitive  and  is  likely  to  involve  the  assessment   of   the
         practicality of travel from Baghdad to the IKR and  the  likelihood
         of securing employment in the IKR, perhaps with the  assistance  of
         any family or friends who may  live  there.   Having  resolved  the
         confusion as to the  appellant's  provenance,  the  judge  at  [29]
         concluded briefly that:

             "I am satisfied the appellant is from Kirkuk.   I  am  further
             satisfied Kirkuk is not part of the IKR.  In  which  case  the
             appellant can relocate to the IKR as above [i.e. by  reference
             to country guidance at AA] and this appeal must be dismissed."

         5.   Rather strangely, the judge reaches this conclusion  and  then
         sets about analysing the credibility of the appellant's account,  a
         credibility which he rejects.  Given that it  is  accepted  by  the
         respondent that the appellant is a Kurd and does not originate from
         the IKR, the  relevance  of  the  credibility  of  the  appellant's
         account on the risk on  return  analysis  is  not  clear.  What  is
         certainly missing is any  fact-sensitive  investigation  of  travel
         from Baghdad to the IKR and the likelihood of the appellant, should
         he reach the IKR, being able to support himself in the longer  term
         there.  To that extent, the judge's analysis remains incomplete. In
         consequence, I set aside the  judge's  decision  but  preserve  his
         findings as regards the credibility of the appellant's account [31-
         34] although I do not preserve any part of his analysis relating to
         internal flight to the IKR.  The Tribunal will remake the  decision
         following the resumed hearing before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive
         Lane at Birmingham on a date to be fixed.  I am aware that there is
         a forthcoming country guidance hearing  which  will  address  these
         very issues and which is likely to be heard in October  2017.   The
         resumed hearing in this case, therefore, will not be listed  before
         1 December 2017.  Mr Mills told me that he had  evidence  regarding
         the availability of flights from Baghdad to Erbil.  I  direct  that
         both parties should file at the Tribunal and serve  on  each  other
         any evidence upon which they  may  seek  to  rely  at  the  resumed
         hearing at least 10 days before the date fixed for that hearing.

         Notice of Decision

         6.   The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  promulgated  on  23
         February 2017 is set aside.  The findings of fact  at  [30-34]  are
         preserved.  Otherwise, the judge's findings and conclusions are not
         preserved.  The Upper Tribunal will remake the decision following a
         resumed hearing on a date to be fixed on the first  available  date
         after 1 December  2017  before  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Clive  Lane
         sitting at Birmingham.

 2. I gave directions on 19 November 2019. It is unclear why it  has  taken
    until June 2021 for the resumed hearing to listed.

 3. At the resumed hearing, the appellant gave evidence with the assistance
    of an interpreter in Kurdish  Sorani.  He  was  cross  examined  by  Mr
    Whitwell, who  appeared  for  the  Secretary  of  State.  I  heard  the
    submissions of  both  representatives  (Mr  Bedford  appeared  for  the
    appellant) and then reserved my decision.

 4. The burden of proof remains on the appellant. The standard of proof  is
    whether there exist substantial grounds for believing  there  to  be  a
    real risk of the appellant suffering persecution  or  ill-treatment  on
    return  to  Iraq,  a  requirement   further   particularised   in   the
    Qualification Directive.

 5. The appellant had  been  found  by  the  previous  Tribunal  to  be  an
    unreliable  witness  as  regards  the  core  facts  of  his  claim  for
    international  protection  (see  [30-34]  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    decision, which contains findings which I preserved in the error of law
    decision). It is against the background of those adverse findings  that
    I have considered the evidence which I heard at the resumed hearing.  I
    find that the appellant does not have a genuine conviction  to  support
    separatist/Kurdish political causes. I find  that  he  has  no  sincere
    interest in propagating his own political opinions or those  of  others
    on his Facebook account. I find that, if faced with  removal  to  Iraq,
    the appellant would delete the account before departure.

 6. The appellant's evidence throughout  was  singularly  unimpressive.  He
    could not explain why,  having  deleted  a  previous  Facebook  account
    (which carried only non-political  posts)  two  years  ago  because  he
    feared for family when he claims not to have had any  idea  since  2014
    where his family are located. I find that he opened the new account  in
    November 2020 solely in order to bolster  his  asylum  appeal.  In  any
    event, the posts on the  account  are  little  more  than  re-posts  of
    existing  media  articles  which  are  widely  available  online;   the
    appellant did not specify any post  which  revealed  his  own  opinions
    whilst his Facebook 'friends' are not publicly visible on the  account.
    Mr Bedford submitted  that  the  appellant  should  succeed  on  asylum
    grounds on the basis of his sur place  activities  which  comprise  the
    Facebook account and attendance at a  single  meeting/demonstration  in
    December 2020; there is nothing in the evidence or background  material
    to indicate that such an attendance would have attracted the  attention
    of state authorities in  Iraq  or  that,  even  if  it  had,  that  the
    appellant would have been regarded by such  authorities  as  worthy  of
    attention.  The appeal on asylum grounds is without merit and I dismiss
    it.

 7. As regards  family  in  Iraq,  I  find  that  the  appellant  has  been
    untruthful. His evidence regarding  the  first  Facebook  account  (see
    above) is, in my opinion, inconsistent with  his  claim  to  have  lost
    touch with his family; that the appellant  should  have  maintained  an
    account with posts and photographs of his family  as  recently  as  two
    years ago sits uneasily with his claim to have lost touch entirely with
    his relatives in 2014. I find that the appellant has  failed  to  prove
    that claim and I find it is reasonably likely that he has  remained  in
    touch with his family in Iraq.

 8. The appellant's evidence about his CSID identity card was  particularly
    problematic. Frankly, it makes no sense  at  all  that  the  appellant,
    having asked a friend in Iraq to try to contact his family, would then,
    without any prompting, receive from the friend  a  document  which  the
    appellant says he believed to  be  his  own  genuine  CSID.  I  do  not
    consider it likely that the friend would have found the document  lying
    about in the appellant's former premises in Iraq. Matters  are  further
    complicated by the fact that the appellant's  own  expert  witness,  Dr
    Fateh, has concluded that the CSID  is  not  a  genuine  document.  The
    appellant's surprise at that  news  which  he  expressed  in  his  oral
    testimony was not persuasive. I find  that  the  document  is,  as  the
    expert concludes, a forgery; Mr Whitwell suggested that it may  yet  be
    genuine but he did not seek to question the  authoritative  opinion  of
    the expert witness.  The  document  contains  the  appellant's  correct
    height, date of birth and details of his grandparents. I find that  the
    appellant himself is likely to have supplied those particulars  to  the
    forger. In the context of all the evidence, I find that  the  appellant
    either commissioned the forged document or colluded in its production.

 9. The appellant, therefore, is a male Kurdish Iraqi whose  home  area  is
    Kirkuk. He has no interest in Iraqi politics beyond pretending to  have
    such an interest in order to obtain  international  protection  in  the
    United Kingdom. No state authority in Iraq will have  any  interest  in
    the appellant on his return to  Iraq  on  account  of  the  appellant's
    political profile; he has no profile so far as  those  authorities  are
    concerned and he will delete any potentially damaging Facebook  account
    prior to his return. I find that the appellant is in touch with  family
    members in Iraq.

10. The appellant's CSID is not a genuine document and the appellant cannot
    use it in Iraq. The appellant claims that he does  not  know  the  page
    number and details of his family on the  registers  maintained  by  the
    Iraqi government. I found this part of his  evidence  to  be  the  only
    thing he told me which had any ring of truth. He said  that  he  rarely
    used his card in Iraq because he had been  self-employed  and  did  not
    need it to access state services. Notwithstanding the appellant's  lack
    of candour, I am not prepared to predicate my assessment of whether  he
    can  be  returned  on  a  finding  that  he  does  know  the   register
    particulars.

11. The Upper  Tribunal  is  SMO,  KSP  and  IM  (Article  15(c);  identity
    documents) Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 400 at [431] found:

         "In any event, as we have noted, matters have moved on as the  CSID
         is being phased out and replaced by the INID.  If, as appears to be
         the case, the judge in the FtT concluded that the  appellant  would
         be able to use a proxy to obtain a replacement CSID  from  the  CSA
         office in Kirkuk, we  cannot  be  sure  that  this  represents  the
         position in 2019.  It is likely, to our mind, that the  CSA  office
         in Kirkuk has an INID terminal and that it would not be willing  to
         issue  a  CSID  to  the  appellant  through  a   proxy.    In   the
         circumstances, we consider that there must be further findings made
         regarding this appellant's access to or ability to  obtain  a  CSID
         card.  In the event that he does not have  access  to  an  existing
         CSID card and is unable to obtain a replacement whilst he is in the
         UK, we think it likely that his return to Iraq would be  in  breach
         of Article 3 ECHR.  As we have explained, we do not  consider  that
         he would be able to obtain either a CSID  or  an  INID  in  Baghdad
         because he is not from that city."

12. I find that the appellant will be unable to obtain a CSID whilst  still
    in the United Kingdom. He will be returned to  Baghdad  where  he  will
    also be unable to obtain a card. He cannot, therefore, remain safely in
    Baghdad because he will not possess a CSID and  cannot  travel  onwards
    from the capital to Kirkuk for the same reason.  It  follows  that  his
    appeal should be allowed on Article 3 ECHR grounds. It is dismissed  on
    all other grounds.




    Notice of Decision

    I have remade the decision. The appeal is allowed  on  Article  3  ECHR
    grounds. It is dismissed on asylum grounds.






    Signed                              Date 2 June 2021


    Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.
