
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07185/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 9 January 2018                    |On 31 January 2018                   |
|                                        |                                   |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MURRAY


                                   Between

                                MOHAMMED [H]
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Mathias Ume-Ezeoke, Counsel for Pillai & Jones
                    Solicitors, Stratford, London
For the Respondent:    Mr P Duffy, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1980.  He appealed
    against the decision of the respondent dated 24 July 2017 refusing  him
    asylum, humanitarian protection and on human rights grounds.

 2. The appeal was heard by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Davidson on 29
    August 2017.  The appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated  on  7
    September 2017.


 3. An application for permission to appeal was lodged and  permission  was
    granted by Judge of the First-Tier Tribunal Pickup on 9 November  2017.
    The permission states that the grounds assert that the Judge  erred  in
    failing to give any adequate reasons for findings.  It states  that  it
    is arguable that for example a simple statement that the Tribunal  does
    not find the appellant to be  a  credible  witness  is  inadequate  and
    devoid of any reasoning for reaching that conclusion.


 4. There is a Rule 24 response on file which states  that  the  respondent
    does not oppose the appellant's application for  permission  to  appeal
    for the reasons given in the permission and the respondent invites  the
    Tribunal to remit the appeal to the First-Tier Tribunal.

The Hearing

 5. Mr Duffy for the Secretary of State confirmed the terms of the Rule  24
    response and Counsel for the appellant had no objections to this.

Notice of Decision

 6. There are material errors of law in the Judge's decision promulgated on
    7 September 2017 as per the grounds.

 7. I set aside the decision of the First-Tier Tribunal  promulgated  on  7
    September 2017  and I direct that this appeal be remitted to the First-
    Tier Tribunal for rehearing but not before  First-Tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Davidson.


 8. Anonymity has not been directed.





Signed                                  Date 30 January 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Murray










