
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07245/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 30 April 2019                             |On 15 May 2019                |
|                                             |                              |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN


                                   Between

                                    MRDS
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. G. Loughran, Counsel instructed by Wilson
Solicitors LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr. N. Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Pacey, promulgated on 2 March 2018, in which she refused
    the Appellant's appeal against  the  Respondent's  decision  to  refuse
    leave to remain on asylum and human rights grounds, and to  deport  the
    Appellant from the United Kingdom.


 2. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


 3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal failed to consider the
         Appellant's arguments set out at paragraphs 3.9 to 3.20 that he had
         rebutted the presumption that he was a  danger  to  the  community.
         The First-tier Tribunal Judge concludes  at  paragraph  22  of  the
         decision that the presumption is made out  without  addressing  the
         Appellant's arguments or evidence and dismisses the appeal.  It  is
         also arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge, having found that
         the presumption applied, failed to consider Articles 2 and 3 ECHR".


 4. At the outset of the hearing Mr. Bramble  accepted  that  the  decision
    involved the making of material errors of law given the Judge's failure
    to engage with the Appellant's evidence regarding the rebuttal  of  the
    presumption under section 72,  and  her  failure  to  engage  with  the
    Appellant's claim under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.

 5. I stated at the hearing  that  the  decision  involved  the  making  of
    material errors of law.  I set the decision aside and  remitted  it  to
    the First-tier Tribunal.

Error of Law

 6. At [16] the Judge states  that  she  is  turning  to  consider  whether
    "72(9)(b) and (2)" of the 2002 Act are applicable.  She then  sets  out
    parts of section 72.  At [22] she finds as follows:


         "In this case the Appellant was convicted of an offence in  the  UK
         and was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  ten  years.   The
         presumption in ss.2 therefore applies and I accordingly dismiss the
         appeal".


 7. The Judge gives no  consideration  as  to  whether  the  Appellant  has
    rebutted the presumption set out in sub-section (2).  She fails to deal
    with this  at  all.   She  states  that  the  presumption  applies  and
    accordingly dismisses the appeal, but she has failed to consider any of
    the  Appellant's  arguments  as  to  why  that  presumption  should  be
    rebutted.  It appears from the fact that she has set out subsection  72
    that she is aware that the  presumption  is  rebuttable,  but  she  has
    failed to address the Appellant's evidence on this point.   This  is  a
    material error of law.

 8. She then states at [23]:


         "For the sake of completeness I would  add  that  on  the  specific
         claims put forward by the Appellant I would in any case dismiss the
         appeal".


 9. The Judge has not considered the Appellant's claim at all.  Even if  an
    appellant  does  not  rebut  the  presumption  under  section  72,  and
    therefore his asylum appeal cannot succeed, there  remains  his  appeal
    under Articles 2 and 3 ECHR.  The Judge says merely that she would  "in
    any case" dismiss his appeal but makes no findings as to his claim, and
    gives no reasons for why she would  dismiss  it.   She  has  failed  to
    consider the evidence at all.  I find that this is a material error  of
    law.

10. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
    paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
    First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
    party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
    opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  The Judge has made no findings, and has failed to
    address the core of  the  Appellant's  appeal.   Therefore,  given  the
    nature and extent of the fact-finding necessary to enable  this  appeal
    to be remade, and having regard to the  overriding  objective,  I  find
    that it is appropriate to remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal.

Notice of Decision

11. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involves the making of material
    errors of law and I set the decision aside.

12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be  reheard.   The
    venue is to be confirmed following compliance with the direction below.



13. The appeal is not to be listed before Judge Pacey.

Direction

      1. The Appellant has moved to London, and his partner needs to  attend
         as a witness.  The previous hearing was in Nottingham,  but  it  is
         not clear that this is now the appropriate venue.  The  Appellant's
         representatives are directed to inform the Tribunal  which  hearing
         centre  would  be  most  appropriate  for  the  rehearing  of   the
         Appellant's appeal.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date 14 May 2019


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain
