
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/07803/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House, London              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 24th August 2017                       |On 01st September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                   Between

                                  mr M. S.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr P Haywood of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr S Staunton, the Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the Appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough promulgated on 9th  March  2017  in  which  he
    dismissed the Appellant's asylum appeal.  At the Upper Tribunal  appeal
    hearing before me the Appellant has been represented by Mr  Haywood  of
    Counsel and the Secretary of State has been represented by Mr Staunton,
    the Home Office Presenting Officer.

 2. Within the first ground of the Grounds of Appeal it is argued that  the
    judge erred in his analysis of the Appellant's claim regarding  whether
    or not  his  brother  had  stored  or  hidden  weapons  and  ammunition
    belonging to the Taliban at the family home  and  whether  the  Taliban
    thought that he had done so.

 3. In the second Ground of Appeal it is argued that the judge erred in his
    analysis as to whether or not the Appellant would be subject to  forced
    recruitment by the Taliban  and  that  the  judge  had  not  adequately
    considered the expert report from Jared Zadeh, who considered that  the
    Appellant's claim was plausible.

 4. It was further  argued  within  the  Grounds  of  Appeal  that  written
    submissions were submitted in the  skeleton  argument  at  the  hearing
    before the First-tier Judge on the basis that the Appellant's status as
    a returnee and as someone who would be seen as being westernised  would
    put him at risk, and that the Appellant  would  be  at  risk  from  the
    Afghan Authorities as a returnee originating from  a  Taliban  area  of
    control whose brother was a member of the  Taliban  and  who  had  been
    killed as a result. It is said the judge  had  not  adequately  engaged
    with those arguments.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    on 5th July 2017 in which she said the grounds argue there had been  no
    finding as to the minor Appellant's account of his brother having  held
    weapons for the Taliban, but contrary to  Ground  1  that  account  was
    found by the judge at paragraph 39 not to be credible,  but  she  found
    the reasons given were arguably inadequate.  She also  found  that  the
    points made at paragraph  15  regarding  the  flawed  analysis  of  the
    background material and expert evidence as to forced  recruitment  were
    arguable in light of the relatively brief reasoning  at  paragraphs  43
    and 44 of the judge's decision.  She therefore found that  the  grounds
    did disclose an arguable material error of law and  granted  permission
    to appeal on all grounds.

 6. The Rule 24 reply from the Respondent is dated 25th July 2017.   It  is
    argued  that   the   First-tier   Tribunal   Judge   directed   himself
    appropriately in his finding regarding the weapons, based upon a proper
    evaluation of the evidence and that was a finding open to the judge. It
    is argued that the decision did not disclose any error of law and it is
    argued that findings regarding forced recruitment were likewise  sound.



 7. I have also fully heard and taken account of the  submissions  of  both
    legal representatives today.

 8. The judge when making his findings did accept some of  the  Appellant's
    account.  He accepted that the Appellant's brother had  been  recruited
    by the Taliban and undergone training at a madrassa  in  Pakistan,  and
    also accepted the brother was killed  in  an  airstrike  in  or  around
    August 2012 as claimed, at paragraph 37 of the decision.

 9. The judge went on to find that the Appellant  claimed  that  after  his
    brother's death the Taliban had threatened to recruit him forcibly  and
    the evidence was that the  brother  had  lived  away  from  home  at  a
    madrassa in Pakistan for some years, returning home  infrequently,  and
    that following his recruitment by the Taliban he lived with his cohorts
    in the local area only returning home every two  to  three  months  and
    that he had been killed in active service and regarded as a martyr  and
    was a loyal and trusted member of the Taliban and senior members of the
    local Taliban attended the funeral.

10. The judge at paragraph 39 of his judgment went on to find that  against
    that background he could not find it credible that  the  Taliban  would
    form  the  view  that  the  brother  had  somehow  hidden  weapons  and
    ammunition at the family home, nor had  the  appellant  explained  what
    motives of purpose he could possibly have for doing so.  That therefore
    led the judge to reject the account that the Taliban had  come  to  the
    family home seeking return of weapons and ammunitions and to reject the
    account that as the weapons were not returned, that led to the  Taliban
    to try to recruit the Appellant or that  the  failure  to  return  such
    weapons, put the appellant.  However it has been properly  conceded  by
    Mr Staunton on behalf of the Secretary  of  State  the  judge  in  fact
    appears to have somewhat misunderstood the Appellant's account in  that
    regard.

11. The account set out by the judge at paragraph 9  of  his  judgment  was
    that about one or two months after the airstrike when his  brother  was
    killed, members of the Taliban had come to the Appellant's home on  two
    occasions demanding the return of weapons and ammunition that has  been
    given to the brother, and that neither the Appellant nor his mother had
    any knowledge of the same. The Appellant said they  were  told  if  the
    weapons and ammunitions were not returned the Appellant would  have  to
    join the Taliban and therefore arrangements were therefore made to send
    the Appellant out of the country using the services of an agent.

12. As Mr Staunton properly concedes the judge appears to have  taken  that
    as being an account that the brother hid weapons and ammunitions at the
    family home.  That however was not the basis of the evidence  that  was
    given.  The basis of the evidence that was given was that  weapons  and
    ammunition were thought by the Taliban  to  have  been  stored  at  the
    family home that had been given to the brother.  It was not an  account
    that the brother had deliberately hidden weapons from the Taliban, just
    that weapons or ammunition were believed by the Taliban  to  have  been
    stored there and that the Appellant's brother having been killed in  an
    airstrike, the Taliban wanted it's weapons or ammunition  back.   I  do
    therefore  find  that  the  judge  has  sadly  got  the  basis  of  the
    Appellant's claim in that regard wrong and therefore I  find  that  the
    judge has analysed the case regarding the threats made by  the  Taliban
    on the wrong basis.

13. Although that is in effect an error of fact I do  accept  that  in  the
    circumstances of this case that is an error of law given that the error
    is as to a material fact which  can  be  established  by  uncontentious
    evidence for which  the  Appellant  or  his  representatives  were  not
    responsible, but clearly it is material to the judge's consideration as
    to the credibility of the Appellant's  account  regarding  the  threats
    which were said to  have  been  made  by  the  Taliban,  and  therefore
    unfairness has resulted from that Although it is argued by Mr  Staunton
    that it is not material,  I cannot say that the judge would necessarily
    have reached the same conclusion regarding  the  threats  made  by  the
    Taliban or risk of forced recruitment had the judge  properly  analysed
    that aspect of the Appellant's  account,  in  circumstances  where  the
    judge had accepted other parts of the  Appellant's  account,  including
    the fact that his brother had been  recruited  by  the  Taliban.  I  do
    therefore find that it is a material error of law.

14. In respect of the risk of forced recruitment, although  the  judge  has
    considered the issue of forced recruitment between paragraphs 40 and 45
    inclusive of the judgment, the point that is  made  by  Mr  Haywood  on
    behalf of the Appellant is that what was argued before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal as set out within the Appellant's skeleton  argument  was  not
    only the threats by the  Taliban  to  recruit  family  members  if  the
    weapons and/or ammunition were  not  returned,  but  what  was  further
    argued within the skeleton argument at paragraph  14  of  the  skeleton
    argument was a submission that when fighters die or are  wounded,  such
    as the Appellant's brother, they have to be replaced by family members,
    for example a brother, son or nephew and this is a system of 'call ups'
    often relied upon by the Taliban, which  was  said  to  stem  from  the
    Country of Origin Information Report.

15. It was also argued within the skeleton  argument  that  the  expert  Mr
    Jared Zadeh had considered the Appellant's account of his being  sought
    to be recruited by the Taliban to  be  plausible  and  it  was  further
    argued within the  skeleton  argument  that  individuals  perceived  as
    having become westernised stood a risk of being tortured or  killed  on
    the grounds that they had become foreigners or were spies for a western
    country.

16. Although the First-tier Tribunal Judge has actually considered some  of
    the background evidence  and  considered  that  forced  recruitment  of
    children by the Taliban was rare and regarded as exceptional  and  that
    they use more subtle coercive strategies rather than forced recruitment
    and that in areas such as Kapisa province where the Appellant came from
    the Taliban had a large presence and enjoyed popular support  so  there
    was no need for them to forcibly recruit members to make  up  dwindling
    numbers as they are not short of recruits, the judge actually  has  not
    considered the arguments raised by the Appellant as to whether  or  not
    the Appellant would be subject to a 'call up' to  replace  the  brother
    who had been killed.  Nor has the judge dealt with the question  as  to
    whether or not  the  Appellant  would  be  regarded  as  having  become
    westernised, having by that stage been out  of  the  country  for  some
    three years and thereby be at risk upon return.

17. I should point out for completeness that although  Mr  Staunton  relied
    upon the finding at paragraph 58 as to whether or not the Appellant had
    become so westernised that he would  not  be  able  to  integrate  upon
    return and the judge's finding that he had not  become  so  westernised
    that he would be unable to integrate upon return,  the  judge  by  that
    stage had already made his findings regarding the claims for asylum and
    the humanitarian protection and the claims under Article 2 and 3  which
    he dismissed at paragraph 57. At paragraph 58 the Judge was looking  at
    the westernisation argument simply in terms of the Appellant's  private
    life under paragraph 276ADE.  The  judge  has  not  made  any  specific
    findings regarding the westernisation of the  Appellant  regarding  his
    risk upon return as argued within the skeleton argument  and  therefore
    did not deal with that  issue  when  considering  the  risk  on  return
    element.

18. Regrettably therefore when making his findings  in  respect  of  forced
    recruitment the judge also has not adequately dealt with the  arguments
    actually raised by the Appellant or the evidence that was  relied  upon
    by the Appellant regarding the risk of him being called up as a  result
    of the death of his brother and a result of him  being  seen  as  being
    westernised.

19. I therefore do consider that the failure  to  actually  deal  with  the
    arguments raised by the Appellant also sadly in  this  case  does  also
    amount to a material error of law and I cannot say that  the  decision
    reached by the judge would have been the same  irrespective  had  those
    errors not been made.

20. The judge when considering the  question  of  internal  relocation  the
    judge found that it was not unreasonable  for  the  family  to  provide
    support for him in Kabul, given the fact that he had family  living  in
    an adjacent province.  However in that regard  there  was  no  specific
    findings that the Appellant actually had any  relatives  living  within
    that city itself and in that regard I consider that the judge  has  not
    adequately explained his findings at paragraph 53 that it would not  be
    unreasonable to expect  family  members  to  arrange  support  for  the
    Appellant in Kabul simply on the basis that they lived in the  adjacent
    province.  This is not a case where it had been said that he  could  go
    and live with family members in Kabul who could  provide  accommodation
    free of charge or that they could help him obtain employment in  Kabul.
    I do not consider that the judge has really adequately or  sufficiently
    explained why he found that the Appellant could return to Kabul without
    undue hardship and internally relocate there, simply on  the  basis  of
    having relatives in a neighbouring province.

21. Although not a Ground of Appeal I also raised concerns about  paragraph
    44 of the judgment wherein the  judge  when  considering  the  question
    about forced recruitment found that the starting point for the  Taliban
    "as set out in its code of conduct is a prohibition on the  recruitment
    of children.  However I am satisfied the provision  is  breached  on  a
    regular basis".  Although I asked  both  legal  representatives  as  to
    where that particular finding has come from, neither were able to point
    me to any evidence before the First-tier Tribunal Judge of  a  code  of
    conduct for the Taliban which generally prohibited the  recruitment  of
    children.  Although the background evidence he  referred  to  indicated
    that often the  recruitment  of  children  was  seen  as  a  rarity  or
    exceptional, the background evidence he referred to did not refer to  a
    code of conduct which prohibited the recruitment of  children.  If  the
    judge was aware of such a  code  of  conduct,  he  has  not  adequately
    explained where that evidence was to be found.

22. Regrettably therefore  I  do  find  that  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Hembrough does contain material  errors  of  law  and  I
    therefore  set  aside  the  decision  of  First-tier   Tribunal   Judge
    Hembrough.

23. Given the nature of the errors made I do not consider that the case can
    simply be re-decided and reheard by the  Upper  Tribunal  on  a  narrow
    point and I find that there would be  a  substantial  amount  of  fact-
    finding required again in respect of the Appellant's risk upon  return.
    I therefore do find that given the amount of fact-finding required that
    it is appropriate for the case to be remitted back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Hembrough.

24. The First-tier Tribunal did order anonymity and  it  seems  appropriate
    given  the  nature  of  this  case  that  the  anonymity  direction  be
    maintained and I therefore do order anonymity.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court otherwise  directs,  the  Appellant  is
thereby granted anonymity.  No report of these  proceedings  shall  directly
or indirectly identify him or any member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 31st August 2017
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty
