
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07563/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 MAY 2019                       |On 31 MAY 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     DA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Sills, instructed by Freedom Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. By a decision which I promulgated on 8 March 2019,  I  found  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such that its decision fell to  be
    set aside. My reasons and consequent directions were as follows:

         "1.  The appellant was born in 1987 and is a male citizen of  Iraq.
         By a decision promulgated on 1 August 2018, the First-tier Tribunal
         determined the appellant's appeal against  the  refusal  of  asylum
         issued by the Secretary of State on 23 May  2018.  The  appeal  was
         allowed on humanitarian protection grounds but otherwise dismissed.
         The appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper  Tribunal.
         He argues that the First-tier  Tribunal  should  have  allowed  his
         appeal on asylum grounds.

         2.   At the initial hearing at Bradford  on  27  February  2019,  I
         found that the First-tier Tribunal had erred in law such  that  its
         decision fell to be set aside. The appellant claims asylum  on  the
         basis that he is an atheist and would campaign as such if  returned
         to Iraq. He is a Kurd  who  has  lived  in  IKR  but  both  parties
         acknowledge that he would be removed to Baghdad and, being  without
         a CSID card or the means to obtain a replacement, he  would  be  at
         risk in Baghdad before he could arrange to exercise internal flight
         to the IKR. Is  unclear  from  the  judge's  decision  whether  she
         believed that the appellant could relocate to the IKR;  she  states
         at [25] that he cannot but elsewhere makes  a  number  of  comments
         regarding the attitudes towards  atheism  in  Kurdistan,  including
         commenting that  being  an  atheist  in  the  IKR  may  be  'easy.'
         Moreover, the judge appears to have relied [20] upon a news article
         referred to in a Country of Origin Information Request (COIR) which
         suggests that as many  as  '32%'  of  the  population  of  Iraq  is
         atheist. It is not clear what  weight  judge  has  placed  on  this
         surprising statistic. I  find  that  the  judge  has  not  properly
         considered risk to the appellant as a campaigning atheist  in  Iraq
         and as an apostate from the religion of Islam. She has not  engaged
         with the reasons why the appellant may refrain from campaigning for
         atheism in Iraq (see HJ (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31).  I  set  aside  the
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal. I am grateful to Mr Sills, who
         appeared for the appellant, for drafting directions in  preparation
         for the resumed hearing which will take place Bradford before me on
         a date to be fixed. Those directions have now been agreed  by  both
         parties and, subject to minor amendments, also by me. I set out the
         directions below.

         Notice of Decision

         The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is  set  aside.  The  Upper
         Tribunal shall remake the decision following the resumed hearing at
         Bradford before Upper Tribunal Judge Lane on a date to be fixed  (2
         hours; Kurdish Sorani interpreter)




         The following directions shall apply:

         Matters not in dispute:

         1.   The Appellant is entitled to humanitarian  protection  on  the
         basis that he is at risk of destitution due  to  his  inability  to
         obtain a CSID card.  He is unable safely to enter the IKR.

         2.   The Appellant is an atheist.

         3.   The Appellant is an openly campaigning atheist in the UK.

         4.   The Appellant would  continue  to  be  an  openly  campaigning
         atheist in Iraq

         5.   The only reason the  Appellant  may  not  live  as  an  openly
         campaigning atheist in Iraq would be his fear of persecution.

         Issues to be determined  by  the  Upper  Tribunal  at  the  resumed
         hearing

         1.   Does the Appellant have a well-founded fear of persecution  as
         an openly campaigning atheist in Iraq?

         Directions for the resumed hearing in the Upper Tribunal

         1.   The Secretary of State shall  notify  the  Upper  Tribunal  in
         writing  within  14  days   of   receiving   the   error   of   law
         decision/directions if he wishes to  cross-examine  the  Appellant.
         If Secretary of State fails to notify the Upper Tribunal within  14
         days, he will not be permitted to cross-examine  the  Appellant  at
         the resumed hearing.

         2.   Both parties may file at the Upper Tribunal and serve on  each
         other additional evidence going to the issue  in  dispute  no  less
         than 5 days before the resumed hearing.

         Other Matters

         3.   The Respondent is invited to consider whether to  continue  to
         contest Appellant's asylum appeal. If the Respondent decides not to
         continue to contest the appeal  he  may  seek  to  agree  with  the
         appellant a  draft  consent  order  disposing  of  the  proceedings
         pursuant to paragraph 39, Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
         2008."

 2. At  the  resumed  hearing,  the  appellant  produced  fresh  background
    material in the form of a supplementary bundle. Of particular relevance
    is a Query Response produced by  the  European  Asylum  Support  Office
    (EASO) and dated  10  April  2018  which  considers  atheism  in  Iraq,
    including Kurdistan. This document records  that  in  Iraq  atheism  is
    equated with blasphemy and apostasy. The  report  records  a  story  in
    'Your Middle East' from 2014 of a 16-year-old student  from  Erbil  who
    was tortured by the police having declared himself an  atheist.  It  is
    true that the  background  material  does  not  provide  many  specific
    examples such as that but that is, perhaps, not surprising given that a
    strong theme emerging from the background  material  is  that  atheists
    take rigorous steps to conceal  their  opinions  from  the  authorities
    throughout Iraq, including Kurdistan. Al-Monitor is reported as  having
    stated that, 'there are many Iraqi websites and  blogs  that  cater  to
    atheists, but they all keep their membership lists secret for  fear  of
    being persecuted and killed by extremist religious militias  in  groups
    or even by ordinary citizens in the street.' The threat, therefore,  to
    atheists appears to come from both state and non-state  actors.  It  is
    also clear that those who are atheists can only live in Iraq safely  by
    concealing their atheist activities and opinions and they do so because
    openly expressing such views would  expose  them  to  a  real  risk  of
    persecution or Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment.

 3. There is a further issue. The appellant does not possess a  CSID  card.
    The appellant would, by operation of the Secretary of  State's  current
    policy, be returned to Baghdad. The background material indicates that,
    in addition to the usual problems in obtaining a card  which  arise  in
    cases involving returnees (see AA (Iraq) [2017] EWCA Civ 944),  the  US
    State Department recorded in 2016 that cards would only  be  issued  to
    those who declared their religion to  be  Christian,  Sabaean-Mandaean,
    Yezidi and Muslim; there appears to be no provision at all for  a  card
    to be issued to a declared atheist.

 4. Mr Diwnycz, who appeared for the Secretary of State, submitted that the
    case turned upon whether the  appellant  is  a  proselytising  atheist.
    However, that submission appears to ignore paragraph [4] of the  agreed
    directions (see above) and the clear evidence that  has  been  produced
    which shows that the appellant would be permitted no public  expression
    of his atheist beliefs because of a fear of persecution; any risk would
    not be confined to the proselytising of atheism.

 5. In the light of the agreed facts upon which  the  resumed  hearing  has
    proceeded considering the evidence  which  was  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal together with the new background material produced before  the
    Upper Tribunal, I  find  that  the  appellant,  a  genuinely  committed
    atheist, would, if returned to Iraq, take steps to conceal his  atheism
    solely in order to avoid the risk of suffering persecution at the hands
    of state actors or Article 3 ECHR ill-treatment at the  hands  of  non-
    state actors. In addition, it is pointless  to  speculate  whether  the
    appellant could obtain a CSID card; I find that he would be  unable  to
    complete the application for such a card without dissembling as to  his
    lack of belief in any of the religions recognised by the  Iraqi  state.
    He would, therefore, as a sole male  Kurdish  returnee  in  Baghdad  be
    exposed to a real risk of harm because he would not have  the  required
    card nor could he obtain one. On the particular facts of  this  appeal,
    the appellant's appeal against the Secretary of State's refusal to give
    him international protection is allowed.



Notice of Decision

    The appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 28 May 2018 is allowed on asylum grounds and human rights grounds
    (Article 3 ECHR)


Signed                              Date 28 MAY 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

