
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07969/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 8th October 2018 and 4th March    |On 12th March 2019                   |
|2019                                 |                                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 nazhad [r]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr J Greer of Counsel instructed by Fisher Stone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer - 8th
October 2018
     Mrs R Pettersen, Home Office Presenting Officer - 4th March 2019


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Bradshaw
    made following a hearing at Bradford on 23rd January 2018.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who arrived in the UK  clandestinely
    on 29th August 2015 when he claimed asylum.   He  was  refused  on  4th
    August 2017.  The appellant was born and  lived  in  Kirkuk  and  is  a
    Muslim of Kurdish ethnicity.  He claimed to have been in the  Peshmerga
    from August 2011 to 2015 and to  have  been  involved  in  the  Kurdish
    Democratic Party.  He said that he feared a return to Iraq  because  he
    had been  involved  in  fighting  against  ISIS  and  was  subsequently
    threatened whilst in Kirkuk by a group linked with ISIS.

 3. The judge found the appellant's account not to be credible.   She  said
    that he had failed to claim asylum at the first safe opportunity.   She
    gave a number of examples, from paragraphs 33 to 41 of  inconsistencies
    in his account of having been targeted.  She found  that  even  if  his
    claim was accepted he could reasonably relocate to the IKR applying  AA
    (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 where his family now live.   He
    speaks Kurdish and a little Arabic and has experience of  work  in  the
    construction industry.  He has an ID card and a family card  and  could
    obtain a CSID.  He was in regular contact with his family who presently
    live in the IKR and who could assist him.

 4. With respect to Article 8 she wrote as follows:

         "So far as any family life rights are concerned the appellant  does
         not meet the Rules and it was not argued  that  he  does.   Private
         life rights were not argued before  me  in  the  appeal.   I  heard
         evidence about the claimed relationship between the  appellant  and
         Ms  [K].   Both  were   vague   and   contradictory   about   their
         relationship, when they met and when  the  relationship  developed.
         Both talked of being in love and having a genuine relationship  but
         although both could recall when they first met neither could recall
         exactly when that was and they  were  contradictory  about  when  a
         romantic relationship began, she said after two days and he said it
         was some six or seven months later.  They cannot and  do  not  live
         together  because  he  was  restricted  in   his   asylum   support
         accommodation but she said he comes round every day and has met her
         family.  She has her name tattooed on her chest.   However  I  find
         that  the  evidence  of  a  genuine  relationship  is   scant   and
         unconvincing.  They produced little or no evidence of a genuine and
         subsisting relationship at this time.  Her pregnancy is  not  alone
         evidence of a relationship for  the  purposes  of  Article  8.   Mr
         Holmes argued that it cannot be expected  of  an  EEA  national  to
         relocate to Iraq and a different culture but if the relationship is
         genuine that is the appellant and Ms [K]'s choice."

 5. On that basis she dismissed the appeal.

The Grounds of Application

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to give adequate reasons for concluding that the appellant's
    credibility was flawed.  Second that  her  conclusions  in  respect  of
    sufficiency of protection were deficient and third that she had  failed
    to properly consider Article 8.

 7. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Andrew for the reasons stated
    in the grounds on 5th March 2018.



Submissions

 8. Mr Greer relied on his grounds.  He submitted that it was incumbent  on
    the judge to put to the appellant her concerns.  She had criticised him
    for a lack of detail in his account and had held it against him that he
    had claimed to have been involved in the Peshmerga for four  years  and
    yet only to have been  involved  in  fighting  once.   Furthermore  her
    observation that the fact that the battle which he had referred to  was
    in the public domain damaged his credibility was perverse.

 9. Second the judge was quite wrong to state  at  paragraph  44  that  the
    authorities in Iraq would be able and willing to offer him  protection.
    Third her assessment of family life was flawed.

10. Mr Tan defended the determination observing that even if any criticisms
    of the judge's credibility findings were made  out  it  was  immaterial
    since the finding that he could relocate to the IKR  was  unchallenged.
    He also submitted that it was open to the judge to reject the  evidence
    of the relationship between the  appellant  and  his  partner  for  the
    reasons which she gave.

Consideration of whether there is a Material Error of Law

11. There is no error in respect of the judge's consideration of the asylum
    claim.  It was not incumbent on the judge to put each and every concern
    which she had to the appellant.  She was entitled  to  comment  on  the
    lack of detail in the account and to observe that since the  battle  he
    referred to was in the public domain the fact that he was able to refer
    to it did not mean that he was present.  She set out in some  detail  a
    number of inconsistencies in his account.  It was open to her  to  find
    it implausible that the appellant claimed to have  been  involved  with
    the Peshmerga for four years and yet only  to  have  been  involved  in
    action once.  Moreover despite the threats to him the family stayed  in
    Kirkuk.  Moreover even if his account was credible there was no  reason
    to think that that the group would be interested in him now.

12. Most importantly there is no challenge in the grounds  to  the  judge's
    conclusion that the appellant could reasonably and safely  relocate  to
    the IKR and join his family there.

13. I am however persuaded that the judge erred  in  her  consideration  of
    whether the appellant enjoyed family life in the UK.  There was  strong
    evidence  that  he  did,  not  least  evidence  of  a  pregnancy.    An
    explanation was given for the couple's decision to  live  apart,  which
    was that the appellant was not able to live with his partner because he
    was restricted to his asylum support accommodation.  However  the  oral
    evidence was that they saw each other daily.  There was no challenge to
    the evidence that his partner had tattooed the appellant's name  on  to
    her body.  In these circumstances the judge ought  to  have  considered
    the Article 8 claim advanced.

14. The appellant produced a birth certificate showing that  the  baby  was
    born on 25th June 2018.  The appellant is named as the father and there
    are two addresses for him, one the  partner's  address  and  the  other
    presumably the address given to him by  the  asylum  support  team.   I
    heard oral evidence from the appellant's partner [MK].  She is a  Czech
    national who has been in the  UK  since  May  2012.   Her  English  was
    limited but I am satisfied that she understood the questions which were
    put to her.  She reiterated that she remained in  a  relationship  with
    the appellant and that he continued to visit her every day.  She  lives
    with her parents.  They came to the UK in 2010 and initially her father
    worked.  Her mother however is disabled.  From her description it seems
    as though she may have had a stroke.  Her evidence was that her  father
    worked for about three years, on something to do with  aeroplanes,  but
    had to stop when her mother became ill and  half  her  body  no  longer
    worked.  The family now live on  benefits,  child  tax  credits  and  a
    carer's allowance.  Ms [K] herself went to college for two  years  when
    she came to the UK and then worked part-time in a shop for two or three
    hours a day.  For the last three years she has not worked.

15. She was unclear about what her parents' status in the UK was.  She said
    that she thought her father had some kind of  paper  but  she  did  not
    think that they had residence cards.   She  herself  did  not  want  to
    return to the Czech Republic and certainly did not want to go  to  Iraq
    with the appellant because she was scared.  She wanted to stay with her
    partner and her parents and her three sisters.

16. At the conclusion of the evidence it became  clear  that  it  would  be
    essential to discover what, if any, the  appellant's  partner's  status
    was in the UK.  It would not  appear  that  she  is  exercising  treaty
    rights here but it could be that she is a family member of a person who
    has retained  the  right  of  residence  under  Regulation  10  of  the
    Immigration (EEA) Regulations 2016.  Further enquiries will need to  be
    made and further evidence taken from Ms [K]'s father.  His  status  and
    Ms [K]'s status have direct bearing on whether  the  appellant's  child
    could be entitled to British citizenship.

17. Accordingly, by agreement, this matter was set down  for  rehearing  on
    27th November 2018.

The Rehearing

18. Following an adjournment request made by the appellant's solicitors for
    more time  to  obtain  the  necessary  documentation  this  matter  was
    postponed but came before me on 4th March 2019.

19. At the commencement of the hearing Mr Greer confirmed that  he  had  no
    documentation which he could place before the Tribunal in  relation  to
    the status of the appellant's partner.  He did however seek to rely  on
    documentation produced by his instructing solicitors filed  before  the
    hearing which includes statements from the appellant and  his  partner,
    objective material relating to Iraq and the Czech Republic, and a  copy
    of an email sent to the Visa Department of the Ministry of  Affairs  of
    the Czech Republic and their reply.

20. I heard oral  evidence  from  the  appellant  who  confirmed  that  the
    contents of his witness statement were true.  He said that he continued
    to be in a relationship with his partner. They were not  able  to  live
    together as he was formally in asylum accommodation but she had her own
    flat and he spent most of his time there.  He helped to look after  the
    baby all the time.

21. He had contact with his family in Iraq, speaking to them about  once  a
    month.  He did not know where his CSID card was because he gave  it  to
    the Home Office together with the ID documents  that  he  had  when  he
    arrived in the UK.  If he needed to apply for a  new  ID  he  would  be
    anxious about being questioned by the authorities about his  activities
    with the Peshmerga.  He did not know whether it would be  possible  for
    his partner or his son to get permission to live in Iraq  but  even  if
    they did, the situation was too dangerous there.  His partner could not
    speak Kurdish Sorani.  He did not think that he could live in the Czech
    Republic as he had  no  travel  documents  to  allow  him  to  make  an
    application for a visa but in any event, he did not speak Czech.

22. His partner, in  her  witness  statement,  confirmed  that  the  couple
    remained close.  She would not be able to go to Iraq with the appellant
    if he were removed there and she did not know how he  could  live  with
    her in the Czech Republic.

Submissions

23. Mrs Pettersen submitted that the appellant  could  conduct  his  family
    life either in the Czech Republic or in Iraq.  On his own evidence  the
    Home Office had sufficient documentation to allow him to  approach  the
    Iraqi Consulate for a passport or travel document and he  could  either
    then use it to travel to Iraq or to apply  for  a  visa  to  the  Czech
    Republic.

24. Mr Greer acknowledged that this case could only be put on the basis  of
    an application outside the Immigration Rules since he  could  not  show
    that the appellant's son was a qualifying child.  He did however submit
    that there would be very significant obstacles to the family relocating
    to Iraq because even  if  the  appellant  could  obtain  the  necessary
    documentation  his  family  members  could  not.   Neither  could  they
    reasonably be expected to go to the Czech Republic where the  appellant
    would face hostility as a Muslim in addition to practical  difficulties
    being admitted there.

Findings and Conclusions

25. This matter was adjourned on the last occasion in  order  to  give  the
    appellant the opportunity to establish that his partner was settled  in
    the UK.  Mr Greer acknowledged that he was not in a position to be able
    to produce any such documentation.  Accordingly, he accepted  that  the
    appellant's child could not be shown to be British.  The  only  way  in
    which this appeal could succeed  is  whether  he  could  bring  himself
    within paragraph 276ADE(vi) or  be  allowed  to  remain  on  Article  8
    grounds outside the Rules.

26. It is clear that the appellant has a number of documents including  his
    CSID and driving licence.  He also is in contact with  his  family  who
    live in the IKR.  On the findings of Judge Bradshaw, and  confirmed  by
    the evidence in his witness statement, he would be  in  a  position  to
    obtain a  CSID.   I  accept  that  the  position  would  be  much  more
    challenging for his child whose birth has not been registered in  Iraq.
    It therefore would be  extremely  challenging  for  the  family  to  be
    expected to all return together, although no doubt in  due  course  the
    appellant could provide the necessary documentation for them once he is
    re-established in the IKR.  He would have the assistance of his family.



27.  Fortunately  there  is  an  alternative   and   more   straightforward
    alternative.  The email from the Visa Department  of  the  Ministry  of
    Foreign Affairs of the Czech Republic reads as follows:

         "Residency on the territory of the Czech Republic falls  under  the
         competence of the Ministry of the Interior and  you  will  be  best
         advised  to  address  your  query  there.   However  based  on  our
         knowledge of the legislature on practice it is  hardly  conceivable
         to accept and decide favourably on an application of  an  applicant
         whose identity cannot  be  determined.   Should  the  person  under
         question be in possession  of  documents  proving  his  status  and
         identity, and primarily his long term legal stay, in the UK, could,
         however, provide some starting point.  Iraqi nationals are required
         to file their visa and  residence  applications  at  our  Consulate
         General in Erbil unless they reside abroad based  on  a  long  term
         residence permit".

28. The appellant is not  a  person  who  cannot  determine  his  identity.
    Neither is he someone who  could  not  return  to  Erbil  to  file  his
    application.   There  are  no  serious   practical   difficulties,   in
    principle, to his obtaining a visa.  I note the information provided by
    the appellant's solicitors in relation  to  hate  crime  in  the  Czech
    Republic towards Muslims and refugees but most of  the  evidence  dates
    from 2015 and in any event, there is no case law which establishes that
    the appellant would face any serious obstacle in  establishing  himself
    there with his Czech partner.  Nor does the evidence now presented show
    that  the  appellant  himself  individually  would   face   significant
    obstacles. Indeed, Mr Greer did not press the point.

29. The appellant cannot meet the requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules
    with respect to Article 8.  He  does  not  enjoy  family  life  with  a
    British national or a person who is settled here and his child is not a
    qualifying child. He does enjoy private life  here,  and  his  familial
    relationships are a part of  that  private  life,  but  they  could  be
    continued either in the IKR or, more likely, the Czech Republic.

30. The appellant has no basis of stay in the UK.  He entered clandestinely
    and made an asylum claim  which  has  been  found  to  be  on  a  false
    prospectus.  The factors set out in Section 117B of the  2002  Act  are
    against  him.   He  speaks  little   English,    is   not   financially
    independent, and his private life has been established at a  time  when
    his immigration status has been precarious.

31. The maintenance of effective immigration  controls  is  in  the  public
    interest and, taking into account all of the above, it follows that  it
    would be proportionate for the appellant to be removed.

Notice of Decision

32. The original judge did not err in law in respect of the asylum  appeal.
    Her decision stands.  Her  decision  was  set  aside  on  human  rights
    grounds.  It is  re-made  as  follows.   The  human  rights  appeal  is
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


[pic]
Signed                              Date 11 March 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor

