
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                    Appeal Number:
PA/07302/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                    | Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 11th December 2019                   | On 20th December 2019              |
|                                        |                                    |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MARTIN

                                   Between

                                    T V N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford (instructed by Turpin & Miller LLP)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is an appeal to the Upper Tribunal by the Appellant in relation to
    a Decision and Reasons of First-tier Tribunal Judge Row promulgated  on
    25th September 2019 shortly after a hearing which took  place  on  19th
    September 2019.

 2. The Appellant in this case is a Vietnamese national who  turned  19  on
    1st June this year and therefore was just 19 when the judge  heard  the
    appeal.  However, he arrived in the UK two years earlier, when he would
    have been 17.  He claimed to have been trafficked and ill-treated,  all
    of which was rejected by the judge.  The judge  noted  that  there  had
    been a negative Decision from the National Referral Mechanism and while
    the judge referred to there having been a further referral,  there  was
    no new information before him, the Presenting  Officer  was  unable  to
    assist and the appellant's representative did not seek  an  adjournment
    on that basis.  So in that regard the judge cannot be criticised.

 3. The judge did go on to consider an expert report but rejected it on the
    basis that the expert had accepted everything said  by  the  Appellant,
    which was contradicted by what he had told the NRM as to the reason for
    his coming to the UK and the means by which he did so,  which  did  not
    involve  trafficking.   The  judge  noted  at  paragraph  34  that  the
    Appellant was an adult male in  good  health  with  family  support  in
    Vietnam and found that he would not be at any risk on return.

 4. At first blush, a reading the Decision and Reasons suggests that it  is
    a fair assessment of the evidence as recited therein.  However, it  has
    been pointed out by Ms Radford that in fact  there  is  other  evidence
    that the judge wholly failed to deal with.  In particular his reference
    to the Appellant being a young healthy adult was not borne out  by  the
    bundle of evidence provided to the judge which included a letter from a
    very experienced psychotherapist who referred to very real difficulties
    with the appellant's memory, his sleep pattern, an inability to recall,
    his waking from nightmares, a blankness  of  mind  and  a  mistrust  of
    people.  Not only would that have impacted  on  his  abilities  at  the
    hearing, it would clearly impact upon his ability to recount  what  had
    happened to him and would have suggested perhaps  that  he  was  not  a
    young healthy adult male as the Judge found.

 5. To have  assessed  the  Appellant's  credibility  without  taking  into
    account his particular vulnerabilities as set out in that  letter,  the
    judge has made an error of law.  His credibility is at the heart of his
    case.  The error of law is thus material.  The  Appellant  should  have
    been treated as a vulnerable witness, not just at  the  hearing  as  he
    clearly was, but in the assessment of his evidence.

 6. A further matter which has arisen subsequently, and which  will  be  of
    relevance when the matter is to be reheard, is the fact  that  the  NRM
    has now made a positive reasonable grounds Decision.  A final  Decision
    is still awaited and it will be sensible for  that  to  be  dealt  with
    prior to the matter being reheard.

 7. As I am setting the Decision and Reasons  aside  in  its  entirety  and
    credibility needs to be  redecided,  it  is  appropriate,  particularly
    given the fact that we are now waiting  for  the  NRM,  for  it  to  be
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.  The hearing centre where  it  was
    heard before was Birmingham.  I set aside the Decision of Judge Row  in
    its entirety and I allow the appeal to the extent that it  is  remitted
    to the First-tier Tribunal for a full rehearing  on  all  matters.   It
    should be listed only after the NRM have concluded their reporting.   A
    Vietnamese interpreter will be required.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed [pic]                            Date 16 December 2019


Upper Tribunal Judge Martin


