
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Number:
PA/07859/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 16th April 2019                       |On 8th May 2019                    |
|                                         |                                   |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS

                                   Between

                                  Mr Y.A.M.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms Smith, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr Tan, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Iran  born  on  27th  August  1987.   The
    Appellant entered the UK illegally on 20th January  2016.   Thereafter,
    he has an extensive immigration history with  appeals  passing  through
    both the First and Upper-tier Tribunal.  For the purpose of the  issues
    before me the Appellant's recent appeal came before Judge of the First-
    tier Tribunal Hudson sitting at Manchester on  7th  January  2019.   At
    that hearing the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 2. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal  on  5th
    February 2019.  On 18th February 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge  Saffer
    granted permission to appeal.  Judge  Saffer  considered  that  it  was
    arguable that the judge may have misunderstood the Appellant's evidence
    as alleged and that this may amount to a material error  of  law  given
    its adverse impact on credibility which is at the heart of the  appeal.



 3. It is on that basis that  the  appeal  comes  before  me  to  determine
    whether or not there is a material error of law in the decision of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant  appears  by  his  instructed
    Counsel, Ms Smith.  Ms Smith is very familiar with  this  matter.   She
    appeared before the First-tier Tribunal and she is the  author  of  the
    Grounds of Appeal.  The Secretary of State appears by his  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Mr Tan.  The Appellant has previously been  granted
    anonymity within these proceedings.  No application  is  made  to  vary
    that order and the anonymity direction will remain in force.

Submission/Discussion

 4. Ms Smith relies on the grounds as pleaded.  She points out to  me  that
    there are three grounds.  Firstly, that there has been a failure by the
    judge to have any or any proper regard to the evidence,  secondly  that
    the judge has made an unreasonable finding that the First-tier Tribunal
    Judge's assessment at paragraph 17 that there is a reasonable degree of
    likelihood that the Appellant and K would have engaged  in  a  plot  to
    threaten a Mullah, whose political views were contrary to their own, is
    materially flawed, and thirdly, that there has been a failure  to  take
    into account a  number  of  relevant  considerations.   She  starts  by
    addressing the first ground.  She takes  me  to  paragraph  15  of  the
    decision.   She  submits  that  the  judge  has  mischaracterised   the
    Appellant's account therein and that is material because an  inaccurate
    account cannot in any way be reconciled with the  account  recorded  in
    the Appellant's screening interview.  Further, she strongly  criticises
    paragraph 16 of the judge's decision where the judge states "he  simply
    told me he was a Kurd", pointing out that this statement demonstrates a
    failure to have any regard to material evidence that the Appellant gave
    in re-examination.

 5. Secondly, she turns to the contended unreasonable finding made  by  the
    judge submitting that on the Appellant's evidence K was a member  of  a
    Kurdish political group, Komala, and that the Appellant himself clearly
    sympathised with the party's cause.   She  contends  that  the  country
    evidence before the judge established that Komala is politically active
    against the Iranian Republic.  She contends that in the many  years  it
    has been active it has not achieved  its  aim  and  those  involved  in
    activities connected to the party have been detained and seriously ill-
    treated by the authorities  and  yet  members  continue  to  engage  in
    activities.  She submits against such a background it cannot reasonably
    be said that the Appellant's  account  of  threatening  the  Mullah  is
    implausible.

 6. Thirdly, she turns  to  the  failure  to  take  into  account  relevant
    considerations.  She refers me to paragraph 6 of the Grounds of  Appeal
    and paragraphs (a) to (e) therein which sets these out.  She reminds me
    that the Appellant is  illiterate,  wholly  uneducated  and  has  never
    attended school and had worked as a shepherd.   It  is  her  contention
    that the way the Appellant gives his account of  events  is  reasonably
    likely to be affected by such considerations.

 7. I have given due consideration to the submissions set  out  therein  at
    paragraphs 6(a)-(e) without reciting them herein.  I note that Ms Smith
    submits  that  the  arguments  that  she  puts  go  far   beyond   mere
    disagreement with the findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.

 8. In brief response Mr Tan firstly  takes  me  to  paragraph  15  of  the
    decision, pointing out that at no stage did the judge  say  the  Mullah
    had been beaten up by the Appellant and that the arguments put  forward
    by Ms Smith amount to mere  semantics.   So  far  as  paragraph  16  is
    concerned he submits that nothing really  turns  upon  this,  that  the
    Appellant has said that he is not a political person and that his  only
    involvement was  as  a  Kurd.   He  points  out  that  the  Appellant's
    testimony is that he was aware that he was asked to be involved  in  an
    attack which could put him at  great  risk  and  he  enquires  why  the
    Appellant would risk everything to get involved.  The judge  had  asked
    this question which is to be found at paragraph 16 of the decision  and
    the response he received was very vague.  Secondly,  he  turns  to  the
    ground relating to unreasonable findings and points out that  paragraph
    17 has to be viewed in the context of the judge's findings at paragraph
    16 and that this issue turns  very  much  on  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony.

 9. So far as the third ground is concerned and the issue which begins with
    the contention that the illiteracy of the  Appellant  is  an  important
    factor, he starts by reminding me that  there  is  nowhere  within  the
    documentation to say that the Appellant is  unable  to  understand  and
    answer questions and that in paragraph 20 of the decision, he  submits,
    the judge was  correct  to  say  that  the  account  was  evolving  and
    therefore not consistent.  In particular, he asked me to  consider  the
    answers  given  at  the  asylum  interview  to  questions  63  to   78.



The Law

10.  Areas  of  legislative  interpretation,  failure  to  follow   binding
    authority or to distinguish it with adequate reasons, ignoring material
    considerations  by  taking  into  account  immaterial   considerations,
    reaching irrational conclusions  on  fact  or  evaluation  or  to  give
    legally inadequate reasons for the decision and procedural  unfairness,
    constitute errors of law.

11. It is not an arguable error of law for an Immigration Judge to give too
    little weight or too much weight to a factor, unless  irrationality  is
    alleged.  Nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge to fail to
    deal with every  factual  issue  of  argument.   Disagreement  with  an
    Immigration Judge's factual conclusion, his appraisal of  the  evidence
    or assessment of credibility, or his evaluation of risk does  not  give
    rise to an error of law.  Unless an Immigration Judge's  assessment  of
    proportionality is arguable as being  completely  wrong,  there  is  no
    error of law, nor is it an error of law for an Immigration Judge not to
    have regard to evidence of events arising after his decision or for him
    to have taken  no  account  of  evidence  which  was  not  before  him.
    Rationality is a very high threshold and a conclusion is not irrational
    just because some alternative explanation has been rejected or  can  be
    said to be possible.  Nor is it necessary to  consider  every  possible
    alternative  inference  consistent   with   truthfulness   because   an
    Immigration Judge concludes that the story is untrue.  If  a  point  of
    evidence of significance has been ignored or misunderstood, that  is  a
    failure to take into account a material consideration.

Findings on Error of Law

12. This is a case that turns  very  largely  on  the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony.  A proper approach to credibility  will  require
    an assessment of the evidence and of  the  general  claim.   In  asylum
    claims relevant factors would be the internal consistency of the claim;
    the inherent plausibility of the claim;  and  the  consistency  of  the
    claim with external factors of the  sort  typically  found  in  country
    guidance.  I accept that it is theoretically correct  that  a  claimant
    need do no more than state his claim but that claim would still need to
    be examined for consistent and inherent plausibility.  In nearly  every
    case external information against which the claim could be checked will
    be available.

13. In this case much of the manner  in  which  the  judge  criticises  the
    decision turns on the way that the Appellant  gave  his  account,  i.e.
    structure and not the content.  I agree with the submission made by  Ms
    Smith that  the  judge's  findings  do  not  take  this  into  account,
    particularly bearing in mind that the manner in the way  the  Appellant
    phrases his answers are not put in the way that  a  more  educated  man
    might have structured or phrased them.  I accept the  Appellant's  lack
    of education and whilst noting Mr Tan's comment that this has not  been
    raised as an issue, it is quite simply a fact which should form part of
    the judge's consideration process.  The amount of weight that  a  judge
    would give to it is for him/her to determine on hearing the evidence.

14. Further, the judge has made adverse findings on the Appellant's account
    of  his  attendance  at  the  mosque  and  repeatedly  refers  to   the
    Appellant's account being one where "his friends set upon a cleric with
    weapons in the middle of  the  night".   I  have  cross-referenced  the
    questions in the Appellant's asylum interview with the findings of  the
    judge and I accept that there is possibly a mischaracterisation by  the
    judge of the Appellant's account and that this is material because such
    an account cannot in any way be reconciled with the account recorded in
    the Appellant's screening interview.  Further, at paragraph 16 Ms Smith
    has emphasised that the judge merely by  stating  that  "the  Appellant
    told me he was a Kurd" demonstrates a failure to have any regard to the
    material evidence that the Appellant gave in re-examination and she has
    set out in the Grounds of Appeal the questions and  answers  that  were
    posed.

15. Looking at this matter in the round I am satisfied that the submissions
    consequently do not amount to mere  disagreement  and  that  there  are
    material errors of law in the manner in which the  judge  has  assessed
    the evidence and made findings with regard to the  credibility  of  the
    Appellant's testimony.  In such circumstances the correct  approach  is
    to set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and to remit
    the matter back to be reheard before another Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Decision and Directions

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains a  material  error  of  law
and is set aside.  Directions are given hereinafter  for  the  rehearing  of
this matter.

 1) On finding that there is a material error of law in the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal Judge the decision is set aside and the  appeal  is
    remitted to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Manchester on the  first
    available date 28 days hence with an ELH of three hours.

 2) The appeal is to be before any Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal  other
    than Immigration Judge Hudson.


 3) None of the findings of fact are to stand.


 4) That there be leave to either party to file and serve a bundle of  such
    further subjective and/or objective evidence upon which  they  seek  to
    rely at least seven days prior to the restored hearing.


 5) That a Kurdish (Sorani) interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

The Appellant has previously been  granted  anonymity.   No  application  is
made to vary that order and the anonymity direction will remain in place.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 29th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris

