
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/ 07706/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 15 February 2019                           |On 20 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     AK
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Faryl, instructed by VIP Legal
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, AK, is a citizen of Iran whose date  of  birth  has  not
    been established. The entered the  United  Kingdom  in  December  2011,
    clandestinely. He was served with a notice as an  illegal  entrant.  He
    claimed asylum and, by decision dated  6  June  2018,  he  was  refused
    international protection by the respondent. He appealed to  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (Judge NMK Lawrence) which, in a decision promulgated  on
    16 August 2018, dismissed the appeal. The appellant now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing  at  Manchester  on  15  February  2019,  I  was
    assisted by that both advocates. They told me that  at  the  First-tier
    Tribunal decision could not stand and that the grounds  of  appeal  had
    been established. Having read the decision of the First-tier  Tribunal,
    I agree. I find that that each of the grounds of appeal have been  made
    out and that the judge's decision is vitiated by reason of  his  flawed
    analysis of credibility. I set aside the decision. None of the findings
    of fact shall stand. There will need to be a new fact-finding  exercise
    which is better conducted  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  I  therefore
    return the appeal to the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  that  tribunal  to
    remake the decision.

Notice of Decision

 3. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal promulgated on 16  august  2018
    is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall stand. The  appeal  is
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal (not Judge NMK Lawrence)  for  that
    Tribunal to remake the decision.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 15 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane
