

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/07180/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 29 January 2018                         |On 5 February 2018             |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?

                                   Between

                               IURIL DVORYANYN
                             AKA YURIY DVORYANYN
                         (anonymity order NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent
Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant,  a  national  of  Ukraine  born  on  1  March  1979,
         challenges the determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge M A  Khan
         promulgated on 7 September 2017 dismissing his appeal  against  the
         respondent's decision of 14 July 2017 to refuse to grant him asylum
         and humanitarian protection under paragraph 336 of the  Immigration
         Rules.


      2. The appellant's immigration history is  poor.  He  entered  the  UK
         using  a  visit  entry  clearance  in  2001  and  overstayed.  When
         encountered  by  immigration  officials  in  2008,  he  produced  a
         fraudulently obtained Latvian identity document.  He  was  arrested
         and the premises were searched. Two further Latvian documents and a
         false Lithuanian identity card were found. All bore the appellant's
         photograph and an alias. The appellant was arrested and charged and
         on 4 July 2008 he received a six-month custodial sentence.  He  was
         subsequently  served  with  removal  directions  but  then  claimed
         asylum. His appeal was dismissed and an attempt at judicial  review
         was rejected. On 17 December 2008 he was removed.


      3. On 19 October 2009 the appellant turned up in France and  attempted
         to enter the UK using a fraudulently obtained Polish identity card.
         A fingerprint check revealed his true identity. It is unclear  from
         the papers whether or not he was refused entry.



      4. On 24 May 2017 the appellant was encountered  by  the  police  with
         regard to a criminal matter. He gave yet another false identity but
         his true identity was revealed when he was finger printed. He  then
         claimed asylum on the basis that he  would  be  forced  to  undergo
         military service in Ukraine. Initially this was on the  basis  that
         he was afraid to do so but subsequently representations  were  made
         on the basis that he had religious reasons for not  wishing  to  be
         conscripted.  He also relied on private and family life said to  be
         established here.


      5. Judge Khan dismissed the appeal.



      6. Permission to appeal was initially refused by  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Scott Baker on 25 September 2017 but granted  on  renewal  by
         Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun on 7 November 2017 on the basis that the
         judge arguably erred in refusing to adjourn  the  appeal  when  the
         representatives claimed to have only been notified of  the  hearing
         four days earlier and had not had adequate time to prepare.



      7. The respondent, in her Rule 24 response,  opposed  the  application
         for permission.



      8. On 24 January 2018 the appellant's  representatives  wrote  to  the
         Upper Tribunal seeking an adjournment.  They  maintained  that  the
         appellant was in custody on a criminal matter  and  they  had  been
         unable to take instructions.



      9. The application was refused by Upper Tribunal Judge O'Connor on  25
         January 2018. He took the view that as no production order had been
         sought, that it had not been anticipated that the  appellant  would
         have attended the hearing and  that  the  representatives  had  not
         indicated that they had been unable to take instructions previously
         with respect to the error of law issue, the matter could proceed on
         the basis of submissions from his representatives.



     10.  The matter then came before me.



    The Hearing



     11. There was no appearance by the appellant's representatives  at  the
         hearing on 29 January 2018 and it was not until after completion of
         the  hearing  that  a  fax  was  received  from   the   appellant's
         representatives removing themselves from the court record.



     12. I heard submissions from Mr Kotas who adduced the  appellant's  PNC
         record showing that he had been convicted, following guilty  pleas,
         of two offences of supplying Class A drugs and had received two 40-
         month prison sentences to be served concurrently.



     13. Mr Kotas submitted that with respect to Judge Khan's determination,
         no errors of law  had  been  shown.  There  was  no  merit  in  the
         complaint that he had erred in refusing to adjourn as the notice of
         hearing had been sent to both the appellant and the representatives
         and no steps had been taken to instruct  an  expert.  He  submitted
         that  the  real  issue  appeared  to  be  one  of  funding  as  the
         appellant's representative  withdrew  from  the  hearing  for  that
         reason. He submitted that although the judge was criticized for his
         approach to Devaseelan, he had been entitled to  rely  on  previous
         decisions and determinations.  The appellant was found to have used
         false documents and to have given evasive evidence. The success  of
         his appeal hinged on the documents allegedly from the military  but
         the appellant had a history of  relying  on  false  documents.  The
         judge was entitled to find that his evidence could  not  be  relied
         on. Even taken at  its  highest,  the  appellant's  claim  had  not
         reached the stage where it could be said that prison conditions  in
         Ukraine  breached  article  3  as  no  criminal   proceedings   had
         commenced. If the claim was  to  be  believed  then  all  that  had
         happened was that the appellant had received  draft  papers.  There
         was a lack of reliable evidence to establish he was a conscientious
         objector. I was referred to the head notes of VB and Another (draft
         evaders and prison conditions) Ukraine CG [2017] UKUT 00079  (IAC).





     14. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination. I now
         give my reasons.









    Conclusions


     15. There are two issues in this case. The first is whether the  First-
         tier Tribunal judge erred when  refusing  to  adjourn  the  hearing
         before him and the second is whether he erred in assessment of  the
         appellant's substantive claim. Before I move on to those matters, I
         shall refer  briefly  to  the  matter  of  the  recent  adjournment
         request. Notice of hearing for today's proceedings  was  served  on
         both the appellant and his representatives  on  13  December  2017.
         Those representatives had prepared the challenge to the  First-tier
         Tribunal's determination and as there had been no amendments to the
         grounds, those would have been the grounds they were due  to  argue
         before me. No further instructions would  have  been  necessary  in
         order to do so.  I  also  note  that  there  has  been  no  renewed
         application for an adjournment either  by  fax  or  by  a  personal
         appearance. I was satisfied that the notice  was  properly  served,
         that  no  objections  had  been  raised  to  the  refusal  of   the
         adjournment the week before the hearing  and  that  the  matter  of
         determining whether or not  there  was  an  error  of  law  in  the
         determination of the First-tier Tribunal could properly and  fairly
         be dealt with in the appellant's absence. I,  therefore,  proceeded
         with the hearing in the appellant's absence.



     16. For the reasons set out below, I find that the First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge did not err either with respect to the adjournment request or
         to the merits.



     17. The appeal against the respondent's decision was lodged on 28  July
         2017  and  on  31  July  the  representatives  (Sterling  and   Law
         Associates) and  the  appellant  were  notified  of  the  scheduled
         hearing for 22 August 2017. On the afternoon of 21 August 2017, the
         Tribunal received a  letter  from  the  representatives  (who  have
         remained on record throughout, until 29 January  2018)  maintaining
         that the notice of hearing did not reach them  and  that  they  had
         only just been notified of  the  hearing  by  the  appellant.  they
         sought an adjournment in order to prepare for "complex issues"  and
         to arrange an expert report which would be "crucial"  to  the  case
         and which would take at least three weeks to obtain.



     18. The following morning a solicitor attended the hearing to  make  an
         oral request for an adjournment. She maintained that the notice  of
         hearing had been sent to the wrong representatives, that they  were
         not aware of the hearing until 18 August, they needed more time  to
         prepare and to obtain an expert report and that the  appellant  was
         looking to instruct different representatives.  The  judge  refused
         the adjournment application. He noted that the Notice had been sent
         to the correct  solicitors  at  the  correct  address  and  to  the
         appellant and that they had had  almost  a  month  to  prepare.  He
         considered there had been ample opportunity to instruct  an  expert
         and that the  appellant  had  had  every  opportunity  to  instruct
         different representatives.  He  gave  the  representative  time  to
         consult with the appellant, to take instructions and to  prepare  a
         hand written witness statement but she withdrew  from  the  hearing
         citing funding issues.



     19. The grounds complain that the judge  acted  unfairly  and  gave  no
         consideration  to  whether  the  appeal  could  have  been   fairly
         determined without an adjournment  particularly  as  there  was  no
         witness statement or bundle.



     20. Given that the representative was  afforded  every  opportunity  to
         consult with the appellant and  to  prepare  a  witness  statement,
         there is no merit in the  complaint  that  no  statement  had  been
         prepared.  I  note  from  the  file  that  contrary  to  what   the
         representative argued, and not pursued in the grounds,  the  notice
         of hearing was indeed properly served at the representatives at the
         same address that is recently provided by them. It was also  served
         on the appellant.  as  the  solicitors  had  prepared  the  initial
         grounds of appeal and lodged the appeal, they would have been aware
         of the basis of the claim and should have known if further evidence
         was required. No details are offered as to what an expert might add
         to the case particularly given  the  recent  determination  of  the
         Upper Tribunal on military service  in  Ukraine  and  there  is  no
         explanation as to why no steps had already been taken  to  approach
         an expert. Nor is the contention that the  solicitors  needed  more
         time to prepare consistent with the claim that the appellant wanted
         to instruct different representatives.



     21. The judge properly  considered  the  matter  and  was  entitled  to
         proceed. His approach does not disclose an error of law which would
         require the determination to be set aside.



     22. The second issue concerns  the  substantive  claim.  The  judge  is
         criticized for his approach to Devaseelan,  it  being  argued  that
         previous adverse findings on credibility  should  not  be  used  to
         apply to fresh documents. At paragraph 39 the judge had  regard  to
         the appellant's previous history of dishonesty in the production of
         and  reliance  on  fraudulently  obtained  documents.  Given   that
         background, and the  appellant's  convictions  for  fraud,  he  was
         entitled to view the appellant's fresh evidence with caution. There
         is no error in his approach in that respect. The judge  noted  that
         the appellant had admitted to  producing  false  documents  at  his
         previous hearing (at 29). He had also relied on many false identity
         documents. He was unable to explain how he had obtained  the  fresh
         evidence. When he assessed the evidence as a whole (at 40), he  did
         not find that the appellant had been credible or consistent.



     23. It is legitimate for countries to require their citizens to perform
         compulsory military service and punishment for failing to  complete
         this duty cannot automatically  be  regarded  as  persecution.  The
         appellant claims to be a conscientious objector; i.e.  someone  who
         can show that the performance of military service would require his
         participation in military action contrary to his genuine  religious
         or moral convictions. However, he has  been  inconsistent  in  that
         even up to the point of his hearing before the First-tier  Tribunal
         where he maintained he did not want to die (at 22), did not want to
         fight (at 32) and was afraid (at 24). The  judge  was  entitled  to
         find that he was an unreliable witness.



     24. I was referred to VB. Head note 1 states: "At the current  time  it
         is not reasonably likely that a draft-evader avoiding  conscription
         or mobilisation in Ukraine would face  criminal  or  administrative
         proceedings for that act,  although  if  a  draft-evader  did  face
         prosecution proceedings the Criminal Code of Ukraine does  provide,
         in Articles 335, 336 and 409, for a prison  sentence  for  such  an
         offence. It would be a matter for any Tribunal to  2  consider,  in
         the light of developing evidence, whether  there  were  aggravating
         matters which might lead to imposition of  an  immediate  custodial
         sentence, rather than a suspended sentence or the matter proceeding
         as  an  administrative  offence  and  a  fine  being  sought  by  a
         prosecutor".  Given that the appellant's claim was not accepted, he
         has not, as Mr Kotas pointed out, reached the stage where he  faces
         criminal  or  administrative  proceedings  for   evading   military
         service.



     25. No submissions have been put forward on article 8  grounds  and  no
         evidence of any family or private life was put to the judge.



     26. Having considered all the evidence,  I  find  that  the  First-tier
         Tribunal did not make errors of law which require the  decision  to
         be set aside.



    Decision


     27. The appeal is dismissed  on  asylum,  humanitarian  protection  and
         human rights grounds.



    Anonymity



     28. I see no reason to continue the anonymity order made by the  First-
         tier Tribunal.

    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge


        Date: 2 February 2018


