
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07652/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25th January 2019                 |On 05th April 2019                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JUSS


                                   Between

                               mr Twana Razayi
                       (ANONYMITY direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss N Patel (Solicitor)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Bates, (Senior HOPO)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This was an appeal against a determination of First-tier Tribunal Judge
    D Birrell, promulgated on 23rd October 2018,  following  a  hearing  at
    Manchester on 16th  August  2018.   In  the  determination,  the  judge
    dismissed  the  appeal  of  the  Appellant,  whereupon  the   Appellant
    subsequently applied for, and was granted, permission to appeal to  the
    Upper Tribunal, and thus the matter comes before me.



The Appellant

 2. The Appellant is a male, a citizen  of  Iran,  and  was  born  on  16th
    November 1996.  He appealed against  the  decision  of  the  Respondent
    Secretary of State dated 5th June 2018, refusing  his  application  for
    asylum, and for humanitarian protection, pursuant to paragraph 339C  of
    HC 395.

The Appellant's Claim

 3. The essence  of  the  Appellant's  claim  is  that  he  is  of  Kurdish
    ethnicity, and is 22 years old, and comes from Sardasht, where he lived
    at home with his parents and his two sisters.  He  had  never  been  to
    school.  He had been helping his father with farming as his father  had
    sheep, lamb, and hens.  In around October 2016 he  started  work  as  a
    kolbar, a smuggler, on the Iraqi Iran border because it  was  difficult
    to find work as a Kurd.  He smuggled women's outfits and cosmetics.  He
    and his brother-in-law, Hushyar, worked with a person called  Ali,  who
    was a cousin of Hussein Farzandi.  The Appellant's  brother-in-law  and
    Ali would speak to one another during the journey about  the  situation
    of Kurds in Iran.   They  talked  about  their  struggle  for  freedom.
    Hushyar wanted  the  Appellant  to  bring  in  KDPI  materials  and  he
    transported these on three separate occasions in April  and  May  2017.
    They would hide the leaflets amongst their loads and go to the  village
    where a vehicle would arrive and pick them up.  However,  on  8th  June
    2017, the Appellant received a telephone call from Hushyar that Ali had
    been transporting party leaflets into Iran, where there was  an  ambush
    by the authorities and Ali had been wounded and arrested.  Hushyar told
    the Appellant to go into hiding and to wait and see what happened.  The
    Appellant told his mother and paternal uncle  and  his  paternal  uncle
    took him to a friend's house.   Four  days  later  the  paternal  uncle
    returned and said that Etalaat had raided his house and his brother-in-
    law's house looking for them.  They arrested his parents and his  older
    sister.  His parents were held for 24 hours and then released  and  his
    sister was released after three days.  They  were  told  that  Ali  had
    given the  Appellant's  name  and  his  brother-in-law's  name  to  the
    authorities.  The Appellant fled Iran in a lorry and arrived in the  UK
    on 2nd August 2017.

The Judge's Findings

 4. The judge held that the Appellant could not succeed because  he  claims
    to have been assisting his brother-in-law  in  bringing  KDPI  leaflets
    into Iran because  what  his  brother-in-law  said  about  the  Kurdish
    struggle had a "profound" effect on him (A36), and yet he gave a  "very
    vague" account of his involvement with the KDPI.  He was asked about Dr
    Abdu Ghassemlou,  the  leader  of  the  KDPI.   This  leader  had  been
    assassinated in 1989.  All the Appellant could say about him  was  that
    he was a "martyr", but he could not explain why he had  been  martyred,
    and when he was martyred,  or  what  he  looked  like.   Moreover,  the
    description of the ideology at question 61 given by the  Appellant,  of
    the KDPI, "is very vague and very limited" (paragraph  42).   Moreover,
    the judge held that the Appellant, during his  screening  interview  at
    4.1, was extremely vague, and made no reference to any  ambush  of  his
    family members, or their being arrested and  detained  (paragraph  44).
    Accordingly, the Appellant could not succeed.

Grounds of Application

 5. The grounds of application state that the judge had  erred  in  finding
    that the Appellant had provided no  description  of  the  KDPI  leader,
    because he had done so at question 59 during  his  interview.   Second,
    the judge had failed to put the Appellant's lack of education into  the
    context of the findings made, and had put disproportionate weight  upon
    their lack of detail in the Appellant's screening interview.

 6. On 12th November 2018, permission to appeal was granted  on  the  basis
    that the judge arguably erred at paragraph  42,  in  finding  that  the
    Appellant was unable to explain what Dr Ghassemlou looked like, with no
    reference being made to what the Appellant had  said  at  question  59.
    Second, it was arguable that the judge also fell into error in  finding
    the lack of detail at the Appellant's screening interview,  because  at
    paragraph 44 the judge had stated  that  the  Appellant's  account  was
    "extremely vague and makes no reference to any  ambush  of  his  family
    members" (paragraph 44), and this arguably failed to take into  account
    the fact that this was simply a screening interview, and not an  asylum
    interview.

The Hearing

 7. At the hearing before me on 25th January 2019, Miss N Patel,  appearing
    on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that the judge  had  erred  in  a
    number of respects.  First, the judge had stated (at paragraph 42) that
    the Appellant's knowledge of the KDPI was vague.  However the Appellant
    had explained (at page 11 at paragraph 2  of  the  Appellant's  bundle)
    that he had never been to school, and from a very young  age  had  been
    helping his father with the farming.  Also the judge had criticised the
    Appellant for not being able to provide a description of Dr  Ghassemlou
    (at paragraph 42), but this overlooked the fact that at question 59  of
    the Appellant's interview, he had said that Dr Ghassemlou was  slightly
    chubby, was losing hair, and had a slight reddish face,  and  no  issue
    had been taken with this description provided by  the  Appellant,  such
    that it could not be said that the  Appellant  had  failed  to  give  a
    proper account about Dr Ghassemlou.   Furthermore,  the  Appellant  had
    explained (at question 61) that  the  KDPI  stood  to  achieve  Kurdish
    rights, so that the judge's conclusion that the Appellant's account  is
    "very vague and very limited" in relation to the KDPI, was unjustified.
     Finally, Miss Patel submitted that the  criticism  by  the  judge  (at
    paragraph 44) that the Appellant had provided an extremely vague answer
    at question 4.1 of the screening interview, as to why he had  to  leave
    Iran, without referring to the ambush of his family, which led  to  the
    resultant arrest of family members, and  the  Appellant's  escape,  was
    wrong.  This was because the Appellant was simply answering a  question
    "briefly state all of the reasons why you cannot return  to  your  home
    country" and the Appellant had stated "something happened that posed  a
    risk to me".  This, submitted  Miss  Patel,  was  a  reference  to  the
    incident that had led him to leave the country.

 8. For his part, Mr Bates submitted that the risk  in  this  case  to  the
    Appellant, arose on account of the family  being  ambushed.   Yet,  the
    Appellant did not refer to this risk during  his  screening  interview.
    What is interesting, submitted Mr Bates, was that after  the  screening
    interview, on 16th August 2017,  the  Appellant's  solicitors  wrote  a
    letter to the Home Office where attention was drawn to the ambush,  and
    it was this which led the Appellant to subsequently raise the issue  of
    the ambush during his substantive asylum  interview.   Second,  if  the
    KDPI had a "profound" effect on the Appellant (as the  judge  describes
    at paragraph 42), it is not conceivable that the Appellant will not  be
    able to give a  proper  description  of  their  activities.   But  most
    importantly, submitted Mr Bates,  was  the  fact  that  the  judge  had
    clearly stated, that the Appellant had not joined the  KDPI  either  in
    Iran or since his arrival in the UK.  The judge was clear that,  "I  am
    aware from previous Iranian cases that the KDPI is  active  in  the  UK
    with a branch in Manchester" (paragraph 43).

 9. In reply, Miss Patel submitted that  the  screening  interview  is  not
    meant to provide a full account.  Second, if one looks  at  the  answer
    given in the screening interview (at paragraph 4.1) what the  Appellant
    had said was that he had to leave Iran  due  to  his  involvement  with
    opposition parties.  Finally, that it was wrong to refer to the  letter
    of 16th August 2017, from the Appellant's solicitors,  which  Mr  Bates
    had submitted followed the screening interview,  because  no  reference
    was made to this in the  judge's  determination  whatsoever,  and  this
    could not be resurrected at this stage before the Upper Tribunal.

No Error of Law

10. I am satisfied that the making of the decision by  the  judge  did  not
    involve the making of an error on a point of law (see Section 12(1)  of
    TCEA 2007) such that I should set aside the decision.  My  reasons  are
    as follows.

11. First, in what is a clear, and comprehensive determination,  the  judge
    has explained why, if it was the case that the Appellant had come under
    risk when Hushyar and Ali had been ambushed, and Ali had  been  wounded
    and arrested, there was no reference to this at all  in  the  screening
    interview.  Even with respect to what  does  appear  in  the  screening
    interview, there is only the suggestion that the Appellant is  involved
    with the opposition parties.  However, the Appellant  has  not  been  a
    member of the KDPI.  He has not sought to be active in the  UK  with  a
    branch in Manchester (paragraph 43).  And yet, the Appellant's claim is
    "to have  been  profoundly  moved  by  the  issue  of  Kurdish  rights"
    (paragraph 43).  The judge was entitled to come to the conclusion  that
    she did.  It was within the range of permissible options to her.

12. Second, it cannot be overlooked that the Appellant has not  necessarily
    been entirely truthful in his evidence before the Tribunal below.   The
    judge wished to know how the Appellant's brother-in-law knew that there
    had been an ambush.  The responses given at questions 63, 104, 105, and
    106 did not suggest that his  brother-in-law  was  present  during  the
    ambush.  It was  only  after  repeated  challenges,  as  Judge  Birrell
    explains, that the Appellant eventually states that his  brother-in-law
    was involved but managed to escape (paragraph 45).  The judge also  did
    not accept the Appellant's account that he had not remained in  contact
    with his family, because as the  only  son,  who  had  been  sent  over
    through the services of an agent, it was simply not  credible  that  he
    would not in the UK have sought  to  retain  contact  with  his  family
    (paragraph 46).

13. Third, the judge was also  clear  that  there  was  no  arrest  warrant
    "because he is of no interest to the  Iranian  authorities"  (paragraph
    46).  But most importantly, when the Appellant was  asked,  during  his
    screening  interview  (at  question  3.2)  whether  he  had  ever  been
    fingerprinted, he had stated that he had not been fingerprinted.   This
    was plainly incorrect.  The Eurodac information suggests  that  he  had
    been fingerprinted in Europe on his  way  to  the  UK.   And  yet,  the
    Appellant had failed to be truthful about this.  All in all, therefore,
    the judge was entitled to come to the conclusions that she did and this
    decision is beyond reproach.

Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve  an  error  of  law.
The decision shall stand.

No anonymity direction is made.

This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Juss                 3rd April 2019












