

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07730/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                   |Decision & Reasons promulgated       |
|On 7 September 2017                   |On 8 September 2017                  |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    SAJH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Mills Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Mrs V James instructed by Immigration Advice Service



                      ERROR OF LAW FINDING AND REASONS




     1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a  decision  of
        First-tier Tribunal Judge Gribble promulgated on 7  March  2017  in
        which the Judge allowed  the  appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
        protection grounds. The Judge did not consider the article 8  issue
        in any detail but opined that in light of the findings in  relation
        to the protection issue there will be very significant obstacles to
        the appellant integrating back into Libya and that the  claim  must
        succeed on that ground too.
     2. The above respondent is a citizen of Libya born in 1984 who is  the
        mother of four children who live with  her  but  who  do  not  have
        separate claims. On  12  July  2016,  the  respondent  refused  the
        application for asylum.
     3. The above respondent was  granted  leave  as  a  Tier  4  Dependent
        Partner on 14 October 2009 valid until 31 January 2011.  The  above
        respondent returned to Libya and then went to Jordan to undertake a
        Masters Degree in Computing before returning to Libya in 2011 where
        she remained until 2013.  A further application for leave to  enter
        as a Tier 4 Dependent Partner was made which was granted, valid  to
        31 July 2017. The above respondent left Libya with her  three  sons
        born in 2010 and 2012 for the UK. At that time her application  was
        sponsored by the Libyan government.
     4. It was noted the above respondent's husband extended his visa until
        2020 but could not afford to extend her visa as a result of  which,
        as her visa was curtailed in 2015 so as to  expire  on  6  February
        2016, the above respondent claimed asylum asserting a real risk  of
        being killed by other tribes in Libya as her  tribal  ethnicity  is
        that of the former President.
     5. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [33]. At  [42]  the  Judge
        did not find the above respondent's account of being at risk due to
        being perceived as a Gaddafi supporter likely to be true  and  that
        the  above  respondent  did  not  have  a  well-founded   fear   of
        persecution for a Convention reason.
     6. At [49] the Judge found there was a real risk  that  the  appellant
        will  suffer  serious  harm  amounting  to  inhuman  or   degrading
        treatment as required by Article 15 (b) upon return to Libya as the
        appellant falls within the definition of a  vulnerable  group.  The
        Judge concludes at [50] that  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
        believing that if returned to Libya the above respondent would face
        a real risk of suffering serious harm on account of the  particular
        vulnerabilities having  due  regard  to  the  serious  humanitarian
        situation presently in Libya. The Judge did not find  this  a  case
        where relocation to Tripoli or Khomz is reasonable.
     7. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal  asserting  that
        as the above respondent's husband had leave until 2020 the  correct
        course of action for the above respondent would have been  to  make
        an application as a dependent. The grounds on which  permission  to
        appeal is sought assert that it is unclear why, when this avenue is
        open to the above respondent, a grant  of  humanitarian  protection
        will  be  appropriate  as  by  making  the  application  the  above
        respondent would not be required to return to Libya  and  therefore
        not at real risk of ill-treatment that  breaches  the  Humanitarian
        Protection provisions. The grounds assert that  had  the  applicant
        made the correct application and paid the correct fee there will be
        no risk as the appellant would not be required to return.
     8. Permission to appeal was granted by another judge of the First-tier
        Tribunal on the basis  the  assertions  made  in  the  grounds  are
        evident on the facts of the decision and disclose an arguable error
        of law.



Error of law


     9. The evidence before the First-tier  Tribunal  was  that  the  above
        respondent and her husband had separated albeit living in the  same
        household.  It was also the evidence that funds did  not  allow  an
        application to be made by the above respondent  for  the  suggested
        Visa.
    10. The grounds on which permission to appeal is sought to  not  appear
        in the  Secretary  of  State's  refusal  letter  as  maintaining  a
        sustainable argument for not granting humanitarian  protection.  It
        must also be remembered that  paragraph  339C  of  the  Immigration
        Rules states:


        "A person will be granted humanitarian  protection  in  the  United
        Kingdom if the Secretary of State is satisfied that:
           i) he is in the United Kingdom or has arrived at a port of entry
              in the United Kingdom;
          ii) he does not qualify as a refugee as defined in regulation  to
              of The Refugee or Person in Need of International  Protection
              (qualification) Regulations 2006;
         iii) substantial grounds have been shown for  believing  that  the
              person concerned, if returned to the country of return, would
              face a real risk of suffering serious harm and is unable, or,
              owing to  such  risk,  unwilling  to  avail  himself  of  the
              protection of that country; and
          iv) he is not excluded from a grant of humanitarian protection.


    11. Paragraph 339CA defines serious harm.
    12. The above respondent is not excluded from a grant  of  humanitarian
        protection  pursuant  to  paragraph  339C(iv)  and  nor  does   the
        definition of the person entitled to humanitarian  protection  make
        any reference to that person having an alternative remedy. Had  the
        appellant made the application suggested by the Secretary of  State
        in the ground seeking permission to appeal she  may  have  possibly
        succeeded  as  suggested  although,  at   this   stage,   that   is
        hypothetical.
    13. What the appellant did do was apply for a  grant  of  International
        protection. The Judge found the appellant was not  entitled  to  be
        recognised as a refugee which is a sustainable finding.  The  Judge
        thereafter considered entitlement  to  humanitarian  protection  by
        reference  to  applicable  case  law  found  the  above  respondent
        satisfied the four requirements of paragraph 339C.
    14. As the above respondent satisfied the requirements for  entitlement
        she was arguably entitled to have the appeal allowed.
    15. Mrs James also seeks  to  rely  upon  the  decision  of  the  Upper
        Tribunal in ZMM (article 15 (c)) Libya CG [2017] UKUT 263 in  which
        it was found that the violence in Libya has  reached  such  a  high
        level that substantial grounds  are  shown  for  believing  that  a
        returning civilian would, solely on account of his presence on  the
        territory of that country or region, face  a  real  risk  of  being
        subject to a threat to his life or person. The finding by the Judge
        that the appellant faces a risk under article 15(c) if returned  to
        Libya is a sustainable finding both on the evidence the  Judge  was
        asked to consider and the country guidance case. No place to  which
        the appellant could relocate to and reasonably be expected to  stay
        in where she would not face  such  a  risk  was  made  out  on  the
        evidence considered by the Judge.
    16. No arguable legal error material  to  the  decision  to  allow  the
        appeal is made out. The decision shall stand.


Decision

    17. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.


Anonymity

    18. Pursuant to rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
        Rules 2008, the above respondent is  granted  anonymity  throughout
        these proceedings. No report  of  these  proceedings  (in  whatever
        form) shall directly or indirectly identify the  above  respondent.
        Failure to comply with this order  could  lead  to  a  contempt  of
        court.




Signed.......................................................
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

Dated the 7 September 2017












