
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07502/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                   |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 November 2018                     |On 21 November 2018                  |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE TURNER
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CRAIG


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  Mr N. B.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr P Jorro, Counsel, instructed by R W Anderson & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision of the First-
tier Tribunal Judge.  The decision under appeal was in respect of an asylum
claim of 20 November 2017.  The basis of that claim was the fear asserted
by the respondent of being persecuted in Pakistan because he is a gay man.

The Secretary of State refused this claim on the basis that the credibility
of the respondent was not made out.  There is no dispute that he is a
citizen of Pakistan.  The central issue therefore as to his sexual
orientation.  In short summary, his credibility on this issue lay at the
centre of his asylum claim.

The First-tier Tribunal Judge analysed the evidence in relation to the
sexuality of the respondent and in a detailed reasoned decision concluded
that the relatively low threshold had been surmounted.  The analysis,
however, reveals that in relation to all aspects of the evidence relating
to the sexuality of the respondent the Tribunal Judge was deeply and
repeatedly sceptical.  By way of example only, the evidence relating to
photographs of the respondent in the company of, and in physical proximity
to, other men were referred to as being "entirely staged".

The judge also said by way of a general comment that his narrative was very
hard to accept.  There was no appearance on behalf of any witnesses or
other contribution from third parties to back up the claim of the
respondent.  The material therefore upon which the First-tier Tribunal
Judge was working would appear, when looked at as a whole, to have mandated
a conclusion that effectively his claim to be gay did not get off the
ground.

The reason for the conclusion in favour of the respondent, despite all of
those adverse issues arising, appears very substantially, if not entirely,
based upon an assessment of the medical records.  At paragraph 47 of his
decision the judge referred to this evidence in the following terms:

"I come, then, to this rather small entry from the GP's notes, at page 83
in the bundle which, in my assessment, really cannot be overlooked and
which needs to be afforded particular weight, given the nature of the
appeal.  The note from 8 November 2017 refers to 'rectal pain with PR
bleeding when wiping first occurred during intercourse one month ago ...'
The doctor, therefore, has picked up on that matter and it is that specific
piece of evidence which, to my mind, really provides the more useful
insight into the appellant's sexual orientation."

The paramount significance of that entry in the mind of the First-tier
Judge is emphasised by his comment at paragraph 50 of the decision:

"Despite all the unsatisfactory aspects, therefore, of the appellant's
appeal, and the lack of oral evidence from other witnesses on the issue, I
am persuaded for the reasons expressed, looking at that medical note, as to
the appellant's sexual orientation."

We are unable to escape, therefore, the clear inference that the judge
regarded the medical note as the tipping point between what would otherwise
have been a rejection of the case that the respondent is gay.  It therefore
behoves us at this stage to pay particular regard to that medical note in
order to determine whether it can rationally support the weight that was
given to it by the First-tier Judge.  It might also be observed at this
stage that of course we are in no worse position than was the First-tier
Judge in interpreting this written record.

The GP notes provide on 8 November 2017 that the respondent attended with
two complaints.  The first, which is irrelevant, related to left shoulder
pain.  The second complaint is that which was afforded such conspicuous
weight by the judge.  The extract which was referred to by the judge only
partially records what was written by the GP.  The full entry provides as
follows:

"Rectal pain with PR bleeding when wiping.  First occurred during
intercourse one month ago.  Straining on going to the toilet.  No urinary
symptoms.

Examination:

PR: skin tags and external haemorrhoid seen.  Unable to assess
rectum/prostate properly due to patient distress and tensing.

Diagnosis: haemorrhoid."

When looking at that particular entry it is abundantly clear that the
reference to intercourse amounted to nothing more than the GP recording
what had been reported to him by the respondent.  The fact that he was
unable subsequently to assess the rectum properly on the basis that the
patient was distressed and tensing underlined the fact that the GP was
expressing no conclusion that the reference to intercourse was causatively
relevant to what he found on examination.  Indeed, straining on going to
the toilet is, as common knowledge would suggest, in itself a common cause
of haemorrhoids.

We are in no doubt that the judge treated this entry with an irrational
reverence in terms of the implications of what it recorded and the judge's
emphasis upon this can only be explained by a misapprehension as to what
was actually recorded or, at least, the importance of that.  When the judge
said the doctor has picked up on that matter the reality is that this was
simply a record of what he had been told by the respondent and,
significantly, told at a time when the sexuality of the respondent was
already in issue against the background of the asylum claim.  Bearing in
mind also that at the time of this record on the respondent's own account
he had been engaged in anal sex for a very considerable period, then his
observation that the bleeding first occurred during intercourse is somewhat
diluted in terms of its significance in timing.

So, for those reasons, despite the fact that this is a decision on the
facts and reminding ourselves as to the restraint we ought to exercise in
interfering with that, we remain in no doubt that this is a case in which
the decision of the judge was indeed irrational to the extent that it
amounted to an error of law.  However, this is a case in which, clearly,
the balancing exercise, once that observations have been taken into
account, falls to be exercised again and therefore we allow this appeal but
order that the matter should be reheard before another First-tier Tribunal
Judge, not the one who was the author of this decision.







Notice of Decision

The appeal is allowed.

The matter should be reheard before another First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  and
not the one who was the author of this decision.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Mark Turner                             Date 13 November 2018

Mr Justice Turner




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As I have allowed the appeal and because a fee has been paid or is  payable,
I have considered making a fee award and have decided to make no fee award.


Signed   Mark Turner                             Date 13 November 2018

Mr Justice Turner




