
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/07323/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 7 June 2017                             |On 15 June 2017                  |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE NORTON-TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     o a
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Radford, Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                  Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Z Ahmad, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge C M Phillips (the  judge),  promulgated  on  1  February
    2017, in which he dismissed the  Appellant's  appeal  on  all  grounds.
    That  appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had   been   against   the
    Respondent's decision of 21 June  2016,  refusing  his  protection  and
    human rights claims.

 2. The Appellant had arrived in the United Kingdom in  2008  as  a  minor.
    His original asylum claim had been  refused  and  a  subsequent  appeal
    dismissed in 2011.  In respect  of  the  latest  claim,  the  Appellant
    relied in part on what he had said in  the  original  claim,  but  also
    asserted that his time in the United Kingdom and his  adaption  to  the
    way of life here would on return to Afghanistan place him  at  risk  as
    being perceived as a "westernised" person.  In  respect  of  his  human
    rights claim he asserted that  he  was  in  a  genuine  and  subsisting
    relationship with a Polish national with whom he had a child.  They had
    cohabited together for  some  time  and  intended  to  reside  together
    permanently in this country.




The judge's decision

 3. The judge concluded that in light of the  previous  Tribunal  decision,
    the Appellant's claim as originally  put  forward  failed.   The  judge
    notes the Appellant's assertion that he  faced  risk  on  return  as  a
    westernised person (paragraph 62).  He concluded that this  status  did
    not constitute a particular social group and  therefore  there  was  no
    Convention reason.  At  paragraph  64  the  judge  cites  a  particular
    passage contained in the Respondent's Country Information  Guidance  on
    Afghanistan and concludes that in general there is no risk to returnees
    simply because they have come back from western countries.

 4. The judge  goes  on  to  consider  Article  15c  of  the  Qualification
    Directive.  He concludes at paragraph 69, relying on the case of Naziri
    [2015]  UKUT  00437  (IAC)  and  HN  (Afghanistan)  that  the   country
    information relied on by the Appellant before her  did  not  "overturn"
    the findings in the country guidance case of  AK  (Afghanistan)  [2012]
    UKUT 163 (IAC).  At paragraph 70 the judge  reiterates  his  conclusion
    that any westernisation on the Appellant's part had not been  shown  to
    be an immutable  characteristic.   The  humanitarian  protection  claim
    failed as well.

 5.  In  respect  of  Article  8  the  judge  finds  that  the  Appellant's
    relationship with his partner was not a genuine one  and  that  he  had
    effectively deceived her into thinking that it was.  His  findings  are
    set out at paragraphs 80 to 89. He finds that the  Appellant's  failure
    to report to the Respondent in respect of his immigration status was  a
    significant  factor  that  went  to  the  question   of   whether   his
    relationship with his partner was genuine.  He  refers  to  a  previous
    relationship with another woman and finds that this too undermined  the
    Appellant's credibility.

 6. At paragraphs 83 and 84 the judge finds against the  Appellant  on  the
    basis of cultural and religious matters. The evidence of two supporting
    witnesses is rejected (paragraphs 86 and 87).  It  is  said  that  they
    were not independent  as  they  were  friends  of  the  Appellant.   At
    paragraph 89 the judge finds that the Appellant's partner had a genuine
    and  subsisting  relationship  with  their  son  but  finds  that   the
    Appellant's relationship with both the partner and their child was  not
    a genuine one.  The appeal was therefore dismissed.

The grounds of appeal and grant of permission

 7. The grounds of appeal are fairly lengthy and seek to attack all aspects
    of the judge's findings and conclusions.  In essence they  assert  that
    the judge misunderstood the nature of the Appellant's claim  under  the
    Refugee Convention, failed  to  have  regard  to  whether  or  not  the
    Appellant could modify his behaviour on return to  Afghanistan,  failed
    to assess or give any reasons in relation to  the  country  information
    relied on by the Appellant, and made several errors in relation to  the
    assessment of the Article 8 claim.

 8. Permission to appeal was initially granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge
    Page on 13 April 2017.  The application decision was sent back to Judge
    Page for clarification.  He then confirmed that his grant of permission
    was limited to the Article 8 related grounds of appeal only.




The adjourned hearing

 9. This matter first came before me on 2 May 2017.  Ms Radford  sought  to
    renew the ground of appeal  relating  to  the  protection  issues.   Mr
    Whitwell was  unaware  of  the  limited  grant  of  leave  and  of  the
    Appellant's intention to renew the protection ground.  In light of  the
    circumstances of the case and the nature of the  list  on  that  day  I
    deemed that it was unfair on Mr Whitwell to deal with this new issue at
    that stage.  I therefore adjourned the error of  law  hearing.   Before
    doing so I heard argument  on  whether  or  not  permission  should  be
    granted on the protection grounds.

10. After  hearing  argument  from  both  representatives  I  decided  that
    permission should be granted.  It was arguable that the judge had erred
    in the manner set out in the Appellant's grounds of appeal.




The hearing on 7 June 2017

11. Ms Radford submitted that the judge had misunderstood  the  Appellant's
    claim: it was not said that he was part of a particular  social  group,
    but rather that the westernisation issue involved the imputation  of  a
    political opinion by non-state actors.  It was this that would lead  to
    a risk.  I was referred to the  skeleton  argument  before  the  judge.
    This error would be material if the judge had also erred in respect  of
    her consideration of the country information.  Ms Radford  referred  me
    to paragraph 64 of the judge's decision in which only one aspect of the
    country information had been cited and  relied  upon.   The  judge  was
    wrong to regard this passage as representing the  "general  assessment"
    of risk on return to those coming back from western countries.   I  was
    referred to a schedule of key passages of the country  information  set
    out in the Appellant's bundle.  Ms Radford submitted that the judge had
    failed to engage with any of this evidence, even in fairly brief terms.
     In respect of the Appellant keeping a low profile, the judge  had  not
    engaged with the principles set out in HJ  (Iran)  and  RT  (Zimbabwe).
    This particular issue had not been  raised  by  either  the  Presenting
    Officer or the judge  at  the  hearing.   In  respect  of  humanitarian
    protection and Article 15C of the Qualification Directive,  Ms  Radford
    submitted that the judge was wrong  to  have  relied  on  the  case  of
    Naziri, it being only a judicial review case, and that in any event the
    country information relied upon  by  the  Appellant  before  the  judge
    postdated the judgment in Naziri.

12. In respect of the Article 8 issue, Ms Radford relied on the grounds  of
    appeal. In respect of the Article 8 issue. She submitted that the judge
    had  erred  by  failing  to  deal  adequately  with   the   Appellant's
    relationship with his son and that there was nothing in respect of  the
    Appellant's partner's evidence

13. Ms Ahmad submitted that the judge did not have to provide  reasons  for
    each and every element of the Appellant's case.  However, she  accepted
    that the judge had not engaged with the Appellant's evidence.  If there
    was an error it  was  not  material  because  Ms  Ahmad  submitted  the
    Appellant's case was bound to fail.  There was nothing in his  evidence
    to suggest that he was westernised or would be perceived as  such  upon
    return. Ms Ahmad  acknowledged  certain  failings  within  the  judge's
    decision but submitted that the ultimate conclusions were open to  her.






Decision on error of law

14. I conclude that there are material errors of law in respect both of the
    protection and Article 8 issues.

15. First, the judge was wrong to have  assessed  the  Appellant's  refugee
    claim in the context of whether or not he  was  part  of  a  particular
    social group.  That was not the way in which the Appellant's  case  was
    put to him.  Rather, it had been argued that the  westernisation  issue
    created the risk of an imputation of political  opinion.   The  judge's
    error would not of itself be material.  However  it  must  be  seen  in
    light of what I say about other matters, below.

16. Second, in my view the  judge  has  failed  to  grapple  with  material
    country information relied upon by the Appellant.  The first example of
    this relates to paragraph 64 of his decision.  The judge concludes that
    the general assessment of risk is represented by passages from a report
    cited at  paragraph  8.9.3  of  the  Respondent's  Country  Information
    Guidance Report.  Having examined that passage at  the  hearing  it  is
    clear that it emanates from one particular source.   In  contrast,  the
    UNHCR took a different view. The judge she has failed to state why  she
    preferred one source of evidence to that  of  another  when  concluding
    that the general assessment  did  not  indicate  any  risk  to  western
    returnees.

17.  The  second  example  of  the  failure  to  engage  with  the  country
    information relates to paragraph 69.  There was, it is clear,  a  large
    amount of relevant  country  information  before  the  judge  to  which
    reference was made both in the key passages section of  the  index  and
    the Appellant's skeleton argument.  The  judge  has  simply  failed  to
    engage with this evidence to  any  meaningful  extent.   One  does  not
    expect each and every item to be considered in great detail  but  there
    must nonetheless be  a  sufficiency  of  engagement  and  reasoning  to
    indicate that a material matter has been  properly  considered  in  the
    context of the way in which the Appellant's case  has  been  put.   The
    judge has relied on the "findings" in Naziri.  The problem with this is
    that that decision was of course in the context of  a  judicial  review
    claim, not a statutory  appeal.   In  addition,  the  relevant  country
    information relied upon before  the  judge  postdated  that  which  was
    before the court Upper Tribunal in Naziri.  The information  had  moved
    on, but the judge apparently failed to appreciate this.  In my view the
    judge's failure to engage with the country information went not only to
    the issue  of  Article  15c,  but  also  the  refugee  case:  the  same
    information was material to the potential  risk  under  both  heads  of
    claim.

18. I disagree with Ms Ahmad's suggestion that  the  Appellant's  case  was
    bound to fail in any event.  It was by no means certain that  he  would
    have succeeded, but there is at least an arguable case that somebody in
    the Appellant's situation might potentially be  targeted  by  non-state
    actors on return to Afghanistan.  As an aside, I note  that  the  judge
    has not in fact engaged in clear and detailed fact-finding as  to  what
    extent the Appellant is a westernised person.  This is  something  that
    should have been addressed in the context  of  the  way  in  which  the
    Appellant's case had been argued.

19. Third, the judge failed to engage with the issue of whether or not  the
    Appellant could be expected to "maintain a low profile"  on  return  in
    order to avoid any potential risk.  Such an issue  clearly  raises  the
    question as to whether such  behaviour  would  be  compatible  with  HJ
    (Iran) and RT (Zimbabwe).

20. I turn to the Article 8 issue.  There are several  material  errors  in
    this respect.

21. First, in my view the judge has failed to provide adequate  reasons  as
    to why the Appellant's failure to report to the Respondent  was  deemed
    to be so significant to the  issue  of  whether  the  relationship  was
    genuine or not.  This is stated  as  being  the  first  reason  in  the
    judge's mind for finding that his relationship with his partner was not
    genuine at all.  I appreciate that weight is a matter in general  terms
    for the fact-finding Tribunal.  However,  the  judge  has  in  my  view
    failed to say why this factor was being regarded as so important.

22. Second, and more importantly, it is quite clear from what the judge has
    said that the points taken against the Appellant in paragraphs  83  and
    84  were  material  to  her  overall  conclusions.   I  have  carefully
    considered the Record of Proceedings and can find no evidence that  the
    Appellant was cross-examined or questioned in any other way  about  any
    of the matters raised in those two paragraphs.  Nothing to the contrary
    has been brought to my attention by either of the representatives.   In
    my view the complaint made in the grounds of  appeal  about  procedural
    unfairness in this regard is made out (see paragraphs 20 to 24 of those
    grounds).

23. Third, the Appellant's partner provided evidence at the hearing and  in
    writing.  There is no suggestion by the judge that she had  deemed  the
    partner's evidence to be unreliable in any respect.  However, the judge
    has failed to make any reference  to  this  evidence  when  making  her
    findings on the relationship between  the  Appellant  and  the  partner
    and/or the relationship between the Appellant  and  the  couple's  son.
    Whilst it is true that a judge is entitled to look at the intentions of
    one party to a relationship (in this case the Appellant), all  relevant
    factors must  be  taken  into  account  when  making  that  assessment.
    Clearly the supportive evidence of an apparently credible witness  (the
    partner) must be a material part of that assessment.

24. Fourth, the judge rejects the evidence of  three  supporting  witnesses
    because, in effect, they knew the Appellant (see paragraphs 86 and 87).
     Whilst connections to an Appellant may have a bearing on the weight to
    be attached to such evidence, it is an  error  simply  to  regard  this
    evidence as being self-serving and therefore not to attach  any  weight
    thereto.  The judge has given no independent reasons as to why she  was
    not prepared to attach any weight to the witnesses' evidence.

25. Fifth, in my view the judge  has  failed  to  carry  out  any  adequate
    assessment of the Appellant's relationship with his son.  The judge has
    accepted the facts of paternity and  cohabitation  in  respect  of  the
    Appellant, his partner and their son, but in reaching  her  conclusions
    at paragraph 89 she in  effect  finds  that  because  the  relationship
    between the Appellant and his partner was not  genuine  the  same  must
    apply to the relationship between the Appellant and his  son.   In  the
    context of this case that is in my view inadequate.

26. For all of the above reasons I set aside the judge's decision.

Disposal

27. Both representatives agreed this case should be remitted to the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  I have had regard  to  the  nature  of  the  case,  the
    relevant issues and paragraph 7.2 of the Practice Statement.  There are
    a large number of matters which require detailed findings  of  fact  in
    this case, not least the extent to which the Appellant is or  would  be
    perceived as being westernised  and  the  nature  of  the  relationship
    between the Appellant, his partner and  their  son.   In  addition  the
    security situation in Afghanistan is ever-changing, and updated country
    information will need to be looked at in detail.  In light of this  the
    proper course is a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

28. The remitted hearing will be a complete re-hearing with no findings  of
    fact preserved.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  material
errors of law.

I therefore set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal.

I remit this appeal to the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed                                  Date: 13 June 2017

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Norton-Taylor
