
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07947/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 25th August 2017                       |On 20th September 2017            |
|                                          |                                  |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KING TD


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [MG]
                         (Anonymity direction made)

                                                         Claimant/Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Claimant/Respondent:    In person


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The claimant is a citizen of Ghana born on [ ] 1978.   He  entered  the
    United Kingdom in 2012 as part of a team for the London  Olympics.   He
    did not return but rather claimed asylum on the  basis  of  his  sexual
    orientation.  That claim was refused by the respondent in a decision of
    17th June 2016.

2.   The claimant sought to appeal against that decision, which appeal  came
    before First-tier Tribunal Judge Juss on  17th  February  2017.   In  a
    decision of 7th March 2017 the appeal was allowed.

3.   The Secretary of State for the Home Department seeks to appeal  against
    that decision on the basis that it is obvious  from  it  and  from  the
    findings made by the Judge, as expressed within it,  that  it  was  the
    intention of the Judge to dismiss the appeal. For some  reason  however
    paragraphs 19 to 24 of  the  determination  have  been  inserted  in  a
    different  font  and  relate  to  an  altogether  different   appellant
    (claimant), namely one from Libya.  It is clear  that  when  the  Judge
    indicates that he allows the appeal, it is in the context of the Libyan
    and not in the context of the claimant himself.

4.   Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was granted  on  that  basis
    and the matter comes before me.

5.   It is entirely clear from paragraphs 1 to 18  that  the  Judge,  having
    heard the claimant, does not believe him in any way.   In  essence  the
    claimant says  that  he  faces  discrimination  and  brutalisation  and
    mistreatment because of the fact that his sexual orientation  has  been
    revealed.  The Judge does not accept that and came  to  the  conclusion
    that the Government of Ghana would not have sponsored him  to  come  to
    the Olympics had that been the case, particularly having regard to  the
    attitude of the Government towards homosexuality.

6.   Although the claimant was suffering from  HIV  it  was  not  considered
    that treatment for that condition was available in Ghana, such that  he
    could return.

7.   Thus it is entirely clear from those  paragraphs  that  the  Judge  was
    minded not to grant the appeal.   However,  paragraphs  19  to  24  are
    clearly entered in a different font, and indeed make it clear that they
    are referable to a  Libyan.   Indeed,  paragraph  22  when  considering
    Article 8 rights makes reference to  the  person  who  is  the  subject
    matter of those particular few paragraphs to have a wife  and  children
    and that clearly does not relate to the claimant in any way at all.

8.   Clearly, therefore, I find that when the Judge indicates  at  paragraph
    23 that he allows the appeal it is in relation to the  Libyan  that  is
    referred to in paragraph 19 and not to the claimant.

9.   Although it is understandable that mistakes are made with  cutting  and
    pasting, it does denote a lack of anxious scrutiny to the case in  hand
    that such an obvious error remained unchecked even upon the signing and
    promulgation of the decision.

10.  It  is  clearly  a  defective  determination  and  reaching  no  stated
    conclusions in relation to the appellant.

11.  Mr Kotas on behalf of the Secretary of State invites me  to  remit  the
    matter back to  the  original  Judge  for  the  Judge  to  correct  the
    determination.  The claimant objects to that course of  action  on  the
    basis that it is quite apparent from the nature  of  the  determination
    and the obvious lack of checking of  that  determination  before  being
    issued, that the Judge failed to give anxious consideration to his case
    and to maintain an accuracy of decision making.

12.  It seems to me that it is important that justice  is  to  be  not  only
    done but seen to be done and the criticism of lack of anxious  scrutiny
    is one that is borne out in the circumstances  of  this  determination.
    It is important that the appellant feels that he has had a fair hearing
    and that correct details of his case and situation have been noted.

13.  In the circumstances therefore the decision of Judge Juss shall be  set
    aside.  The matter shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  for  a
    re-hearing of the facts.

14.  In order not to further delay proceedings I  asked  the  claimant  what
    further evidence, if any, he  would  be  relying  upon,  upon  the  re-
    hearing.  He presented a medical report of 16th August  2017  from  the
    Leicester NHS and an article from the website dated 25th July  2017  on
    same-sex marriage as an abomination.  Copies of those matters have been
    made and are in the file.  The claimant indicated that apart from  that
    all matters were ready for a re-hearing.

Notice of Decision

15.  The Secretary of State's appeal before the Upper Tribunal  is  allowed.
    The decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Juss  is  set  aside.   The
    matter will be re-heard by the First-tier Tribunal.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


[pic]
Signed                                  Date  18 September 2017


Upper Tribunal Judge King TD



