
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07784/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford by Skype for business       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On the 30 October 2020                        |On 15 December 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     BA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr O. Sobowale, Counsel instructed on behalf of the
appellant
For the Respondent:    Mr M.  Diwnycz, Senior Presenting Officer


                        AMENDED DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction:


      1. The appellant, a citizen of Saudi Arabia, appeals  with  permission
         against the decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge  O'Hagan)
         (hereinafter  referred  to  as  the  "FtTJ")  who   dismissed   his
         protection and human rights appeal in a decision promulgated on the
         17 April 2020.


      2. I make a  direction  regarding  anonymity  under  Rule  14  of  the
         Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal  Rules)  Rules  2008  as  the
         proceedings relate to the  circumstances  of  a  protection  claim.
         Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise  the
         appellant is granted anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings
         shall directly or indirectly identify him. This  direction  applies
         both to the appellant and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
         with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

      3. The hearing took place on 30 October 2020, by means  of  Skype  for
         Business. which has been consented to and not objected  to  by  the
         parties. A face to face hearing was not held  because  it  was  not
         practicable, and both parties  agreed  that  all  issues  could  be
         determined in a remote hearing.  I conducted the hearing from court
         at Bradford IAC. The advocates attended remotely via video  as  did
         the appellant's sister so that she could  listen  and  observe  the
         hearing. There were no issues regarding sound, and  no  substantial
         technical problems were encountered during the  hearing  and  I  am
         satisfied both advocates were able to make their  respective  cases
         by the chosen means.

      4. I am grateful to Mr Sobowale and Mr Diwnycz  for  their  clear  and
         helpful oral submissions.

Background:

      5. The history of the appellant is set out in the decision letter  and
         the decision of the FtTJ.

      6. In 2001, the appellant was involved in road traffic accident  where
         he suffered a fractured skull and bleeding into the  brain  with  a
         resultant brain injury. He has spent the majority of time over  the
         years that followed receiving inpatient hospital care. In 2015,  he
         was diagnosed with frontal lobe damage and schizoaffective disorder
         with symptoms of schizophrenia.

      7. On 14 September 2008, the appellant applied for leave to enter as a
         dependent of his  father.  The  application  was  refused,  and  he
         reapplied in his  own  right  on  27  September  2008.  The  second
         application was granted, and he entered  the  United  Kingdom  with
         leave as a student on 30 September  2008  that  leave  being  valid
         until 11 June 2009. On 6 June 2009, he applied for further leave as
         a student which was refused and whilst he appealed, the appeal  was
         withdrawn on 9 October 2009.

      8. On 10 November 2009 he applied for further leave and it was granted
         until 26 October  2010  and  there  followed  further  applications
         subsequently, the last of which was granted until 30 November 2016.

      9. The appellant made a claim for asylum on 10 November  2016  on  the
         basis that he would be at risk on return to Saudi Arabia because he
         had converted to Christianity and also as a result  of  his  mental
         health. No decision was made however because  there  were  criminal
         prosecutions pending against him at that time.

     10. On 13 April 2018, the respondent was notified  that  the  appellant
         had been convicted of an offence of interfering with a vehicle  for
         which he received six weeks imprisonment. The notification  led  to
         the respondent reviewing the appellant's offending history. It  was
         found that he had accrued nine convictions 18 offences  between  31
         March 2010 and 9 April 2018. This led to the  respondent  beginning
         deportation proceedings. In response to  the  stage  I  deportation
         letter, the appellant's solicitors made submissions  based  on  his
         religious beliefs and his mental  health.  Whilst  this  was  under
         consideration the appellant received further convictions.  Overall,
         the appellant received 13 convictions for 27 offences  since  being
         in the United Kingdom. The FtTJ set out  the  convictions  and  the
         chronology of them at paragraph [10] of his decision

     11. In a decision letter of 3 July 2019,  the  respondent  refused  his
         protection  and  human  rights  claim  in  the   context   of   his
         deportation. The decision is set out in 17  pages  and  it  is  not
         necessary to set out the entirety of that decision; some  of  which
         has not been in dispute. In that decision the respondent considered
         the claim that it would be at risk because of his mental health and
         consideration was  given  to  various  medical  reports  that  were
         exhibited in the respondent's bundle. The  conclusion  reached  was
         that the documented instances  of  harm  were  instances  of  self-
         inflicted harm rather than mistreatment by the authorities in Saudi
         Arabia. It was not accepted that he would be at risk of harm  as  a
         result of comments made in the context of  his  mental  illness  in
         relation to the state authorities.  It  was  further  not  accepted
         based on the objective country material that he would be unable  to
         access treatment for his mental health problems given that  he  had
         access to such treatment in the past.

     12. In respect of his protection claim and his  claimed  conversion  to
         Christianity, whilst it was accepted that  there  is  no  religious
         freedom in Saudi Arabia and Christians face  persecution  there  as
         did apostates, it was not accepted that the appellant would  be  at
         risk as it was not accepted that the evidence supported the claimed
         conversion and that at its  highest  respondent  accepted  that  he
         displayed some low level interest  in  Christianity.  The  decision
         letter  made  reference  to  the  appellant's  interview  and   the
         responses he had given concerning the Christian faith.

     13. In relation to his deportation, the Secretary of  State  considered
         that the appellant was a persistent offender deportation  would  be
         conducive  to  the  public  good.  When  considering  the   aspects
         identified  in  relation  to  his  private  life  and   the  public
         interest, the respondent concluded that there were no factors which
         were sufficiently identified to outweigh the public interest in his
         deportation.

     14. The appellant appealed that decision, and his  appeal  came  before
         the First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Hagan).  The  FtTJ  did  not  hear
         evidence from the appellant but did  do  so  from  his  mother  and
         sister. He also  had  the  documentary  evidence  set  out  in  the
         appellant's bundle  which  included  witness  statements  from  his
         family members, objective material relating to  religion  in  Saudi
         Arabia and letters of support  from  two  members  of  the  church,
         evidence relating  to  his  studies  and  photographs  and  in  the
         respondent's bundle a large number of  medical  reports  from  2008
         onwards.

     15.  In a decision promulgated  on  17  April  2020  he  dismissed  his
         appeal. In relation to the protection claim the judge set  out  his
         findings at [36 - 52]. It was common  ground  between  the  parties
         that Christian converts in Saudi Arabia would be at risk of serious
         harm. The judge agreed with that view as set out in  the  objective
         country materials (at [40]). The judge also recorded an  additional
         submission made at [41] that as  a  result  of  his  mental  health
         problems, the appellant could not realistically be expected to self-
         censor and  would place himself at risk by divulging his  Christian
         belief without regard to the danger of doing so in the  context  of
         his country of origin.

     16. The FtTJ noted that he had not heard from the appellant  (at  [42])
         and having considered the letters from the members of  the  church,
         the documents  demonstrated  that  the  appellant  had  shown  some
         interest in Christianity when "putting the matter at its  highest".
         However, the documentary evidence did not demonstrate  a  sustained
         interest and "still less a  genuine  conversion".  The  judge  also
         considered the evidence of the appellant's mother and  sister  that
         gave reasons as to why he could not place weight on their evidence.
         Having considered the evidence he concluded that the account of his
         question conversion was a "fabrication". At [51] he considered  the
         possibility that the appellant might attract adverse  interest  but
         that there was little in the way of evidence that the appellant had
         a propensity to do so. The judge found that as there was a lack  of
         evidence to support the claim that his experience and treatment  in
         the past gave such a reason and that even if he were  to  say  such
         things, it was unlikely that they would be taken seriously  in  the
         context of a significant brain injury and resultant mental illness.

     17. Permission to appeal was sought and was refused by a  FtTJ  but  on
         renewal permission was granted by UTJ Gill on  4  August  2020  who
         stated as follows:

         "It is arguable that the judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  (Judge
         O'Hagan) may have erred in law as follows;

            i) grounds one, paragraphs 8 and nine of the renewed grounds: by
               assuming that the appellant did not speak  English  and  that
               there was a language barrier between the  appellant  and  rev
               our and also assuming that the appellant has been affected by
               is mental health condition to the same degree at all times;

           ii)  ground  two,  paragraph  12  of  the  renewed  grounds:   by
               misapprehending  the  evidence  in  stating  that  the  first
               evidence of any Christian activity by the  appellant  was  in
               September 2016: and

          iii) ground  three,  paragraph  16  of  the  renewed  grounds:  in
               reaching is finding at paragraph 51 that the appellant  would
               not express himself to be a Christian, the judge appears have
               overlooked relevant evidence (i.e. to  the  effect  that  the
               appellant did so when under a hospital order in 2015)."

The hearing before the Upper Tribunal:

     18. In the light of the COVID-19 pandemic  the  Upper  Tribunal  issued
         directions, inter alia, indicating that it was provisionally of the
         view that the error of law issue could be determined without a face
         to face hearing and that this could  take  place  via  Skype.  Both
         parties have indicated that they were content for  the  hearing  to
         proceed by this method. Therefore, the Tribunal listed the  hearing
         to enable oral submissions to be given by each of the parties.

     19. Mr Sobowale, Counsel on behalf of the  appellant  relied  upon  the
         written  grounds  of  appeal.  There  were  also  further   written
         submissions dated 23 September 2020 ( in answer to the  submissions
         set out in the Rule 24 response).

     20. There  were  also  written  submissions  filed  on  behalf  of  the
         respondent in a Rule 24 response dated 15 September 2020.

     21.  I also heard oral submission from the advocates, and I am grateful
         for their assistance and their clear oral  submissions. I intend to
         consider their respective submissions when addressing  the  grounds
         of challenge advanced on behalf of the appellant.

Decision on error of law:

     22. There are three grounds advanced on behalf  of  the  appellant  and
         they are set out  in  the  renewed  grounds.  In  my  view,  it  is
         necessary to consider ground 2 before making an assessment  of  the
         other grounds.

     23. Dealing with ground 2, it is submitted on behalf of  the  appellant
         that the FtTJ failed to give adequate reasons for finding that  the
         appellant's  conversion  was  a  fabrication.  Having   heard   the
         submissions of Mr Sobowale,  in  my  view  this  is  not  solely  a
         "reasons" challenge but that the FtTJ when reaching his  assessment
         of the evidence made errors of fact which  undermined  his  factual
         findings and hence his conclusions.

     24. The FtTJ heard  oral  evidence  from  the  appellant's  mother  and
         sister. Their evidence concerned a number of matters  but  included
         evidence  which  also   concerned   his   claimed   conversion   to
         Christianity (see paragraph 25 of his sister's witness  statement).
         His mother's witness statement contains similar evidence although I
         note that there  are  two  identical  paragraphs  in  each  of  the
         statements dealing with the issue Christianity at paragraphs 34 and
         25, respectively.



     25. The FtTJ recorded at [48] that on the face of the evidence, it was
         consistent with an account of a genuine conversion. However, the
         FtTJ went on to reject their evidence. He gave a number of reasons.
         Firstly, he did not consider that they were "independent witnesses"
         and "there is a very strong interest in trying to establish the
         appellant's claim to be a Christian convert in the context that
         arises here of his facing deportation."



     26. The second reason he gave is  found at  [48];




         "it is noticeable that the first evidence of any Christian activity
         is in September 2016 at which time the appellant's leave was
         shortly due to expire. It was on 10 November 2016, just under three
         weeks before his leave expired on 30 November 2016 that the asylum
         claim was made."


     27. Mr Diwnycz on behalf of  the  respondent  accepted  that  that  was
         factually incorrect. There was evidence contained  in  the  medical
         report at AB400 which recorded the appellant and  his  presentation
         on 22 October 2015 and it was noted by the author of report that he
         was wearing a cross and that he had stated to the  doctor  that  he
         had converted to Christianity.

     28. Whilst Mr Sobowale has referred me  to  other  evidence  where  the
         appellant had given the date  of  his  interest  or  conversion  to
         Christianity  as  being  September  2015,  both  in  his  screening
         interview and his substantive interview which  makes  reference  to
         changing his religion in 2015 (reference 43 - questions 57) Andy in
         his interview at page 255RB) both of those documents were generated
         after September 2016 when he had claimed asylum  and  therefore  by
         themselves do not undermine the FtTJ's findings.

     29. However, I am satisfied that there was evidence which was not given
         during the interview/screening  interview  in  2016  and  therefore
         predated his claim for asylum as evidenced in  the  medical  report
         which set out the earlier date of October 2015.

     30. I observed that when the FtTJ was saying that  the  first  evidence
         was of Christian activity, the judge might have been  referring  to
         his activity undertaken as a Christian rather than  when  he  first
         stated he had become interested in Christianity.  However,  neither
         advocate has addressed the Tribunal on that issue, and therefore  I
         take no point on it. It follows that the finding at [48]  that  the
         date of his first interest in Christianity was September  2016  was
         not factually correct or in the alternative it did not take account
         of the other evidence that I have set out above and relied upon  by
         the appellant.

     31. I now turn to the third  reason  the  judge  gave  rejecting  their
         evidence.

     32. At [49] the FtTJ stated:

         "it is also noticeable that  (i)  the  appellant  initially  was  a
         student when there is no evidence of his having  studied,  and  his
         brain injury and resultant problems meant that it was unlikely that
         he could study, and (ii) that his family seem to have been involved
         in his church attendance. Looking at the position in the round,  it
         is clear that the appellant's family sought to bring  him  here  to
         care for him, and to access treatment. The evidence does  not  lead
         me to suppose that there was ever a genuine intention  for  him  to
         study. There  is  some  reason  to,  at  the  least,  consider  the
         possibility that the claimed Christian conversion was an attempt by
         his family to secure some basis for him to remain.  The  timing  of
         the events in relation to when his  leave  to  remain  was  due  to
         expire reinforced that view..."

     33. Again, Mr Diwnycz on behalf of the respondent accepted that this is
         factually incorrect. He indicated that the author of  the  Rule  24
         response had not had access to the full file of papers as indicated
         at paragraph 4. There was evidence in  the  bundle  concerning  the
         appellant's past studies. As I indicated to Mr Sobowale during  the
         hearing the evidence of his studies was not clear and  no  one  had
         sought to consider the chronologies of his studies in  the  context
         of the periods of time that he was  unable  to  study  due  to  his
         medical condition.

     34. The appellant's evidence was that he had entered the United Kingdom
         and completed an English course and received a certificate and then
         he proceeded to a degree course but it was put on hold due  to  his
         ill-health (see paragraph 8 of witness statement. Similar  evidence
         was given by his sister at  paragraph  5  and  16  of  her  witness
         statement.

     35. Whilst the chronology of his studies in the context of  his  mental
         health relapses is unclear, nonetheless I am satisfied  that  there
         was some evidence that he had studied in the UK and  I  am  further
         satisfied that there  is  a  certificate  of  having  completed  in
         English course at elementary level  in  January  2009  (at  109RB).
         There was also referenced to having attended a college in  February
         2009 (RB 107). The evidence relating to his university  studies  is
         not very clear, but I am satisfied that there was  a  reference  to
         the appellant having passed year  one  modules  (RB  101)  for  the
         academic year 2013 - 2014. The documents refer  to  the  University
         course starting in or about November 2012 and  completing  in  July
         2017. The evidence is unclear  as  to  what  had  happened  in  the
         intervening years and whilst Mr  Sobowale  took  oral  instructions
         from the appellant's sister, it does not appear that such  evidence
         was before the FtTJ or  any  clarification  of  what  had  happened
         during that time.

     36. Having considered the submissions of Mr Sobowale,  I  am  satisfied
         that the FTT J's finding that the evidence  did  not  lead  him  to
         suppose that there was ever a genuine intention of him studying  in
         the UK failed to take account of the evidence  in  the  appellant's
         bundle which did refer to his studies. Whilst the judge also  found
         that his family relatives must have appreciated that the  appellant
         might well have struggled to gain further leave  given  the  nature
         and extent of his offending (see paragraph 49, in the light of  his
         criminal convictions that is a point that is not made without merit
         but on balance, I am satisfied that there was  evidence  which  the
         judge had failed to take into  account  which  had  the  effect  of
         rendering that finding to be  a  flawed  one.  Therefore,  it  must
         follow that there was evidence which was relevant to the  issue  of
         his Christian and the credibility of the witnesses' evidence  which
         was not properly analysed by the FtTJ.

     37. In a dealing with ground 1,  it  is  submitted  on  behalf  of  the
         appellant that the  judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
         rejecting the written evidence which is advanced in support of  his
         claim to have genuinely converted to Christianity.

     38. There were two letters in the bundle which the  judge  set  out  at
         paragraphs [44 - 45]. The first letter was dated 2 June  2017  from
         the Rev R which made reference to the appellant's  attendance  from
         about  September  2016  until  January  2017.  The  second   letter
         considered by the FtTJ is dated 10 January 2018  from  the  Rev  W.
         That letter made reference to  the  appellant  approaching  him  in
         early summer 2017 with a letter from the church in X informing  the
         reverend that he became a Christian and wanted instruction  in  the
         Christian faith with a view to being baptised. The letter  went  on
         to state that he had attended services over several  weeks  joining
         in the worship and listening to the sermons. As part of the process
         of learning about Christianity,  he  has  received  communion.  His
         family had participated in church social events. The author of  the
         letter said that he had organised him  to  take  the  "Christianity
         explored" course which he has started but has yet to complete.

     39. The FtTJ's assessment of that evidence is set out at [44] where  he
         stated:

         "it is unclear from  the  letter  how  well  the  Rev  R  knew  the
         appellant, and on what she based her  view  of  his  sincerity  and
         commitment. At its highest, she knew him for a period of about four
         months. It seems likely that there  would  have  been  barriers  to
         communication between them in  terms  of  language,  and  also  the
         appellant's mental health".

     40. At [45 ]  the  FtTJ  addressed  the  second  letter  stating,  "the
         observation set out above about the letter from  the  Rev  R  apply
         with equal force to this letter."

     41. Mr Sobowale submits that the FtTJ's approach generally  was  flawed
         when he reached the conclusion that the appellant  would  not  have
         been able to express himself. He  submits  that  the  letters  show
         interaction between the appellant and the authors of  the  letters.
         In relation to Rev R's evidence it is submitted that she  took  the
         trouble to refer the appellant to someone else and  evidenced  that
         she accepted that he was genuine and sincere in his beliefs.

     42. The second point Mr Sobowale makes is that the FtTJ  was  wrong  at
         [46] where he stated that the appellant was only physically present
         at church but that this was wrong because the evidence demonstrated
         that he had received holy Communion and had been supported  by  his
         family in attending church events.  Thus,  the  second  letter,  he
         submits, referred to a course of study in  Christianity  which  had
         been arranged.

     43. His submission was that the judge had taken a prejudicial  view  of
         the documentary evidence and that as he decided that the  appellant
         had become interested in Christianity in 2016,  a  date  which  was
         wrong, that he could not  communicate  with  those  who  wrote  the
         letters due to his  mental  health  and  that  the  FtTJ's  overall
         assessment of the evidence was demonstrably flawed.

     44. The submission made on behalf of the  respondent  in  the  Rule  24
         response set out that it was pertinent to note that the  judge  had
         not heard oral evidence from the appellant and  could  only  attach
         limited weight to his evidence at [42], nor were there any Dorodian
         witnesses present (at [43]) and the submissions made on  behalf  of
         the respondent set out at paragraph 30 (where he reported going  to
         church in prison and in hospital but there was no evidence of this)
         could have been resolved if witnesses had been present to give oral
         evidence.

     45. I have therefore carefully considered the submissions in the  light
         of the evidence before the FtTJ and in the light  of  the  relevant
         jurisprudence.

     46. In the decision of  the Extra Division of the Inner  House  of  the
         Court of Session in TF (Iran) v Secretary of  State  for  the  Home
         Department [2018] CSIH 58, 2019 SC 81 the appeal concerned an issue
         about the genuineness of a claimed conversion. It  was  noted  that
         active participation in  a  Christian  church  was  not  conclusive
         evidence of the genuineness of the claimed conversion but  "it  was
         likely  to  be  a  very  powerful  consideration,  to  be  assessed
         alongside any other evidence pointing to the sincerity or otherwise
         of a claimed conversion to  Christianity."  The  remainder  of  the
         opinion was concerned with the  type  of  evidence  that  would  be
         admissible  to  support  the  genuineness  of   a   conversion   to
         Christianity. At [58] the decision made it plain that what mattered
         was that evidence came from individuals with:


             "sufficient knowledge of the practices of the church of  which
             they are a member;  sufficient  experience  of  observing  and
             interacting with  those  seeking  to  become  members  of  the
             church; sufficient knowledge and experience of others who have
             gone  through  similar  processes  of  engagement  in   church
             activities with a view to becoming members of the church; and,
             in  cases  such  as  these,  sufficient   knowledge   of   the
             individuals concerned and of the manner  in  which  they  have
             thrown themselves into church activities.'

     47. In TF there had been independent evidence including  oral  evidence
         from  one  witness  support  the  genuineness  of  the  appellant's
         conversion. The evidence is detailed and extensive (see paragraph 9
         - 16). The judge fell into error because he failed to  engage  with
         the evidence and as a result the appeal was remitted.

     48. In a  more  recent  decision  of  MH  (review;  slip  rule;  church
         witnesses) Iran [2020] UKUT 125 (IAC), the Upper Tribunal  set  out
         in its headnote that "written and oral evidence  given  by  "church
         witnesses"  is  potentially  significant  in  cases  of   Christian
         conversion  (see  TF  and  MA).  Such   evidence   is   not   aptly
         characterised as expert evidence, nor is it  necessarily  deserving
         of particular weight, and the weight to be attached to such evident
         is that the judicial factfinder".

     49. The Tribunal went on to state at [41] that active participation  in
         church activities, without more, to demonstrate the truthfulness of
         a conversion, is not the position by reference to the  decision  in
         TF and  MA  although  I  recognise  that  they  stated  that  there
         observations were "obiter".

     50. Having considered the  evidence,  in  my  judgement  the  FtTJ  was
         required  to  consider  the  evidence  of  those  with   sufficient
         knowledge of the appellant. It was therefore open to the  judge  to
         find at [44] that on the face of the evidence the Rev R  only  knew
         the appellant for a period of four months and it was  unclear  from
         the contents of the letter how well the Rev knew the  appellant  or
         what she based her view  of  his  sincerity  and  commitment  upon.
         Similarly, at [45], the FtTJ took a similar view.

     51. However, where the judge fell into error is the finding  made  that
         it would be  likely  that  there  were  barriers  to  communication
         between the authors of the letters and the appellant  in  terms  of
         language and also of his mental health.

     52. I have not been pointed to any particular evidence  concerning  the
         appellant's level of English and the letters are silent upon  this.
         However, I accept the submission made by Mr Sobowale that there was
         some evidence which suggested that he was able  to  participate  in
         Christian worship given the reference to holy Communion.  I  cannot
         accept  the  submission  that  the  letter  showed  the  level   of
         interaction between the appellant and  the  authors,  as  the  FtTJ
         stated, the letters were lacking in their content.  However,  I  do
         accept that the  FtTJ's  assessment  when  he  concluded  that  the
         appellant's mental health was a  barrier  to  communication  was  a
         flawed finding. There is nothing to suggest that his mental  health
         would have been such a barrier or if it  were,  the  FtTJ  did  not
         identify such evidence.

     53. At [46] the judge assessed photographic evidence. I do not consider
         that his assessment of the  photographic  evidence  having  limited
         value was necessarily a flawed finding in the way that Mr  Sobowale
         submits. As general evidence, photographs are only  a  snapshot  of
         the time they are taken. They do not give any details  beyond  that
         which can be seen. In that sense, the FtTJ's finding that they show
         the appellant being physically present in church was correct. Where
         I consider he erred in law is that there was some evidence  in  the
         letters which referred  to  active  participation.  The  photos  by
         themselves do not establish a genuine Christian conversion. However
         the evidence  before  the  Tribunal  should  have  been  considered
         holistically alongside the evidence of the church witnesses and the
         evidence from the appellant's  family  and  the  other  documentary
         evidence  before  reaching  a  concluded  view  (see  decision   in
         Karanakaran v SSHD [2000] 3All ER).

     54. Drawing together those matters, I am satisfied that the  FtTJ  fell
         into error in his overall assessment for the reasons  that  I  have
         given. The FtTJ made errors of fact as to the  date  the  appellant
         stated he had been first involved in Christianity and rejected  the
         evidence of his family members without taking  into  account  other
         relevant evidence  and  therefore  the  factual  findings  and  the
         assessment of the evidence, both oral and documentary evidence, was
         flawed.

     55. As to ground 3, Mr Sobowale submits that the judge failed  to  give
         adequate reasons for finding that the appellant would  not  express
         himself to be a Christian when "in the grip of mental illness" (see
         grounds). In his oral submissions, he stated that the appellant had
         a general history of acting without inhibitions and was  unable  to
         resist impulses which therefore gave rise to a risk. In this regard
         I was referred to page 400 of the bundle. That is  a  reference  to
         the appellant wearing a cross. Furthermore, the decision  cited  in
         the original skeleton argument and relied upon in these proceedings
         MA (Cart JR: effect on  UT  processes)  Pakistan  [2019]  UKUT  353
         relied upon particular expert medical evidence and the capacity  of
         the appellant to  be  discreet  in  the  factual  context  of  that
         particular claim. In my  view,  the  medical  evidence  as  to  the
         appellant's presentation and functioning cannot be seen in a vacuum
         and therefore the assessment of  the  appellant's  conversion,  his
         conduct and behaviour is all of  relevance  and  must  be  assessed
         holistically. Given that  the  FtTJ  did  not  assess  the  factual
         background in accordance with the evidence, that assessment has not
         been undertaken. Given that this was a protection claim,  and  that
         anxious scrutiny was required before reaching a decision, the  only
         outcome in the light of the errors of law identified  is  that  the
         decision should be  set  aside  with  no  findings  of  fact  being
         preserved.

     56. As to the remaking of the decision, the parties indicated  that  in
         the event that an error  of  law  is  found  they  would  wish  the
         opportunity to consider how the decision could be remade.


     57. For those reasons, I am satisfied that it has been demonstrated
         that the decision of the FtTJ did involve the making of an error on
         a point of law and that the decision should be set aside with no
         findings of fact preserved.


     58. The parties are required to confirm their replies to the directions
         before any further order is made.


POSTSCRIPT:

     59. Further to those directions, I have received correspondence from
         the appellant's solicitors. They state that the seek to take
         further statements from the appellant's mother and sister and also
         from the prison chaplain. There is a medical report.


     60. The letter states "we request that the matter be re-made before the
         Upper Tribunal by way of an oral hearing."

     61. I have therefore considered those submissions and I have done so in
         the light of the practice direction and I have considered whether
         it should be remade in the Upper Tribunal or remitted to the FtT
         for a further hearing. In reaching that decision I have given
         careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of the First-
         tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning the disposal of appeals
         in this Tribunal.

          "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal is likely on each such occasion to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the case to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is satisfied
         that:-
         (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
         First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for that
         party's case to be put to and considered by the First-tier
         Tribunal; or
         (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is
         necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is
         such that, having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it
         is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal."


     62. The letter from the solicitors give no reasons as to why the appeal
         should be re-made by the Upper Tribunal. As it  will be necessary
         for the  witnesses (the appellant's mother and sister and the
         representative from the church and possibly the appellant)  to give
         evidence and to deal with the evidential issues, further fact-
         finding will be necessary and in my judgement the best course and
         consistent with the overriding objective is for it to be remitted
         to the FtT for a further hearing. None of the previous findings
         have been preserved. The Tribunal will be seized of the task of
         undertaking a credibility assessments of all the witnesses and in
         the light of the issues and will be required to do so on the basis
         of the evidence as at the date of the hearing. I therefore find
         that the appeal falls within category (b) of the Practice
         Statement.


     63. I therefore exercise my discretion and reach the conclusion that
         the appropriate course is for the appeal to be remitted to the
         First-tier Tribunal.


Notice of Decision


The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the making of  an  error
on a point of law and therefore the decision of the FtT shall be set  aside.
The appeal shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him.  This direction applies both to the  Appellant  and
to the Respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

                                Dated   23 November 2020
