
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07718/2019 (v)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard via Skype for Business at Field House |Decision & Reasons           |
|                                            |Promulgated                  |
|On 12th March 2021                          |On 30th March 2021           |
|                                            |                             |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RIMINGTON


                                   Between

                                  Mr D D M
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Georget, Counsel instructed by Malik & Malik
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

The appellant appeals with permission against the determination of First-
tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan promulgated on 2nd December 2019 and
dismissing the appellant's appeal against the decision of the Secretary of
State for the Home Department dated 30th July 2019.  The Secretary of State
refused the appellant's protection and human rights claim.  The appellant
is an Iraqi national born on 1st April 1982 and of Kurdish ethnicity, born
in Makhmour, Iraq.  In 2001 he clandestinely entered the United Kingdom at
the age of 19 years and claimed asylum in June 2001 on the basis that he
was at real risk of serious harm from the Jaff tribe in the Iraq Kurdish
region and that he had evaded military service, which had resulted in him
being detained and tortured.  His asylum claim was refused on 20th June
2001 and his appeal against the refusal was dismissed on 14th November
2001.

On 21st February 2006 he was convicted of two counts of using false
instruments and failing to surrender to bail and sentenced to eighteen
months' imprisonment.  On 13th August 2006 a deportation order was signed.
His appeal against that order was dismissed by the First-tier Tribunal on
20th October 2006 and he became appeal rights exhausted on 30th October
2006.

Following further submissions the deportation order was revoked but the
Secretary of State refused the protection and human rights claim on 1st
October 2012.  An appeal was dismissed on 20th February 2013 by the First-
tier Tribunal.

In January 2019 the appellant travelled to France and claimed asylum.  He
was told that his claim had to be considered by the UK authorities and he
was returned to the UK in March 2019.  He made further submissions which
were refused in the decision dated 30th July 2019 and owing to his criminal
record it was concluded he fell within the exclusion criteria under Rule
339D(iv).  It was decided that he did not qualify for asylum or
humanitarian protection, but his appeal was considered under paragraph 399
of the Immigration Rules although he has neither a partner nor children in
the United Kingdom.  The Secretary of State considered whether he met the
private life exception to deportation set out at paragraph 399A of the
Immigration Rules, but his claim was refused.

The appellant submitted that his return to Iraq without a reasonable
prospect of him obtaining a CSID would breach his Article 3 rights and that
his circumstances taken cumulatively constituted very compelling
circumstances such as to displace the public interest in his deportation.

First-tier Tribunal Judge M A Khan dismissed his appeal under the
Immigration Rules, Articles 2 and 3 and 8 of the ECHR and also dismissed a
protection appeal.

Permission to appeal was sought on four separate grounds as follows.

Ground 1, a flawed approach to credibility

It was submitted that the judge placed undue reliance on adverse
credibility findings made previously such that he lost sight of his
obligation to assess the appellant's credibility for himself.  The
appellant had been tendered for evidence and had given oral testimony.  The
basis of the judge's adverse credibility finding was based on the mother's
death certificate and findings of adverse credibility in previous decisions
but there was no independent assessment of the appellant's oral testimony
in the instant case, and any findings thereto were invisible in the
determination.  Following Djebbar [2004] EWCA Civ 804 at paragraph 30 it
was said of the guidance in Devaseelan v SSHD [2002] UKIAT 00702  that,
"the most important feature of the guidance is that the fundamental
obligation of every Special Adjudicator independently to decide each new
application on its own individual merits was preserved".  As per Djebbar
the judge should have taken into account the appellant's oral evidence to
decide whether he departed from the previous findings on credibility but
instead at paragraph 44 the judge remarked that since the appellant "has
been found not be credible on three previous hearing, (sic) there is not a
great deal he can say now to this Tribunal, which would (sic) credible
and/or consistent".

Ground 2

A central feature to the appellant's account was that he did not have a
Civil Status Identity Document (CSID).  At paragraph 28 the judge recorded
a submission that there was no evidence that he was in possession of a CSID
but that the judge failed to give any proper consideration to this crucial
aspect of the appellant's claim save for a one sentence reference at
paragraph 60.  This was woefully inadequately reasoned and that was an
error of law.  It was never even the Secretary of State's own position that
the appellant had access to his CSID but that the appellant could obtain
another card.  The judge's alternative finding that the appellant could
obtain his CSID with the help of his family in Iraq demanded explanation.
Even if the appellant's mother was alive, which was denied, given the
patrilinear registration system in Iraq this would be of no assistance.

Ground 3

There were procedural irregularities and unfairness.  At paragraph 56 the
judge stated: "In the light of his lengthy avoidance of the immigration
authorities in the UK and due to credibility finding (sic) by three
previous Tribunals and fourthly by this court, I do not accept his evidence
that her went to France in January 2019".

The appellant's travel to France was not in dispute and no issues thereon
were raised in the Secretary of State's decision letter nor in any cross-
examination.  This matter only arose as a result of the judge's questioning
and the appellant was not put on notice that this would be an issue and the
judge at 16 incorrectly recorded Belgium instead of France.  In YHY (China)
(AP), Re Judicial Review [2014] CSOH 11 it was held that there was a
procedural unfairness where points which were not previously taken against
the appellant were taken by a judge unless there was proper notice.

Ground 4, inadequate consideration under Article 8

The judge appeared to treat the previous determination as conclusive of the
issue contrary to the principles of Devaseelan.  It was submitted that the
judge failed to assess properly the proportionality of the appellant's
deportation and the individual merits of the case for himself.  There was
no consideration of the appellant's length of residence in the UK, his
absence from Iraq, the difficulties he may face upon return to Iraq and any
difficulties in obtaining a CSID upon return nor of his medical issues, all
of which should have been considered.

The permission to appeal granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Ford failed
to comply with the guidance in Safi & Ors (permission to appeal decisions)
[2018] UKUT 388 such that unless the permission is restricted under the
"Decision" heading, any ostensible restriction of permission in the
"Reasons" section will not restrict the grant of permission and the actual
decision does not restrict the grant of permission in any way.

At the hearing before me Mr Kotas did not seek to argue with Mr Georget
that the permission was restricted.

Mr Georget argued at the hearing that it was not just a question of
consideration of the CSID standing or falling with credibility and an
assessment of the appellant's ability to obtain a CSID needed to be
considered objectively, and separately from any credibility considerations,
of where the appellant could in fact obtain such a card or replacement.

Mr Kotas submitted that the appellant gave oral evidence and repeated his
claim and the judge dealt with the death certificate, finding it was not a
reliable document, and that was rationally open to the judge. It was open
to the judge to rely on Tanveer Ahmed (Documents unreliable and forged)
Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 00439.

The CSID consideration stood or fell with credibility and his asylum claim
had been rejected in three previous decisions which were referred to in the
determinations.  Mr Kotas also referred to the refusal letter which made
comprehensive observations on the appellant's credibility.

Analysis

I raised the issue of whether the appellant was excluded from protection
grounds, because the judge displayed an apparent confusion in his legal
self-direction on Article 8.    At paragraph 55 it appeared that the judge
had confused IT (Jamaica) [2016] EWCA Civ 932 with KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC
53 and stated: "However Section 117C does not contain 'very compelling
circumstances' test (IT (Jamaica) [2018] UKSC 53)".  If this appeal is
focussed only on Articles 3 and Article 8 it is even more imperative that
the judge directs himself appropriately with respect to Article 8.  I note
the grounds of appeal to the First-tier Tribunal relate only to Articles 2,
3 and 8.

It is correct that the judge reviewed the previous determinations and
stated at paragraph 38 that: "Under the principle of Devaseelan, the
starting point for this Tribunal are the previous determinations of 2001,
2006 and 2013".  The judge indeed set out large sections of those
determinations from paragraph 38 to paragraph 41.  At paragraph 41 the
judge stated: "The appellant's asylum and protection claim is essentially
on the same basis as before, he has now produced his mother's death
certificate, which was collected from Kurdistan at the end of 2014 by the
witness, Mr Aziz".  The judge proceeded to deal with the witness, Mr Aziz,
and then addressed Counsel's submissions at paragraph 43 whereupon the
judge also stated, "I find that this appellant is willing to say anything
that would assist his case" and at paragraph 44, the judge stated: "The
fact that this appellant has been found not to be credible on three
previous hearing (sic), there is not a great deal he can say now to this
Tribunal which would credible (sic) and/or consistent".  As the judge
identified, Devaseelan was the starting point but it would appear from his
comment at paragraph 44 that he had closed his mind to the appellant's
evidence from the outset.  Of course the previous determinations were
relevant, but it was incumbent upon the judge to deal independently with
the further evidence, including the oral evidence, submitted by the
appellant and which was recorded from paragraphs 22 to 23.  That is not to
say that the appellant does not have a hurdle to climb but that the judge
needed to include and address the further evidence holistically.

Mr Kotas made reference to the refusal of the Secretary of State, but the
judge must draw his own conclusions and findings on the evidence before him
as per Djebber and as outlined in ground 1 above.   There was reference to
Tanveer Ahmed (documents unreliable and forged) Pakistan * [2002] UKIAT
00439 by Mr Kotas but I could detect no reference to reliance by this judge
himself on that authority within the determination.

Additionally, there needed to be adequately reasoned findings in relation
to the CSID and the judge in his last paragraph, having addressed the
protection, Article 3 and Article 8 grounds, as an afterthought found: "I
find that the appellant has held CSID card (sic) previously and he still
has that in his possession or it is with a member of his family.  I find
that the appellant can return to Iraq (Kurdistan) and there is not a risk
to his life as claimed by him". That would appear not even to be the
position of the Secretary of State.

Overall, the approach to credibility was flawed, there was a failure to
consider evidence, and make relevant findings.  There was also a failure to
give adequate reasons as per MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT
00641 (IAC)

    '(1) It is axiomatic that a determination discloses clearly the reasons
    for a tribunal's decision.

    (2) If a tribunal finds oral evidence to be implausible, incredible or
    unreliable or a document to be worth no weight whatsoever, it is
    necessary to say so in the determination and for such findings to be
    supported by reasons. A bare statement that a witness was not believed
    or that a document was afforded no weight is unlikely to satisfy the
    requirement to give reasons'.

There was also an inadequate consideration of Article 8, not least with a
misdirection in law and a failure to address the issue of the CSID card.
For these reasons I find there were material errors of law and the
determination will be set aside. The errors which relate to credibility are
fundamental to the consideration of the appeal and hence the matter is
remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a hearing de novo.



Notice of Decision
The Judge erred materially for the reasons identified. I set aside the
decision pursuant to Section 12(2)(a) of the Tribunals Courts and
Enforcement Act 2007 (TCE 2007).  Bearing in mind the nature and extent of
the findings to be made the matter should be remitted to the First-tier
Tribunal under section 12(2) (b) (i) of the TCE 2007 and further to 7.2 (b)
of the Presidential Practice Statement.
Direction
All further evidence should be filed and served at least 14 days prior to
the substantive re-hearing.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed      Helen  Rimington                               Date  22nd  March
2021

Upper Tribunal Judge Rimington



