
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07665/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice Centre      |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9 November 2018                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    T S N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Capel, instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, TSN, was born in 1985 and is a male  citizen
    of Vietnam.  The appellant first entered the United  Kingdom  illegally
    in 2009.  He was convicted of cannabis production and was sentenced  to
    twenty months' imprisonment.   He  did  not  challenge  the  subsequent
    deportation order.  He was removed to Vietnam on 6  May  2014.   By  10
    December 2015 the appellant was back in the United  Kingdom  and  again
    arrested for immigration offences.  On  26  January  2016  he  made  an
    application for  asylum  he  claimed  to  have  been  trafficked.   The
    Competent Authority found that the appellant  had  been  trafficked,  a
    finding with which the Secretary of State does not disagree.   However,
    by a decision dated 4 May 2017, the appellant's application for  asylum
    was refused.  Representations made in respect of Article  8  ECHR  were
    also rejected  and  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  to  revoke  the
    deportation order.  The appellant appealed on asylum and  human  rights
    grounds to the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Herwald) which, in a decision
    promulgated on 19 March 2018 allowed  the  appeal.   The  Secretary  of
    State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Judge Herwald found that the appellant was at real risk  of  being  re-
    trafficked back to the United Kingdom if  he  were  to  be  removed  to
    Vietnam.  The Tribunal had the benefit of a report from Dr  Tran  which
    indicated that problems in Vietnam with sufficiency of  protection  for
    male trafficked victims together with limited availability of  shelters
    for such individuals.  The Secretary of State relies  upon  the  United
    States Department of State (USSD) Report  on  Trafficked  Persons  from
    Vietnam (2016).  This document indicates that  traffickers  in  Vietnam
    are prosecuted.  The respondent argues that the Vietnamese  authorities
    are willing and able to take criminal proceedings against  traffickers.
    Dr Tran also drew attention to problems  with  internal  relocation  in
    Vietnam.  Those problems included high rents  and  a  serious  risk  of
    destitution.  In his oral submissions, Mr  Tan  who  appeared  for  the
    Secretary of State before the Upper Tribunal, told  me  that,  although
    there were no shelters specifically from male trafficked victims, there
    were shelters for victims generally.  Mr Tan also relied upon the Upper
    Tribunal decision in Nguyen [2015] UKUT 170.  The Tribunal in that case
    found that there was  a  sufficiency  of  protection  provided  by  the
    authorities in Vietnam for  female  victims  of  trafficking.   Mr  Tan
    submitted that the  principles  of  the  case  and  in  particular  the
    evidence before  the  Tribunal  was  of  relevance  to  all  trafficked
    victims, not merely females.  In addition, the appellant would have the
    benefit of funds provided to him by the United Kingdom  Government  for
    returning voluntarily to Vietnam. Such funds would assist him to  avoid
    destitution.

 3. Ms Capel, who appeared for the appellant, provided me  with  a  helpful
    Rule 24 response.  This response points out that the case of Nguyen  is
    not a country guidance case although it was  reported.   She  submitted
    that the appellant in Nguyen was a female  victim  of  trafficking  and
    that  the  Tribunal  had  identified  evidence  that   the   Vietnamese
    authorities  did  assist  the  (invariably  female)  victims   of   sex
    trafficking.  Ms  Capel  submitted  that  Dr  Tran  had  described  the
    availability of support services for victims of trafficking in  Vietnam
    as "at best fragile and extremely limited".  As regards the Facilitated
    Returns Scheme (FRS) Judge Herwald had made a specific finding that the
    appellant would  not  benefit  from  the  FRS  [18(c)].   However,  the
    appellant had received money under the FRS  on  a  previous  return  to
    Vietnam but this had not assisted him as he had been re-trafficked.  As
    regards internal flight, the traffickers had located the  appellant  on
    his last return to Vietnam and there is an incentive for them to do  so
    again; the appellant owes them money and had damaged their business  by
    escaping as Judge Herwald found to be  the  case.   Moreover,  internal
    movement within  Vietnam  requires  registration;  those  who  exercise
    internal flight may be identified more quickly by those which  seek  to
    harm them.  The absence of  adequate  accommodation  in  a  shelter  or
    otherwise will also rapidly expose the appellant as an outsider  living
    beyond his home area and thereby expose him the risk of  hostility  and
    harm.

 4. Ms Capel also submitted that the Conclusive Grounds decision  regarding
    trafficking post-dated the  appellant's  criminal  conviction  and  the
    decision to  make  a  deportation  order.   In  effect,  the  Competent
    Authority had concluded that the appellant had been  trafficked  on  at
    least two occasions, on both occasions, he had been used  to  cultivate
    cannabis.

 5. Ms Capel's submissions were well made and accept them.  There  is  also
    another powerful factor at operation  in  the  appellant's  case.   The
    Secretary of State's case is that the appellant, with the assistance of
    the FRS, can return to Vietnam and live safely there without being  re-
    trafficked.   The  appellant's  experience  would  seem   to   indicate
    otherwise.   He  has  returned  once  before,  has  been   located   by
    traffickers and returned to the United Kingdom where he  was  a  second
    time and  forced  to  work  for  traffickers  and/or  their  associates
    cultivating cannabis.  Past persecution or ill-treatment  is  a  strong
    indicator of the likelihood of such treatment occurring in  the  future
    and the appellant's experience would appear to fit that  paradigm.  The
    appellant's circumstances now are not  materially  different  from  the
    last time he was removed and re-trafficked. Moreover, the Secretary  of
    State's arguments regarding the availability  of  internal  flight  and
    shelter accommodation (arguments not supported by Dr Tran,  the  expert
    witness) are not compelling.  Judge  Herwald  has  considered  all  the
    evidence which  was  relevant  and  has  not  taken  into  account  the
    irrelevant evidence.  The judge  has  reached  conclusions  which  were
    available to the Tribunal on the evidence. Indeed, the reasons  I  gave
    above, I find that his assessment of risk on return was legally  sound.
    The Secretary of State's appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

This appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 1 February 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane

