
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07778/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11th December 2019                |On 19th December 2019                |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     NW
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Akram of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a citizen of Sri Lanka.

 2. Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity as this is a protection appeal. No report of these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.

 3. The Appellant, with permission, appeals against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal, who, in a determination promulgated  on  the  19th
    September 2019, dismissed  his  appeal  against  the  decision  of  the
    Respondent made on the 1st August 2019 to  refuse  his  protection  and
    human rights claim.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Froom  on
    the 17 October 2019.

 5. The background to the appeal is set out in the decision letter and  the
    determination at paragraphs 1- 3 and at 10-13. It can be summarised  as
    follows. The Appellant entered the United Kingdom on the 30th June 2018
    with leave as a visitor and he claimed asylum on the  31st  July  2018.
    The basis of his claim was that he had been in the Sri Lankan army  and
    been serving under a particular individual. In the year 2000 he started
    a business hiring  out  vehicles.  That  individual  had  come  to  the
    appellant with security personnel to use one of his hire vehicles.  The
    man's assistant gave a bag of guns to motorcyclists and that later  the
    appellant heard shots. The appellant later learned  that  a  journalist
    been murdered, and the appellant was called to the  FC  ID  as  it  was
    considered that he was involved. He was later called in by  them  again
    and was threatened to tell the truth about the incident. He  was  later
    arrested in February 2018 and asked  to  give  a  statement  about  the
    incident but  refused  to  do  so.  He  was  then  released,  and  then
    rearrested in June 2018 for a prolonged period where he was  beaten  so
    as to give a statement. He later escaped with the assistance of one  of
    the guards. He left Sri Lanka in June. Following his departure, it  was
    stated that his wife had received threats from unknown people  believed
    to be related to the military.

 6. His protection and human rights claim was refused in a  decision  dated
    1st August 2019. The protection claim was addressed at paragraphs 22-51
    with the respondent rejecting the appellant's claim that  he  had  been
    arrested, detained or had suffered any injuries and  raise  credibility
    issues concerning the documentary evidence provided and surrounding his
    claim of being forced to give evidence.

 7. The Appellant sought permission to appeal and the  appeal  came  before
    the First-tier Tribunal on the 16 September 2019.  In  a  determination
    promulgated on the 19 September 2019 the Judge dismissed his protection
    appeal and the appeal under the Immigration Rules and on  human  rights
    grounds.

 8. Grounds of appeal were submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  which
    principally challenge the FtTJ's assessment of the claim and  that  the
    judge devoted a large part of the decision to considering  whether  the
    appellant should have been excluded from refugee status  by  virtue  of
    Article1F of the Convention. This was not an issue either raised in the
    decision letter or by the respondent at any stage nor were the  parties
    alerted to this. The concern for the appellant was that he had not  had
    a fair hearing and when considering the conclusions reached, the  judge
    noted that the appellant's claim did not engage the Refugee  Convention
    at [42] but this is because in the view of the FtTJ that he had already
    been excluded from it. Further concerns  were  raised  in  the  grounds
    concerning the view taken of the appellants claim by  the  FtTJ  noting
    that his "actions over the years have been reprehensible" at [41],  and
    that the events in Sri Lanka were as a result of his "past catching  up
    with him."

 9. Before the Upper Tribunal, the advocates agreed that  the  decision  of
    the FtTJ involved the making  of  an  error  on  a  point  of  law.  Ms
    Petterson, in her submissions noted that the FtTJ at  paragraphs  27-29
    addressed the issue of Article1F without this being raised as an  issue
    by the respondent and without notifying the parties and that whilst the
    FtTJ stated that  he  would  "not  dwell  on  it  further"  (at  [29]),
    nonetheless returned to this issue at [41]. It was therefore a material
    error of law which had the effect of undermining the  overall  decision
    reached.

10. Even if that concession had not been made,  I  am  satisfied  that  the
    grounds are made out.

11. It is plain for the decision letter that no issues had been  raised  in
    respect of Article1F nor had it been raised with the parties.  At  [27]
    the FtTJ makes reference to this as a "potential issue in this  appeal"
    and from paragraph 27 onwards went on to assess  part  of  his  factual
    account as one which supported his exclusion on Article1F grounds,  and
    the appearance is given at [27] that the appellant was complicit  in  a
    murder.  The FtTJ then went on to set out the UNHCR guidelines relating
    to Article 1F. As Mr Akram submitted, given that this was an issue  not
    raised by any of the parties that was a material  error  of  law  which
    went to the fairness of the proceedings. He further submitted that this
    had the effect of "prejudicing "the mind of the FtTJ and  that  it  was
    unclear why such a large part of the decision  was  dedicated  to  this
    area and that the descriptions used  by  the  FTT  J  had  tainted  the
    overall assessment of the appellant's case.

12. It is correct that the FtTJ after setting out the  issue  of  Article1F
    then stated at [29] that as the burden of proof was on  the  respondent
    "I will not  dwell  further  on  that  matter  in  the  course  of  the
    proceedings". The FtTJ then related his surprise  that  the  respondent
    had not mentioned consideration of this point in  the  refusal  letter.
    However, as Mr Akram pointed out, the FtTJ did dwell  further  on  this
    point and returned to it at [41]  reaching  another  finding  that  the
    appellant's actions had at best been "reprehensible."

13. I accept the submission made by Mr Akram that in the conclusion reached
    at  [42]  that  the  appellant's  claim  did  not  engage  the  Refugee
    Convention, the FtTJ had reached that conclusion on the basis  that  he
    was excluded from it by reason of the assessment of the factual account
    and that the decision had been materially affected by consideration  of
    the Article1F issue. If the FtTJ had any concerns  as  to  the  factual
    basis, it would have been incumbent on the FtTJ to at least raise  this
    with the parties but did not do so and this was therefore  procedurally
    unfair to the appellant who did not have the opportunity  to  make  any
    challenge to it.

14. For those reasons I am satisfied that the decision involved the  making
    of an error on a point of law and therefore the decision reached cannot
    stand and shall be set aside.

15. The issue relates to what, if any, findings of fact  can  be  preserved
    from the decision of the FtTJ. Mr Akram  relies  upon  the  grounds  of
    permission at paragraph 5 where it is stated  that  the  FtTJ  accepted
    everything that happened but  had  allowed  the  appellant's  purported
    complicity to affect the assessment of risk  on  return.  When  he  was
    asked to identify what factual findings had been made by the  FtTJ,  he
    could only point to paragraph 36 where the FtTJ accepted  that  he  had
    been in the army and had a business providing vehicles and at paragraph
    37 where the FtTJ  considered  it  was  credible  that  the  FCT  would
    investigate the murder of the journalist. Beyond that, he accepted that
    there was difficulty in distilling the findings of  fact  made  by  the
    judge in the light of the overall conclusions reached which had related
    to the issue of Article1F and his complicity in crimes.

16. Ms Petterson on behalf  of  the  respondent  submitted  that  the  only
    factual finding that could properly be preserved was that at  paragraph
    36 and that the finding at paragraph 37 was partially inconsistent with
    the appellant's own case.

17. I have carefully considered those submissions and in doing  so  I  have
    reached the conclusion  that  the  only  finding  of  fact  that  could
    properly be preserved from this  decision  is  that  at  paragraph  36.
    Whilst the grounds to assert that the  FtTJ  accepted  the  appellant's
    account, on closer inspection that is not position and when reading the
    decision in my judgement it is difficult to discern  what  findings  of
    fact the judge made on the relevant factual issues including events  in
    Sri Lanka and also those which went to the issue of risk on return.  By
    way of example, the appellant's account was that he  was  arrested  and
    detained and suffered ill-treatment which formed part  of  the  factual
    account. The FtTJ recited this account at paragraph 33 - 35 but made no
    findings of fact on this issue or  on  the  evidence  in  support  (the
    documentary evidence of injuries). The  appellant's  account  was  also
    that the appellant's wife had received threats from  the  military  and
    the appellant provided documentary evidence including an  extract  from
    the police station and also that after the report  that  his  wife  had
    moved home. There were no findings made on that part of his account.

18. The thrust of  the  grounds  relate  to  the  FtTJ's  consideration  of
    Article1F, which had not been raised by the respondent or  raised  with
    the advocates and that the judge had dedicated  a  large  part  of  the
    decision to this. The concern being raised was that the  appellant  did
    not have a fair hearing. Mr Akram pointed  to  parts  of  the  decision
    where the appellant was referred to "having blood on his hands" at [27]
    and his "reprehensible actions" [41]. Given the nature of the error, in
    my judgement it has  affected  the  whole  of  the  assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim as it has been considered on a wholly erroneous basis
    and consequently it is not possible to properly  discern  what  factual
    findings the judge made, what was accepted and  importantly  the  basis
    upon which it was accepted.

19. I have therefore reached the conclusion that beyond paragraph 36  there
    are no other factual findings that can be preserved.  I have  therefore
    considered whether it  should  be  remade  in  the  Upper  Tribunal  or
    remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that decision  I
    have given careful consideration to the Joint Practice Statement of the
    First-tier Tribunal and  Upper  Tribunal  concerning  the  disposal  of
    appeals in this Tribunal.

         "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal  is  likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

             (a)  the effect of the error  has  been  to  deprive  a  party
             before the First-tier Tribunal of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
             opportunity for that party's case to be put to and  considered
             by the First-tier Tribunal; or

             (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial fact  finding  which
             is necessary in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

20. As it will be necessary for the appellant to give evidence and to  deal
    with the evidential issues,  further  fact-finding  will  be  necessary
    alongside the analysis of risk on return in the light of  the  relevant
    country guidance and in my judgement the  best  course  and  consistent
    with the overriding objective is for it to be remitted to the FtT for a
    further hearing.

Decision:

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did involve the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law, the decision to  dismiss  the  appeal  is  set
    aside and shall be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a rehearing.
    The only preserved finding is that at paragraph 36.


Signed
                                Date: 12 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
