

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                      Appeal Numbers:
PA/07196/2018

                                               PA/07223/2018

                                               PA/07224/2018

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice      |    Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|Centre                                 |                                     |
|On 23rd July 2019                      |    On 08th August 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHALKLEY

                                   Between

                              HAILU Amare kesto
                                 seid bedru
                                 zema tefera
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                  Appellants

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Sills of Counsel instructed by J D Spicer
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Chris Bates, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   All three appellants are nationals of Ethiopia.   The  first  appellant
    was born on 26th October 1995, the second on 11th  May,  1994  and  the
    third on 13th May, 1990.  It appears that they were members of a circus
    troupe which originally travelled to the Edinburgh Festival to  perform
    in the Festival and subsequently performed  at  the  Grenfell  Memorial
    Concert in London.

2.   They individually claim that between September and October  2016,  they
    were each arrested by the authorities in Ethiopia as a result of  being
    caught distributing leaflets on behalf of the Blue Party in Ethiopia.

3.   They originally came to the United Kingdom on a date unknown some  time
    on or after 23rd June, 2017 to perform as members of a circus group  at
    the Edinburgh Festival and then  subsequently  at  the  Grenfell  Tower
    Memorial.  They returned to Ethiopia  and  remained  there  until  22nd
    November 2017 when  they  returned  to  the  United  Kingdom  and  made
    application for asylum.  Their claim was rejected by the respondent  on
    24th May 2018, as a result of which each of them appealed to the First-
    tier Tribunal.

4.   Their appeals were all linked and were heard jointly by the  First-tier
    Tribunal on 12th February, 2019.  In hearing their appeals,  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Birrell concluded that the appellants were  all  members
    and supporters of a legal opposition party in Ethiopia, namely the Blue
    Party, but she did not believe that they were members or supporters  of
    PG7, an illegal party in  Ethiopia.   She  did  not  believe  that  the
    appellants had been interviewed by ESAT TV channel at  the  fundraising
    event organised by the  Ethiopian  Community  UK  to  raise  funds  for
    victims of the Grenfell Tower incident which took  place  on  15th  and
    16th July 2017.  Neither did she accept that the  first  appellant  had
    attended a meeting in London for  a  high  profile  PG7  member  before
    having returned to Ethiopia.  She did not believe the  appellants  were
    credible in relation to  their  claimed  interview  with  ESAT  in  the
    absence of any evidence from the TV channel that such an interview took
    place,  either  with  a  narrative  account  of  the  contents  of  the
    interview, or a copy of the audio  file  of  the  interview  and  their
    comments.  The company in question was based in the United Kingdom.

5.   There was no evidence either from members of  the  Ethiopian  community
    in  the  United  Kingdom  who  organised  the   Grenfell   fundraising,
    confirming that an interview with the appellants took place  with  ESAT
    and she concluded that the first named appellant  had  not  attended  a
    meeting in London for a high profile PG7 member because  there  was  no
    evidence from Facebook to show the photograph which it was claimed  had
    been seen by the public and published and no evidence from anybody  who
    had attended the demonstration which apparently was  organised  by  the
    Ethiopian community in Manchester.  There was no evidence  either  that
    it had been posted on social media and no evidence from the  organisers
    of the event.  There was nothing to link the event to the  PG7  protest
    in general.  She  concluded  that  the  appellants  were  all  economic
    migrants and while they had  been  supporters  of  the  Blue  Party  in
    Ethiopia, that support had never put them at risk of persecution.   She
    did not accept that they were perceived to be or  would  in  future  be
    perceived to be supporters of PG7.  She did not believe that they would
    be at any risk on return to Ethiopia.

6.   There were several challenges to the determination.  The first  was  of
    an alleged failure to make  reasoned  findings  and  consider  material
    matters in relation to past persecution; a  failure  to  make  required
    findings on risk on return on the basis  of  their  accepted  political
    membership of the Blue Party; and a failure to apply  the  respondent's
    policy guidance to the facts of the appellant's case.  Mr Sills  relied
    on the  respondent's  policy  document:  Ethiopia:  opposition  to  the
    government, which states in material part,

         "3.1.5   Members or supporters of non-armed opposition groups whose
                profile is such that the government  perceives  them  to  be
                active or influential in the opposition and a threat to  the
                state may be at risk  of  arbitrary  arrest,  detention  and
                physical abuse which is likely to amount to  persecution  or
                serious harm.


         3.1.6    However, persons who have a low profile  or  who  are  not
                active  in  an  opposition  group  may  face  harassment  or
                discrimination but, in general,  this  will  not  reach  the
                level to constitute persecution.


         3.1.7    The onus is on the person  to  show  that  their  position
                within an opposition group and/or their activities are  such
                that the authorities are likely to view them  adversely  and
                subject  them  to  treatment  amounting  to  persecution  or
                serious harm."


7.   The judge accepted that the appellants were each  of  them  members  of
    the  Blue  Party  and  accepted  that  they  had  been   detained   for
    distributing leaflets.  The judge found that they would not be at  risk
    given their membership  and  previous  detention,  but  failed,  it  is
    alleged, to give reasons or determine material issues arising from this
    acceptance.  In particular it is said that the judge should  have  made
    clear findings on whether  or  not  the  appellant  had  suffered  past
    persecution.

8.   Next it was suggested that the  judge  erred  by  failing  to  consider
    whether their continued political  activities  as  Blue  Party  members
    would put them at  risk  in  future,  given  their  previous  arbitrary
    detention for distributing leaflets and previous persecution.  Next  it
    was suggested that the judge erred  by  failing  to  clearly  determine
    whether the appellants fell under paragraph 3.1.5 of  the  respondent's
    policy document.  Next it was asserted that the judge failed  to  apply
    Immigration Rule 339L and in particular the judge  failed  to  consider
    that any information held by a media company was not at the disposal of
    the appellants and that significant corroboration had in any event been
    provided, given that the account was plausible and  coherent  and  made
    promptly, once each of them realised they were at risk.   It  was  then
    asserted that the judge failed to consider the evidence in  the  round.
    Other challenges were repetitious.

9.   In addressing me at some length, Mr Sills suggested that without  clear
    findings as to the appellant's past persecution during their  arbitrary
    detention, the judge was not able to properly assess the  risk  to  the
    appellants on their return.  He submitted that where at  paragraph  101
    the judge said:-

         "The appellants all claim to have been  arrested  for  distributing
         leaflets.  There is nothing about that which is  inconsistent  with
         background material that supporting opposition parties puts one  at
         risk of harassment or even detention.  I am satisfied however  that
         if  the  authorities  had  genuinely  believed  that  any  of   the
         appellants were supporters of PG7 an illegal party they  would  not
         have been released as they were they would not have been allowed to
         remain in their jobs and they certainly would not have been allowed
         to leave the country with no  difficulty  whatsoever.   That  party
         membership and even their detention does not place them at any risk
         on return as they were all clear that they intended to return after
         the last trip to the United Kingdom."

10.  Mr Sills  submitted  that  that  was  inadequate.  The  fact  that  the
    appellants had all been  persecuted  during  their  previous  detention
    meant that there was a heightened risk to them on  their  return.   The
    fact that they had left Ethiopia, come to the United Kingdom  and  then
    returned to Ethiopia did not necessarily mean that they did not at  the
    time of their return have a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution.   The
    judge should have applied the respondent's policy guidance,  they  were
    members of a non-armed opposition group  and  their  profile  was  such
    given  that  they  had  previously  been  arrested  and  tortured  have
    perceived to be active or influential in the opposition.   The  failure
    by the judge to make any clear reasoned finding on whether or not  they
    had suffered persecution was he submitted a clear  error  of  law.   He
    suggested that there was no clear finding on whether or not given their
    past  political  activities  on  behalf  of  the  Blue  Party  and  the
    likelihood of them continuing their Blue Party membership activities on
    return whether they would be at risk of further detention.  That was  a
    material error of law and he submitted the  failure  of  the  judge  to
    properly apply Rule 339L in relation to the evidence of their sur place
    activities amounted to a clear error of law.

11.  Mr Bates accepted that the judge had failed to make  specific  findings
    in relation to each of  the  appellants'  claimed  mistreatment  during
    their period of detention, but he submitted that it was not material in
    the context of this appeal.  After the time that they had been detained
    they were released and they remained in Ethiopia, but nothing  happened
    to them.  They continued working in Ethiopia, but nothing  happened  to
    them and then they were allowed to leave and come to the United Kingdom
    as part of a circus troupe.  Having been  in  the  United  Kingdom  for
    approximately two months during the summer of 2017 they  then  returned
    to Ethiopia.  There was  no  evidence  that  they  had  been  vocal  in
    Ethiopia  or  that  they  were  of  any  interest  to   the   Ethiopian
    authorities,  either  before  they  left   Ethiopia,   or   when   they
    subsequently returned, or indeed now.  As to  the  assertion  that  the
    judge  erred  by  finding  that   the   appellant's   credibility   was
    significantly undermined by the absence of any  evidence  from  the  TV
    company such that an interview took place  with  either  the  narrative
    account of the contents of that interview or a copy of the  audio  file
    of the interview and their comments on whether they were  aware  of  it
    having been broadcast in Ethiopia or having come to  the  attention  of
    the Ethiopian authorities, he submitted that that was  something  which
    was open to the judge.  She pointed out that the company was  based  in
    the  United  Kingdom  that  according  to  the  appellants,  they  were
    supporters of PG7.  There was no evidence either from  the  members  of
    the Ethiopian community who  organised  the  Grenfell  fundraising  who
    might have been able to confirm that an interview  with  a  TV  station
    took place and the sort of questions that were asked.  The  judge  said
    at paragraph 107 that she reminded herself that the appellants bear the
    burden of establishing this aspect of their case  and  they  failed  to
    meet it.  She was entitled to conclude that  they  had  fabricated  the
    account in order to remain in the United Kingdom.  She was entitled  to
    find that they had fabricated a significant  element  of  their  claim.
    Similarly, she was entitled to find that the first appellant had failed
    to prove that he had attended a meeting in London for  a  high  profile
    PG7 member, because there was no evidence from Facebook to show that  a
    photograph had been seen by the public, or that it was published  there
    and no evidence from the person who took the photograph.  There was  no
    evidence either to corroborate the  claim  that  the  second  appellant
    attended a  demonstration  organised  by  the  Ethiopian  community  in
    Manchester.

12.  He submitted that the appellants may very well have been mistreated  in
    the past, but they came to the United Kingdom having been released  and
    remained in Ethiopia until travelling to  the  United  Kingdom  in  the
    summer of 2017.  They continued with their jobs and having performed in
    their circus troupe for two months at various events they then returned
    to Ethiopia.  The judge has given clear reasons why  she  rejected  the
    appellants' sur place element of their claim.

13.  Mr Sills invited me to allow the  appellants'  appeal,  set  aside  the
    determination and remit  it  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for  making
    afresh.  I reserved my determination.

14.  It is clear from the determination that the judge  was  satisfied  that
    each of the appellants were members and have  been  supporters  of  the
    legal opposition party in Ethiopia, known as  the  Blue  Party.   Their
    evidence was consistent with those who were long term supporters of the
    party.  She noted that  they  all  claim  to  have  been  arrested  and
    mistreated as a result of their activities on behalf of the Blue Party,
    but she said at  paragraph  104  of  the  determination  that  she  was
    satisfied that if the  authorities  had  genuinely  believed  that  the
    appellants were supporters of PG7 an illegal party (as opposed  to  the
    Blue Party which of course is legal), then they would  not   have  been
    released as they were and would not have  been  allowed  to  remain  in
    their jobs and not have been allowed  to  leave  the  country  with  no
    apparent difficulty.  They did leave the country as part  of  a  circus
    group.  The judge pointed out that  their  party  membership  and  even
    their detention did not place them at risk on return as  they  had  all
    been clear that they intended to return after  the  last  trip  to  the
    United Kingdom and in fact of course they all did  return  and  nothing
    happened to them.   The judge went on  to  find  that  the  appellants'
    accounts of attending demonstrations were largely consistent  with  the
    background material but there was no suggestion that they had got  into
    any trouble for that or that it prevented them from  travelling  abroad
    on a regular basis.  They claimed however that a significant change  in
    their circumstances arose from their  participation  in  the  interview
    with ESAT TV channel and the audio of that interview and  a  photograph
    coming to the attention of the Ethiopian authorities.  She believed  it
    was unclear why it had taken from July  2017  when  the  interview  was
    alleged to have taken place, until September, 2017 for the material  to
    come to the attention of the Ethiopian authorities, but noted  that  it
    meant that  the  appellants,  conveniently,  were  able  to  return  to
    Ethiopia after the interview and then  return  to  the  United  Kingdom
    without being detained.

15.  Given the  ease  with  which  it  would  have  been  possible  for  the
    appellants to have obtained some corroborating  evidence  from  the  TV
    channel or from members  of  the  Ethiopian  community  in  the  United
    Kingdom who organised the Grenfell  fundraising  event,  she  concluded
    that the  appellants'  credibility  was  significantly  undermined.   I
    believe that she was perfectly entitled to find  that  the  appellants'
    credibility had been damaged by that lack of evidence.   There  was  no
    indication that any attempt  had  been  made  to  obtain  it.   But  an
    approach to the tv company for evidence would not have caused any  risk
    to the appellants.   The  judge  was  entitled  to  conclude  that  the
    appellants had fabricated a significant element of their claim and that
    the first and second appellants had attempted to  bolster  their  claim
    with modest engagement in political activities in the  United  Kingdom.
    It was said that the first appellant attended  a  meeting  for  a  high
    profile PG7 member, but again nothing to corroborate that and that  the
    second appellant attended a demonstration organised  by  the  Ethiopian
    community in Manchester and no evidence of  the  person  who  took  the
    photograph and no suggestion that the photograph  had  been  posted  on
    social media and no evidence from organisers of the event.   Again,  an
    approach to the community in  Manchester  would  not  have  caused  the
    appellant's to be put at any risk.  As  it  was,  it  appears  that  no
    attempt to obtain such evidence was ever made.  The standard of risk in
    a low one, but there still is a standard the appellants have to  reach.
    The judge found that the appellants had failed to prove  the  truth  of
    the facts upon which they relied and had therefore failed to prove that
    they were entitled to  be  treated  as  credible  witnesses.   She  was
    satisfied that they were all economic migrants and whilst they may have
    been supporters of the Blue Party in Ethiopia, that support  never  put
    them at risk of  persecution.   She  did  not  accept  that  they  were
    perceived to be or would be in future perceived to be supporters of PG7
    and did not believe they would be  at  any  risk  on  return.   I  have
    concluded that the determination does not contain any material error of
    law on the part of the judge.  She very clearly did  consider  all  the
    evidence in the  round.   As  to  the  appellants'  policy,  given  her
    findings it is clear that the appellants did not meet the  requirements
    of that policy.  I uphold the judge's determination.  The  appeals  are
    dismissed.

No anonymity direction is made.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley

Dated 30 July 2019
