
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07865/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House UT                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 13th September 2017                   |On 03 October 2017                  |
|                                         |                                    |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                   mr f.s.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Nicholson, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms N Willocks-Briscoe, Home Office Presenting
Officer

Anonymity

Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
I hereby make an anonymity direction on account of these proceeding
involving a protection claim.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1.   The   Appellant   is   a   citizen   of   Afghanistan,   who   claims
    asylum/humanitarian protection saying that he cannot  return  there  on
    account of a fear of persecution from:

       . the Taliban because although a former member of it, he is suspected
         of being involved in the death of Taliban members;

       . the Afghan government -  which  also  suspects  him  of  committing
         various atrocities; and

       . a family blood feud with the MK family, possibly relating to  water
         rights.

 2. The Appellant's application for asylum was refused  by  the  Respondent
    and the Appellant was  informed  of  his  liability  for  removal.   He
    appealed the Respondent's decision refusing his claim  and  the  appeal
    against the decision came before First-tier Tribunal Judge  McMahon  on
    1st March 2017.  The appeal was dismissed in a decision promulgated  on
    20th March 2017.   The  judge  did  not  accept  the  veracity  of  the
    Appellant's account and dismissed the appeal on all counts.

 3. The Appellant through his representatives  applied  for  permission  to
    appeal  to  this  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  There is one ground only.   It  is  asserted  that  the  FtT
    failed to apply the appropriate standard of proof  in  determining  the
    appeal.  It is contended that the FtT determined the appeal  using  the
    application  of  "balance  of  probabilities"  rather  than  the  lower
    standard of proof appropriate to protection claims.

 4. A particular criticism is made of [53] of the decision by reference  to
    the judge using such  words  as  "unlikely"  or  "most  unlikely"  when
    setting out his findings of fact.

 5. The relevant part of the grant of permission reads as follows:

         "The sole ground of the appeal is that the judge applied the  wrong
         burden of proof in deciding the appeal based on (i)   his reference
         at para  [53]  to  balancing  the  apparent  consistencies  in  the
         Appellant's account with inconsistencies, and (ii)    his reference
         and various paragraphs to  the  use  of  words  'likely'  or  'most
         unlikely' in making his findings of fact.  As to (i) this  is  just
         arguable because nowhere does the Judge refer to  the  standard  of
         proof that he is applying  and  he  does  refer  to  balancing  the
         evidence, and, if it is made out there  is  some  merit  in  (ii)."
         (sic)

 6.  The  Respondent  lodged  a  Rule  24  response,  contending  that  the
    Appellant's grounds are not made out because  a  fair  reading  of  the
    decision shows:

       . at no point does the FtT  decide  the  appeal  on  the  balance  of
         probability;

       . the FtT is simply considering the evidence in the round at [53];

       . the findings of "unlikely" are plausibility findings; and

       . given the "very significant concerns" set out by the FtT  over  the
         core aspects of the claim [56] a "reasonable degree of  likelihood"
         direction would not have altered the outcome of the appeal.

Error of Law Hearing

 7. Before me Mr Nicholson appeared for  the  Appellant  and  Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe  for  the  Respondent.   In  keeping  to  the  grounds  seeking
    permission, Mr Nicholson submitted that the judge's  findings  of  fact
    were tainted by taking a wrong approach  to  the  evidence.   His  main
    criticism centred on [53] where, he said, the language  used  including
    the words "balance" and "unlikely" lent weight to  his  challenge  that
    the judge had applied a balance of probability  test  rather  than  the
    correct test set out, for example, in Karanakaran v  SSHD  [2000]  EWCA
    Civ 11.  He submitted that should I find that the judge had erred  then
    there was a real possibility that the appeal would succeed,  especially
    when  a  correct  review  of  the  medical  report  from  Harmondsworth
    detention centre was properly factored into the evidential matrix.

 8. Ms  Willocks-Briscoe  relied  upon  the  Rule  24  response,  but  also
    emphasised that the judge when reviewing the hearing had made  explicit
    reference to the relevant standard of proof  [12].   It  was  incorrect
    therefore to say as suggested in the grounds that there was no  mention
    of this in the decision.

 9. She continued by saying that thereafter the  judge  reviewed  extensive
    evidence concerning the Appellant's claim and clearly found it wanting.
     The findings made by the judge disbelieving the core claim were  well-
    founded and  well-reasoned.   The  judge's  task  was  to  decide  what
    evidence could be accepted and what must  be  rejected.   Ms  Willocks-
    Briscoe referred to [56] wherein  the  judge  had  set  out  his  "very
    significant concerns  as  to  the  reliability  of  important  features
    relating to the core aspects of the claim."

10. Finally, she submitted, if I did consider there to be an error, it  was
    in any event  immaterial  when  regard  was  given  to  the  evidential
    findings of fact made by the judge. Alternatively based on those  clear
    and cogent findings, it would also be open to me to say that there  was
    an error in the decision but to find that I  could  substitute  my  own
    decision dismissing the original appeal.

11. Mr Nicholson responded to that last  point  saying  that  the  original
    decision was one which could  not  be  corrected  and  the  appropriate
    course would be to remit the  matter  for  a  fresh  hearing  before  a
    differently constituted FtT.

12. At the end of submissions I reserved my decision which I now give  with
    my reasons.

Consideration

13. The starting point for my consideration must centre upon an examination
    of the judge's analysis of the evidence placed  before  him.   In  this
    appeal as in many asylum claims, the credibility or  otherwise  of  the
    Appellant plays a central role.

14. When considering a protection claim,  First-tier  Tribunal  judges  are
    tasked with looking at evidence in the round, and adopting an  approach
    which takes into account evidence:

      a) about which they are certain;

      b) they think is probably true;

      c) willing to attach some credence; and

      d) not willing to attach any credence at all.

15. The judge in the instant appeal gave many reasons for disbelieving  the
    Appellant's narrative.  There were three elements  to  the  Appellant's
    core claim as set out above.

16. The first  element,  which  is  the  historic  starting  point  to  the
    Appellant's claim, related to  the  blood  feud  with  MK  and  family.
    Stemming from this feud was his claim of involvement with  the  Taliban
    and the ensuing problems with them and the Afghan authorities.

17. His claim included an assertion that on different occasions in the past
    he had been stabbed, shot in the hand and  shot  in  the  leg  by  MK's
    family.  As part  of  the  evidence  in  support  of  this  claim,  the
    Appellant submitted a medical note including a body map drawn up by the
    doctor who examined him in Harmondsworth detention centre.  This showed
    evidence of a bullet wound scar on the hand, bullet wound scars on  the
    upper and lower leg and a laceration scar of the body trunk.

18. The judge noted the medical report as expressing the  doctor's  opinion
    that the Appellant "may have been the victim of torture" [23].  However
    looking at the evidence in the round the judge decided  that  he  could
    place little or no reliance on that conclusion.  The judge's reason for
    this was because the account that the Appellant had given to the doctor
    as to the circumstances in which the injuries had  been  sustained  was
    inconsistent with other accounts that he had given at different  times.
    I find that the judge was fully entitled to draw that conclusion.

19. The doctor's report dated 21st June 2016  records  that  the  Appellant
    stated that he had been tortured in Afghanistan, and then  proceeds  to
    document descriptions of  four  separate  attacks  said  to  have  been
    carried out by the enemies of his family.  The  doctor  concludes  that
    "on examination he has scars possibly due to the history he has given,"
    this despite the fact that the history refers to a knife injury to  the
    hand whereas the accompanying body map highlights bullet wound scars in
    this area.

20. The difficulty for the Appellant is that, as  the  judge  found,  there
    were significant differences in the various accounts given by him as to
    how  the  scarring  occurred.   The  judge  noted   these   significant
    inconsistencies and set them out over several  paragraphs  in  [33]  to
    [37].

21. In  [38]  the  judge  noted  a  further  significant  conflict  in  the
    Appellant's account regarding the timing of when he claimed he was last
    attacked by the MK family.  These significant  inconsistencies  brought
    the judge to a conclusion in [50] that the Appellant's overall  account
    was  disjointed,  partly  inconsistent  and  significantly  lacking  in
    detail.

22. A full reading of the  decision  in  my  judgment  discloses  that  the
    judge's analysis of  the  evidence  shows  that  for  good  reason  the
    Appellant's account was such that it was open to the judge to attach no
    credence to it.

23. So far  as  the  other  two  elements  of  the  Appellant's  claim  are
    concerned, they effectively depend upon the evidence of the blood  feud
    being accepted. This is because the Appellant claimed  that  he  joined
    the Taliban "on  account  of  the  blood  feud"  and  that  the  Afghan
    government are looking  for  him  because  of  his  membership  of  the
    Taliban.  The  judge  sets  out  in  his  decision  good  reasons   for
    discounting the Appellant's claim that he served  in  the  Taliban  for
    several years, not least because the appellant was unable to supply the
    sort of detail that it would  be  reasonable  to  expect  of  him.   It
    follows therefore that the judge was at  liberty  to  disbelieve  those
    parts of the Appellant's claim as well.

24. In addition the judge gave cogent reasons as  to  why  he  could  place
    little  reliance  on  the  expert's  report,  and  these  reasons   are
    documented in [51].

25. I find force therefore in Ms  Willocks-Briscoe's  submission  that  the
    FtT's  findings  as  expressed  by  the  term  "unlikely"   amount   to
    plausibility findings only and are not an expression of the standard of
    proof used.  In coming to this finding I  acknowledge  that  the  judge
    might have phrased some aspects of his decision better.  I accept  also
    that there is a need for caution when employing plausibility as a  tool
    for assessing evidence given that it can be regarded essentially  as  a
    subjective concept, but I am bound to  say  that  in  this  appeal  the
    inconsistencies  in  the  Appellant's  evidence,  which  are  carefully
    documented by the judge, shake the whole foundation of the  Appellant's
    claim to the extent that the credibility of it falls away.

26. I find therefore on a fair reading  of  the  decision  that  the  judge
    applied the correct standard of proof and the Appellant can  have  been
    left in no doubt as to why his claim failed.  I find that the challenge
    to the FtT's decision amounts to little more than a  quarrel  with  the
    findings and an attempt  to  elevate  form  over  substance.   For  the
    foregoing reasons therefore this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains no material  error  of  law
requiring it to be set aside.  This appeal is therefore dismissed.
Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.




Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     30 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts




