
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07980/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool Civil and Family Court     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 29th January 2019                          |On 18th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE M A HALL


                                   Between

                                     RA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr C Holmes of Counsel instructed by Greater
                    Manchester Immigration Aid Unit
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction and Background

 1. The Appellant is a female Nigerian citizen born 1st January 1980.   She
    appealed against a decision of Judge McCall (the judge) of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal (the FtT) promulgated on 21st March 2018.

 2. The Appellant made a  claim  for  international  protection  which  was
    refused by the Respondent on 4th August 2017.  The  Appellant  has  two
    sons born  in  April  2010  and  February  2012  respectively  who  are
    dependants in her appeal.  Her husband (PO) died in September  2012  in
    Nigeria  and  she  fears  his  family  because  the  family  held   her
    responsible for his death.  In addition, the Appellant claimed that she
    was raped in the UK in August 2016 by a  man  known  as  EZ,  who  also
    originates from Nigeria.  This was reported to the  police  in  January
    2017 but EZ was  not  prosecuted.   She  has  a  fear  of  EZ  and  his
    acquaintances if returned to Nigeria because she reported the  rape  to
    the police.  The third reason  for  claiming  international  protection
    relates to her sexuality in that she is a lesbian.

 3. Following refusal of her application for international  protection  the
    Appellant's appeal was heard by the FtT on 7th March 2018.   The  judge
    heard evidence from the Appellant and from SW who is a  volunteer  with
    the Lesbian Immigration Support Group (LISG)  in  Manchester.   SW  and
    another volunteer, KS, who could not attend the hearing because of work
    commitments, had prepared a statement on behalf of the Appellant  dated
    28th January 2018.

 4. The judge dismissed the appeal on  all  grounds.   The  judge  did  not
    accept the Appellant's claim that she  was  blamed  for  her  husband's
    death and did not accept that she had previously  been  ill-treated  by
    his family.  The judge found that account to be a fabrication.

 5. The judge did not accept that the Appellant had been raped  by  EZ  and
    therefore did not accept that she had a well-founded fear of EZ or  his
    family and acquaintances either in the UK or in Nigeria.

 6. The judge did not accept the Appellant's claim  to  be  a  lesbian  and
    therefore did not accept that she would be at risk  on  that  basis  if
    returned to Nigeria.

 7. The Appellant applied for permission to appeal to the  Upper  Tribunal.
    Permission to appeal was granted by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Reeds  who
    found it arguable that the judge had  failed  to  properly  assess  the
    evidence  in  relation  to  the  issue  of   the   Appellant's   sexual
    orientation.

Error of Law

 8. On 3rd September 2018 I heard submissions from both parties in relation
    to error of law and concluded that the judge's  decision  must  be  set
    aside.  Full details of the application for permission to  appeal,  the
    grant of permission, the  submissions  made  by  both  parties  and  my
    conclusions and reasons are set out in my error of law  decision  dated
    3rd September 2018 promulgated on 12th  September  2018.   I  summarise
    below my reasons for setting aside the decision of the FtT.

 9. I found the FtT decision to have been prepared with great care.   There
    was no error of law disclosed regarding the judge's conclusion that the
    Appellant would not be at risk from her former husband's family or from
    EZ.  Those findings were preserved and are contained in paragraphs  20-
    29 of the FtT decision.

10. I was persuaded that the judge had erred  in  law  in  considering  the
    Appellant's sexuality.  I found the judge  had  not  provided  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the considerable amount of evidence  in  relation
    to the Appellant's sexuality.  I  found  the  judge  erred  in  law  at
    paragraph 49 by giving the impression that because he did  not  believe
    the Appellant had been raped, this suggested that she may not have been
    truthful about her sexual orientation.  It is trite law that  in  cases
    such as this the evidence must be considered  in  the  round,  and  the
    impression is given that having decided  that  the  Appellant  was  not
    raped, the judge did not believe the remainder of her claim in relation
    to her sexuality.

Re-making the Decision

11. At the resumed hearing the Appellant attended  and  Mr  Holmes  advised
    that the Appellant would be giving oral evidence  and  there  would  be
    three witnesses.

12. I ascertained that I had received  all  documentation  upon  which  the
    parties intended to rely, and that each party had served the other with
    any documentation upon which reliance was to be placed.

13. I had received the Respondent's bundle that had  been  before  the  FtT
    with Annexes A-J, and the Appellant's bundle that had been  before  the
    FtT comprising 82 pages.  In addition, I had received  a  supplementary
    bundle on behalf of the  Appellant  comprising  48  pages.   Mr  Holmes
    submitted case law, TF and MA [2018] CSIH 58 and NK v SSHD (IJR) [2015]
    UKUT 00431 (IAC).  There was no skeleton argument.

14. The Appellant gave oral evidence, adopting her witness statement  dated
    24th January 2019.

15. SW gave oral evidence, adopting as her evidence her letter  dated  22nd
    September 2018.

16. KS gave oral evidence, adopting as her evidence her letter  dated  30th
    September 2018.

17. WJ gave oral  evidence,  adopting  his  witness  statement  dated  28th
    February 2018.

18. The Appellant and witnesses were questioned by the representatives.   I
    have recorded all questions and answers in my Record of Proceedings and
    will not reiterate them here.  If relevant I will  refer  to  the  oral
    evidence when I set out my conclusions and reasons.

19. I then heard oral submissions.  Mr Tan submitted that the Appellant had
    not given  a  credible  account  in  relation  to  her  sexuality.   He
    described the three witnesses, who had stated that the Appellant  is  a
    lesbian, as well intentioned but mistaken.  Mr  Tan  pointed  out  that
    these witnesses had stated that they believed the  Appellant's  account
    in its entirety, despite a judge having found that she  had  fabricated
    her account and those findings had been preserved.

20. Mr Tan confirmed that if the Appellant was a  lesbian,  the  Respondent
    accepted that she would be at risk in  Nigeria,  but  the  Respondent's
    case was that the Appellant had fabricated her claim to be a lesbian.

21. Mr Holmes submitted that the sole issue to be decided  at  the  hearing
    related to the Appellant's sexuality.  The Appellant claimed  that  she
    was entitled to asylum on the basis of her membership of  a  particular
    social group.  Mr Holmes confirmed that no human rights claim was being
    pursued in this appeal.

22. I was asked to find the Appellant and witnesses  credible.   Mr  Holmes
    submitted that evidence from SW and KS, who are founding members of the
    LISG, could be regarded as expert evidence in line  with  the  findings
    made in paragraph 54 of TF and MA in relation to church members.  I was
    asked to note that in NK there was specific reference at paragraph 8 to
    the LISG and weight was attached  to  evidence  from  members  of  that
    group, based on their own experiences and their own sexuality.

23. At the conclusion of oral submissions I reserved my decision.

My Conclusions and Reasons

24. I have taken into account all the evidence, both oral  and  documentary
    that has been supplied, and have considered that evidence in the round.
     In relation to risk on return the burden of proof is on the Appellant,
    to the lower standard, that being a reasonable degree of likelihood.

25. The issue before me related only to  the  Appellant's  sexuality.   The
    findings by the FtT that the Appellant would not be at  risk  from  her
    late husband's family or from EZ or  his  associates  and  family  were
    preserved.

26. As the Respondent accepted that the  Appellant  would  be  at  risk  in
    Nigeria if she is a lesbian, I had to decide whether she had proved  to
    a reasonable degree of likelihood that she is a lesbian.

27. The Appellant claimed that she  had  a  lesbian  relationship  with  an
    individual whom I shall refer to as GN while in Nigeria.  A letter from
    that individual had been provided to  the  Respondent.   The  Appellant
    also claimed that she had a lesbian relationship  with  TM  in  the  UK
    which lasted between September and December 2017, the couple having met
    in Liverpool.  No evidence had been provided from TM.

28. The Appellant was found to have fabricated elements of her  account  by
    the FtT.  That does not mean that she has  fabricated  her  account  in
    relation to her sexuality.

29. A letter dated  20th  January  2018  from  LISG  is  contained  in  the
    Appellant's bundle at pages 22-26 and is written by SW  and  KS.   This
    confirms that the Appellant contacted LISG in October 2017, when  there
    was an initial assessment.  Only women who are believed to  be  lesbian
    or bisexual are admitted  to  the  group.   If  there  are  doubts  the
    individual would not be invited to join the  group  after  the  initial
    meetings.  The letter confirms that the group have no  doubt  that  the
    Appellant is  a  lesbian.   The  letter  confirms  that  the  Appellant
    disclosed to the group her lesbian relationship with GN in Nigeria.

30. SW in giving oral evidence relied upon her letter dated 22nd  September
    2018.  SW is one of the founding members of LISG and confirmed that she
    has  known  the  Appellant  for  approximately  fourteen  months.    SW
    described coming out as a lesbian  when  she  was  married  with  three
    children.  She was 32 years of age at that time, and is now 68 years of
    age.  SW confirmed that she had no doubts at all that the Appellant  is
    a lesbian.

31. KS then  gave  oral  evidence.   She  adopted  her  letter  dated  30th
    September 2018.  This is contained at pages  7-10  of  the  Appellant's
    supplementary bundle.  She is also a founding member of the LISG.   She
    came out as a lesbian in 1984.  She gave very similar evidence  to  SW,
    in describing the Appellant's attendance at  meetings  and  interaction
    with other women.  She reiterated that LISG would not offer support  to
    an individual over whom there were any doubts as to her sexuality.   KS
    confirmed that she has no doubts that the Appellant is a lesbian.

32. The third witness was WJ who adopted his witness statement  dated  28th
    February 2018 contained at pages 23-24 of the Appellant's supplementary
    bundle.  WJ is a gay man.  He was a teacher for seventeen years and  is
    now an IT professional.  He is a church elder, has spent six years as a
    civilian instructor  with  the  RAF  Cadets,  and  twelve  years  as  a
    magistrate, and  chairs  both  adult  and  youth  courts.   WJ  in  his
    statement explained that he had known the Appellant  for  approximately
    seven months prior to the statement date when she started attending the
    church where he serves as an elder.  The Appellant attended  a  support
    group for LGBT people seeking asylum.  WJ  confirmed  that  he  had  no
    doubt whatsoever that the Appellant is a lesbian.  He had observed  her
    interacting with other LGBT people and  he  has  no  doubts  about  her
    sexuality.  I found the witnesses to be entirely credible and  genuine.
    They have no doubt that the Appellant is a lesbian.

33. My task is to decide what weight I should attach to their evidence, and
    to consider the Respondent's view that they are genuine  witnesses  but
    have been misled by the Appellant.

34. I attach  very  considerable  weight  to  the  evidence  given  by  the
    witnesses.  They have a considerable amount of  experience  in  meeting
    with LGBT persons.  They have known  the  Appellant  for  approximately
    eighteen months.  They have met with her on a frequent basis.

35. I do have to take into account that the Appellant  has  been  found  to
    have fabricated other elements of her account, and that it is  for  the
    Appellant to prove her sexuality to a reasonable degree of  likelihood.
    My conclusion is that the Appellant has discharged the burden of proof.
     I reach this conclusion because of the weight that  I  attach  to  the
    evidence given by  the  three  witnesses.   I  do  not  find  that  the
    Appellant  has  been  able  to  mislead  all  three  witnesses  over  a
    considerable period of time.  I am satisfied because  of  the  evidence
    given by those witnesses that the Appellant is a lesbian.  It therefore
    follows, and is accepted by the Respondent, that she would be  at  risk
    if returned to Nigeria.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  on
a point of law and is set aside.  I substitute a fresh decision.

The appeal is allowed on asylum grounds.

An anonymity direction is made.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date         11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I make no fee award.  The  appeal  has  been  allowed  because  of  evidence
presented to the Tribunal that was not before the initial decision maker.


Signed                              Date         11th February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge M A Hall
