
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07029/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 21 September 2017                     |On 03 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                  |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     MWE
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr. I. Jarvis, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr. J. Martin, Counsel, instructed by Nag Law
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State  against  the  decision  of
     First-tier Tribunal Judge Randall promulgated on 13 July 2017 in  which
     he allowed MWE's appeal against the Secretary of  State's  decision  to
     refuse to grant asylum.


  2. For the purposes of this decision I refer to MWE as the Appellant,  and
     to the Secretary of State as the Respondent, reflecting their positions
     as they were before the First-tier Tribunal.


  3. As this is an asylum appeal, I make an anonymity direction.


  4. Permission to appeal was granted as follows:


         "It is clear from the judge's  decision  that  adverse  credibility
         findings have been made in relation to the appellant's  claim.   It
         does seem that the judge allowed  the  appeal  on  the  documentary
         evidence from Sri Lanka, which the judge found to be  genuine.   Of
         course, it was open for the judge to find documentary  evidence  to
         be genuine but, in this case, it is  at  odds  with  other  adverse
         credibility findings made by the judge."


  5. The Appellant attended the hearing.   I  heard  submissions  from  both
     representatives following which I reserved my decision.


Submissions


  6. Mr. Jarvis relied on the grounds of appeal.  He referred to the case of
     JT (Cameroon) [2008] EWCA Civ 878, in  particular  paragraph  19.   The
     assessment of credibility must be done in the round.  He submitted that
     this was a fairly detailed  decision.   Near  the  end  the  judge  had
     referred to the cases of Tanveer Ahmed  [2002]  UKIAT  000439,  and  PJ
     [2014] EWCA Civ 1011, but in the substance of the  decision  the  judge
     had not applied either case lawfully.


  7. In paragraph 26 the judge had set out how the Appellant  had  not  made
     any reference to a fear on return in his previous  appeal  in  November
     2014 although the claimed events had taken place in 2010 and 2011.   In
     paragraph 29 the judge made  a  finding  that  the  Appellant's  asylum
     interview was not "a particularly impressive  interview  which,  absent
     documentary evidence in support of the claim, or other live  witnesses,
     would leave this appeal struggling to succeed".  In  paragraph  30  the
     judge found that  there  was  a  significant  delay  in  the  Appellant
     claiming asylum from when he started to overstay in May  2014  to  when
     his claim was made in January 2016.  Again, the judge did not find  his
     explanation  adequate  and  made  a  finding   that   the   Appellant's
     credibility was adversely affected.


  8. In paragraph 33 the judge referred to the letter from the British  High
     Commission (the "BHC letter") regarding documents from Sri  Lanka,  and
     then turned to consider the documents [34] to [41].


  9. Mr. Jarvis submitted that, when reading through the findings, there was
     no explanation for why the Appellant had claimed asylum so late and not
     on entry to the United Kingdom in  October  2010.   His  entry  to  the
     United Kingdom was some five or six years before the asylum  claim  was
     made.  The Appellant had failed to give a reasonable  explanation.   He
     questioned why these matters had not adversely affected the  weight  to
     be given to the documents provided.  The Respondent was entitled to  an
     explanation as to why the letters should be given weight in  the  light
     of these adverse credibility findings.  He submitted that the judge had
     instead expected  to  see  evidence  from  the  Respondent  that  these
     particular documents were forgeries.  In paragraphs 33 to 35 the  judge
     referred to the fact that no checks had been made.  In paragraph 35 the
     judge found that the Presenting Officer would have to  allege  that  an
     extensive range of  documents  had  been  fabricated,  but  Mr.  Jarvis
     submitted that this was not the case.


 10. In paragraph 41 the judge referred to the only attack on the  documents
     being the generalised assertions in  the  BHC  letter  but  Mr.  Jarvis
     submitted that this was not the only attack.  There was  an  attack  on
     the overall credibility of the Appellant.   Overall  no  weight  should
     have been placed on the documents.


 11. The judge had found against the Respondent on the basis that checks had
     not been carried out on the documents.  He had set out  first  the  bad
     points and then the good points.   At  the  end  of  the  day,  he  had
     concluded that the documents should be given more materially  important
     weight than the adverse credibility findings, but he had failed to give
     reasons for this.


 12.  In  paragraph  35  the  judge   referred   to   "lawyer   to   lawyer"
     correspondence.  Mr. Jarvis submitted that Nag Law had not verified the
     lawyer in Sri Lanka, but had taken the Appellant's evidence  that  this
     was the person involved in  his  case  in  Sri  Lanka.    There  was  a
     presupposition that the person in Sri Lanka was a genuine  lawyer.   He
     questioned why the judge had considered this letter  to  be  a  genuine
     letter from a genuine lawyer.  That was not  Nag  Law's  evidence.   In
     summary, the judge had switched the burden of proof onto the Respondent
     and had not applied the case law correctly.


 13. Mr. Martin submitted in response that it was a  thorough  decision,  as
     had been pointed out by Mr. Jarvis.  He referred me to paragraph 10  of
     SM (Section 8: Judge's process) Iran [2005] UKAIT 00116.  He  submitted
     that, in asylum appeals, an individual's account on its own may not  be
     particularly persuasive for a number of reasons.  In these cases, if  a
     judge was to consider only the  appellant's  testimony,  the  appellant
     would be found not credible.  However, if these individuals  could  put
     forward other evidence, particularly given  the  burden  of  proof,  it
     would be enough to find their accounts credible.


 14. The judge had gone into great  length  and  detail.   He  rejected  the
     submission that there was an obligation on the Secretary  of  State  to
     investigate the documents [39].   He  had  considered  matters  in  the
     round, and having looked at the totality of the evidence, had  assessed
     whether the negative had outweighed the positive [46].


 15. Taking matters in the round and weighing them together, it was  evident
     that he had not put undue weight on any particular part of the evidence
     but had maintained the correct approach.  If the judge had  said,  when
     making his adverse credibility findings at [26] to [30], that he  could
     not believe a  word  the  Appellant  had  said,  it  would  clearly  be
     inconsistent to put weight on the documents.   However,  this  was  not
     what he had found.


 16.       The  judge  had  found  the  Appellant's  interview  not  to   be
     particularly impressive, and his answers on their own posed  questions,
     but this did not mean that the judge was not entitled to  consider  the
     documents.  He accepted that false documents are often presented in Sri
     Lankan appeals, but submitted that the standard  of  documents  varies,
     and the documentation put forward  by  the  Appellant  was  impressive.
     This was not a case where the  documents  were  sent  directly  to  the
     Appellant from Sri Lanka but they had been received by the  Appellant's
     representatives.


 17. Mr. Martin submitted that the judge  was  entitled  to  attach  greater
     weight to the lawyer to lawyer correspondence.  The correspondence  was
     between the Appellant's representatives and an individual in Sri  Lanka
     who had produced his Bar Association Card and a print-out  of  his  Bar
     registration [34].  The documents from the court were date-stamped  and
     had been certified as genuine.   The  judge  found  that,  because  the
     documents were so impressive, the Respondent has to do more  than  just
     point to the BHC letter.


 18. On the face of it the documents are extremely impressive.  He submitted
     that no allegation of forgery had been made in respect of the documents
     from the LLRC.  The  Appellant  had  been  able  to  produce  documents
     through his solicitors showing that he had  made  a  complaint  to  the
     LLRC.  This brought him within the risk categories set out in GJ.


 19. It is clear that the judge was still troubled by the  final  assessment
     [46], but he concluded that the documents outweigh the negative points.
      He had given reasons for rejecting the submissions of  the  Presenting
     Officer regarding the documents  at  [31]  and  [32].   In  summary  he
     submitted that the judge did not place too much weight on the documents
     just because there had been no verification, but he found that he would
     need more to reject these documents than a generic letter.


 20. Mr. Jarvis submitted that it was  not  purely  an  argument  about  the
     structure of the decision.  He asked where the Respondent could see the
     light from the  adverse  credibility  findings  cast  on  the  positive
     findings regarding the documents.  The consequences of the British High
     Commission not checking each and every document did not change the  way
     in which documents from Sri Lanka should be assessed.  They  should  be
     treated no differently than documents from anywhere else.  In  relation
     to the LLRC letters, documents could be  forged  no  matter  what  they
     were.


 21. He submitted that Tanveer Ahmed was fair to both sides - the  documents
     could not be condemned only because they were not corroborated, but the
     Appellant could not rely on them just because the  Respondent  had  not
     checked them.  There was no requirement on the  Respondent  to  produce
     contradictory evidence regarding the documents.  The judge had to apply
     the consequence of finding against the Appellant under section 8 to the
     documentary  evidence  provided.   He  had  rejected  the   Appellant's
     explanations as unreasonable but there was no consequence of this.   He
     submitted that it was possible that the explanation for the  delay  was
     that  the  Appellant  had  been  attempting  to  acquire  these   false
     documents.  The Secretary  of  State  simply  did  not  know  from  the
     decision.  The light of the adverse credibility findings had  not  been
     cast on the rest of the evidence.

Decision and reasons


 22. I have carefully considered the decision  and  grounds.   I  find  that
     there is no error in the way in which  the  judge  has  structured  the
     decision.  I find that he has considered  first  the  evidence  of  the
     Appellant himself and then turned to consider the documents provided by
     the Appellant.


 23. The judge does not find the  Appellant  to  be  completely  lacking  in
     credibility, but finds some of  his  explanations  unsatisfactory.   At
     [26] he considers the earlier appeal where the Appellant did not  state
     that he was afraid of returning  to  Sri  Lanka.   He  finds  that  the
     Appellant "will need to address why his fears were not raised earlier".




 24. At [28] he considers the impact of section 8 of the  2004  Act  on  the
     Appellant's credibility.  He finds that he has delayed in bringing  his
     claim and that he did so only after  the  commencement  of  enforcement
     action.  "I find that both these aspects have an adverse effect on  the
     Appellant's  credibility."   However  he  does  not   find   that   his
     credibility is damaged completely.


 25. At [29] he considers the Appellant's asylum interview.   He  finds  the
     Appellant's representatives attempt to  correct  unclear  matters  with
     further representations to be unsatisfactory.  "Generally, I find  that
     this  was  not  a  particularly  impressive  interview,  which,  absent
     documentary evidence in support of the claim, or other live  witnesses,
     would leave this appeal, struggling to succeed."  He finds that it  has
     been accepted by Mr. Martin that the Appellant would be  in  difficulty
     with regard to his claim, were it not for the complaint  to  the  LLRC.
     It was submitted by  Mr.  Martin  at  the  hearing  of  the  First-tier
     Tribunal that in 2010 people did not realise that  complaining  to  the
     LLRC could put them at risk.  The judge is aware of the inadequacies of
     the Appellant's evidence alone as the basis for a claim.


 26. At [30] to [32] the judge addresses the submissions of  the  Presenting
     Officer.  He finds that there was significant delay in the  Appellant's
     claiming asylum.  He finds the Appellant's explanation for the delay to
     be inconsistent with his level of education  or  with  his  involvement
     with lawyers both in the United Kingdom and in Sri Lanka.  He addresses
     the submissions made by Mr. Martin regarding the delay,  but  concludes
     that "his delay, and his inadequate explanation as to why it  occurred,
     affects his credibility adversely".  Again, importantly,  he  does  not
     find that the Appellant's credibility is completely damaged.


 27. Having made a finding that the  Appellant's  credibility  is  adversely
     affected but not completely damaged, at [31] the judge deals  with  the
     Presenting Officer's submissions regarding the  arrest  warrant.   The
     judge  finds  that  the  Appellant  would  not  necessarily  know   the
     procedures required to obtain various documents in Sri Lanka, and  does
     not hold this point against the  Appellant.   At  [32]  he  deals  with
     further submissions of the Presenting Officer relating to the complaint
     to the LLRC.  The judge states that these  points  have  substance  and
     cause him "some concern", but on consideration  affords  them  "limited
     adverse weight". He deals with a further point made by  the  Presenting
     Officer, but finds that it has been addressed by the submissions of Mr.
     Martin.  These are all findings in favour of the Appellant's case.


 28. At [33] the judge turns  to  consider  the  BHC  letter  on  which  the
     Presenting Officer relied in relation to the abuse of lawyers'  letters
     in Sri Lanka.  He refers to the fact that the allegations  in  the  BHC
     letter are "generalised", and finds that the BHC letter does  not  deal
     with the specifics of the Appellant's case, nor does it deal "in terms"
     with LLRC correspondence.  These findings were open to him and have not
     been contested.


 29. At [34] the judge deals with the correspondence between the Appellant's
     representatives  and  his  lawyer  in  Sri  Lanka.   While  noting  the
     criticism  made  by  the  Presenting  Officer  that   the   Appellant's
     representatives not gone back to ask further questions of  the  lawyer,
     he notes that the Presenting Officer did not specify what it  was  that
     was missing from the lawyer's response.  He notes that the  lawyer  has
     not explained how he accessed the documents, but  also  finds  that  he
     would not expect to see any involvement of the  police  stated  on  the
     face of the letter.


 30. The judge finds the documents are generally consistent.  He states that
     the Presenting Officer provided no "detailed analysis of the  extensive
     and generally consistent documents".   The  judge  then  sets  out  the
     documents which he has before him including the Bar  Association  Card,
     and the printout of the online Bar registration.  He refers to the fact
     that the documents have a date stamp, and that there is a  letter  from
     the court confirming that the documents are true copies.  He finds that
     the reference is in common to all of the documents.


 31. He then turns to consider the material relating to the LLRC.  He  notes
     that the Presenting Officer made no  specific  submissions  about  this
     material beyond  stating  that  the  Appellant's  entire  claim  was  a
     fabrication.  At [35] he sets out his consideration of these documents.
      It is clear that he is aware of the possibility  of  forged  documents
     from  Sri  Lanka,  and  notes  the  Respondent's  statement  that   the
     "preponderance  of  documents  submitted  for  verification   are   not
     genuine".  However, he then gives  reasons  for  giving  the  documents
     produced by the Appellant weight, that there is a very extensive  range
     of documents to fabricate in the Appellant's case, that  there  are  no
     quoted examples in the BHC letter of material  from  the  LLRC  failing
     verification tests, and that the documents were produced as a result of
     lawyer to lawyer correspondence.


 32. I find that he was entitled to take these factors into account.  It  is
     the case that there were extensive documents produced, which the  judge
     has found to be consistent.  He was entitled to  place  weight  on  the
     fact that  there  are  no  quoted  examples  of  LLRC  letters  failing
     verification tests.  Given the significance of these letters, it is not
     unreasonable to expect that, were there to have been forged examples of
     these produced to the BHC, there would have been a reference to this in
     the BHC letter.  Finally, the judge finds that he can place  weight  on
     these letters because they were produced  as  a  result  of  lawyer  to
     lawyer correspondence, and he has already referred to the fact that the
     Bar Association documents were provided.


 33. However, the judge does  not  stop  there  in  his  assessment  of  the
     documents.  At [36] it is clear that he appreciates that the  focus  is
     on the documents.  Significantly he does not accept them  just  because
     there is no DVR.  He rejects the submission made by Mr. Martin that the
     Respondent's failure to check the documents means that  he  must  treat
     them as genuine.  He sets out the principles set out in Tanveer  Ahmed,
     and correctly states that he must consider  the  matter  in  the  round
     before deciding whether he can place reliance  on  the  documents.   He
     then correctly states that, following the case of GJ, if he accepts the
     documents, the Appellant satisfies risk categories (c) and (d).


 34. At [39] the judge refers to the fact that the  hearing  had  previously
     been adjourned on the request of the Respondent in order that she could
     check the documents.  No such checks were carried  out.   However,  the
     judge does not place undue weight on  this  failure.   He  rejects  the
     suggestion made in the Appellant's skeleton argument that there was  an
     obligation on the Respondent to investigate, with reference to the case
     law.


 35. At [40] he gives further consideration to the weight to be given to the
     documents taking account of a discrepancy in a date.   He  accepts  the
     submission that this could be for number of  reasons,  and  finds  that
     this alone is not a reason for all of the correspondence to be doubted.
      This finding was open to him.


 36. At [41] he gives further consideration to the documents in the light of
     the BHC letter.  He finds that the inference should not  be  made  that
     all, and therefore these, documents are not genuine.  This finding  was
     open to him.  He then states that the only attack on the documents is a
     generalised assertion in the BHC letters.  Mr.  Jarvis  submitted  that
     this was not the only attack, but that an attack had been made  on  the
     Appellant's credibility.  However, the judge is aware of the attack  on
     the Appellant's evidence in general, and addresses these submissions in
     the same paragraph [41].


         "In effect, although Mr. Bassi submitted that this entire case  was
         a fabrication, he provided no specific  reasons  as  to  why  these
         documents  should  be  found   to   be   fabricated,   beyond   the
         generalisations  from  the  BHC  and   the   Appellant's   evidence
         generally."


     He has already given reasons  for  rejecting  some  of  the  Presenting
     Officer's specific submissions.  It was not submitted that detailed and
     specific criticisms of  the  documents  were  made  in  the  First-tier
     Tribunal, and it is open to the judge to find this in  the  absence  of
     specific criticisms, he is left only with the general  submission  that
     the entire case was a fabrication.


 37. I find that the judge  is  aware  of  the  attack  on  the  Appellant's
     credibility in general, and although he states that the only attack  on
     the documents is the assertions in the BHC letter, he goes  on  in  the
     same  paragraph  to  acknowledge  that  another  reason  given  by  the
     Respondent as to why the documents should be found to be fabricated  is
     the "Appellant's evidence generally".  However, he is also  aware  that
     the submission made in respect of the Appellant's evidence  is  only  a
     general assertion of fabrication.


 38. The judge correctly states at [42] that he must consider matters in the
     round.  He proceeds to address a number of  subsidiary  issues.   These
     are all in the Appellant's favour and relate to his exit from Sri Lanka
     [43], discrepancies caused by sloppiness on the part of his  solicitors
     [44], and the explanation as to why the police continue  to  visit  his
     parents' house [45].  In the case of his exit from Sri  Lanka  and  the
     police visits to his home, these are significant matters.


 39. Having made all of the above findings, the  judge  then  comes  to  his
     conclusion at [46].  Although he finds that the  reasons  for  delaying
     his claim on asylum were "broadly unsatisfactory", he  finds  that  the
     main issues arose "only as, and especially after" he  left  Sri  Lanka.
     He does not find that the broadly  unsatisfactory  reasons  damage  his
     credibility  completely.   He  finds,  against  the  delay,  that  "the
     documentary evidence is impressive", and that there is nothing specific
     regarding the documents to suggest that they are forged.  This  finding
     was open to him on the basis of the evidence presented to him.  He then
     states:


         "When I look at the evidence in the round, and take account of  the
         lower standard of proof,  by  a  narrow  margin  I  find  that  the
         Appellant has established his account, and that the  documents  are
         genuine".


 40. I find there is no error in the judge's consideration of the  evidence.
     He has weighed up the unsatisfactory reasons given for the  failure  to
     claim asylum earlier, but he has balanced this against the  documentary
     evidence  provided  to  him,  and  having  carefully   considered   the
     documents, together with all of the  arguments  both  for  and  against
     their genuineness, he has decided that they are genuine and  therefore,
     given the lower standard of proof, which he clearly sets out, he  finds
     that the Appellant will be at risk on return.  I find  that  the  judge
     has not simply made adverse credibility  findings  and  then  forgotten
     them in his consideration of the documentary evidence, but he has  made
     clear and detailed findings as to why he  can  rely  on  the  documents
     provided to him.  He has not  decided  that  they  are  genuine  simply
     because no document verification has been carried out, but he has given
     reasons for why he can place reliance on these documents in  the  light
     of the documents themselves, and the evidence  which  was  before  him.
     Importantly he did not find the Appellant to be completely  lacking  in
     credibility, and has not found that he cannot believe anything that the
     Appellant says.


 41. I find that the judge has considered the evidence in the round, but has
     found the documents can be relied on, and therefore he  has  found,  to
     the lower standard of proof  applicable,  that  the  Appellant's  claim
     succeeds.


Notice of Decision


 42. The appeal is dismissed.  The decision does not involve the making of a
     material error of law.


 43. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date 2 October 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain




