
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07895/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 11 April 2018                     |On 17 April 2018                     |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DAWSON


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     JBS
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr T Melvin, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms L Hirst, Counsel instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a Venezuelan citizen, came to the United Kingdom in June
    2000 at the age of 15 and was granted indefinite leave to remain as the
    dependant of his mother  in  December  2001.   She  is  now  a  British
    citizen.  The appellant had been formally adopted in Venezuela  by  his
    step-father at the age of 5 but that process had not been recognised in
    the United Kingdom.  The family had  moved  here  following  a  natural
    disaster in their country of origin which had destroyed their home.

 2. This appeal finds its origins in the conviction of the appellant on  17
    December 2007 of offences concerning the importation of a Class A  drug
    for which he was sentenced to seven years' imprisonment.  It led to  an
    automatic deportation order under section 32 of the UK Borders Act 2007
    by the Secretary of State signed on 5 February 2010.  An appeal against
    the decision under Section 32(5) of the 2007 Act on Article  8  grounds
    was dismissed by the First-tier  Tribunal  for  reasons  given  in  its
    decision dated 5 August 2010 (the first appeal).  Permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was refused.

 3. In response to removal directions set for 13 May 2011,  representations
    were  made  to  the  Secretary  of  State  seeking  revocation  of  the
    deportation order.  These were rejected and the claim was certified  as
    clearly  unfounded.   Medical  evidence  was  subsequently  lodged  and
    although the Secretary of  State  refused  to  revoke  the  deportation
    order, she made a new decision carrying an in-country right of  appeal.
    That appeal was dismissed by a different composition of the  First-tier
    Tribunal (the second appeal) for reasons given in its decision dated  4
    January 2013.  The appeal had been on  grounds  under  the  Immigration
    Rules and Article 8.  Here too an appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal  was
    unsuccessful; permission was  granted  but  the  appeal  dismissed  for
    reasons given in a decision dated 4 April 2013.

 4. Based on information provided by the Secretary of  State  in  a  letter
    dated 6 February 2015, there was an attempt to  persuade  the  Criminal
    Case Review Commission to refer the appellant's case to  the  Court  of
    Appeal on the basis of medical evidence relating to  his  capacity  and
    fitness to plead but this was refused in January 2015.

 5. A further application for revocation of the deportation order based  on
    new evidence (including correspondence from the  Criminal  Case  Review
    Commission and the report by Dr O'Shea, a  consultant  psychiatrist  in
    specialist learning disability dated 14 May 2014 together with a report
    from Amnesty International) was refused by the Secretary of State under
    paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules as  not  amounting  to  a  fresh
    claim for reasons given in her letter dated 6  February  2015.   On  16
    March 2016 Jay J (sitting as a judge of the Upper Tribunal) granted  an
    application for judicial  review  of  that  decision  and  ordered  the
    Secretary of State to re-consider her fresh claim determination in  the
    light of his judgment.  The  Secretary  of  State  did  so  giving  her
    decision in a letter dated 13 July 2016  to  refuse  a  protection  and
    human rights claim.  This gave rise to a third appeal before the First-
    tier Tribunal which was heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Griffith  on
    17  November  2017.    She   allowed   the   appeal   on   humanitarian
    protection/Article 3 grounds and under Article 8 for reasons  given  in
    her decision dated 28 November 2017. In summary she concluded that  the
    appellant had significant difficulties which rendered him a  vulnerable
    adult. Were the support from his wife and parents removed, he would  on
    the basis of  evidence  from  Amnesty  International,  be  at  risk  of
    destitution and of exploitation  by  criminal  gangs.  If  returned  to
    Venezuela, there was  a  real  risk  his  Article  3  rights  would  be
    violated. The appellant would also succeed under Article  8  where  the
    scales would tip in his favour based on his learning disability; he was
    thus able to show very compelling circumstances over  and  above  those
    provided for in the Rules.

 6. The appellant gave evidence in the first appeal but not at the  hearing
    of the second and third appeals.  No medical evidence  was  before  the
    Tribunal at the first appeal; the appellant's step-father explained his
    concerns about the appellant's mental age although there had never been
    any medical assessment.

 7. The Tribunal at the second appeal had before it a report  by  Dr  Karen
    Long, an independent psychological report by Lisa Davies and a  medical
    report from Dr Richard Hillier, a Consultant Psychiatrist  in  learning
    disability working for Your  Health  Care  in  the  London  Borough  of
    Richmond.  In  addition,  Dr  Hillier  gave  evidence  and  was  cross-
    examined.  By the time of the third appeal, Dr O'Shea had  provided  an
    update on his earlier report in which he  addresses  questions  arising
    out of the possibility of exaggeration or fabrication of the extent  of
    cognitive impairment and he expressed a view on the probable effect  of
    deportation to Venezuela on the appellant's mental health.

 8. A previous partner of the appellant gave evidence at the first  appeal.
    His wife, whom he had married in August  2016,  gave  evidence  at  the
    hearing of the third appeal.  They have  a  son  who  was  born  on  24
    November 2014.  The appellant lives however with his mother  and  step-
    father as a condition of his bail from immigration detention.

 9. No probation report was provided at the third appeal  however  we  note
    that a probation officer gave evidence at the  hearing  of  the  second
    appeal. As to the  conviction,  Judge  McGregor-Johnson  sentenced  the
    appellant and his co-defendant  and  included  these  remarks   in  his
    judgment

         "You both pleaded guilty to being involved  in  trying  to  smuggle
         some 1.1 kilos of cocaine at 100 per cent purity into this country.



         I  accept  that  there  were  others  involved  above  you  in  the
         organisation of this importation, but  you  both  played  essential
         roles.

         You, [JBS], were involved in involving others and at least assisted
         in the organisation of those who  were  going  to  travel  and  the
         retrieval of the case.

         ...

         As far as you are concerned, [JBS],  I  am  satisfied  that  having
         regard to the nature and gravity of the offence, it is  appropriate
         to recommend  that  when  you  have  served  the  sentence  you  be
         deported."

10. By way of country information there was a  volume  of  material  before
    Judge Griffith including a report  by  Amnesty  International  dated  9
    December  2014  specifically  addressing  the  circumstances   of   the
    appellant.

11. Permission to appeal the decision in the third appeal  was  granted  by
    UTJ Martin.  Her reasons briefly stated as follows

         "It is arguable, as succinctly set out in  the  grounds,  that  the
         Judge erred in failing to follow the guidance of Devaseelan  [2002]
         UKIAT 00702 and in finding that a mild learning difficulty  crossed
         the Article 3 threshold when the Appellant had lived independently,
         studied, worked and married."

12. The grounds of appeal begin with the assertion,

         "The FTTJ has primarily allowed the appeal on  the  basis  that  it
         would be a breach of his Article 3 and Article 8 human  rights  due
         to his mild learning disability  and  the  potential  consequences.
         This is despite having two previously dismissed appeals,  with  the
         issue of the appellant's learning disabilities being raised at  the
         previous appeal."

13. The grounds continue with reference to [63] of the judge's decision  on
    which it is argued that the judge had erred in deciding that this is  a
    case where she could look at the matter as if a determination had never
    made.  The judge had not made reference to three  other  categories  of
    learning disability: moderate,  severe  and  profound.   There  was  no
    evidence that the appellant had ever sought  or  received  any  support
    from the support networks available in the  United  Kingdom  whilst  at
    school as an adult and the decision of the judge made no  reference  to
    any medication or specific requirements.  As to the bearing the country
    situation would have, it is argued that the judge had  failed  to  give
    clear reasons why she reached her conclusions.  The judge had erred  by
    relying on a much lower threshold of "not  reasonable"  or  "realistic"
    regarding ability of family members to relocate and had failed to  give
    clear reasons how the appellant met the particularly high threshold  of
    Article 3 on the basis  of  his  mild  learning  disability  for  which
    assistance would be available in Venezuela.

14. We are grateful to Mr Melvin and Ms Hirst for their submissions, at the
    conclusion of which we announced that  we  were  satisfied  that  Judge
    Griffith had erred in law in failing to take into account the  evidence
    as  a  whole  having  departed  from  the  decisions  of  the  previous
    tribunals.  We do not consider however it necessary to  set  aside  her
    decision because we consider that any properly instructed  judge  would
    have reached the same conclusion having regard  to  the  evidence  that
    Judge Griffith had failed to take into account. Accordingly  order  her
    decision stands.

15. Our reasons are as follows.  The guidance given in  Devaseelan  v  SSHD
    [2002] UKIAT 00702 is not confined to asylum appeals and  fact  finding
    by an earlier judge and we consider the final major category  described
    in [41(6)] relevant to this appeal,

         "(6) If before the second Adjudicator the Appellant relies on facts
         that are not materially different  from  those  put  to  the  first
         Adjudicator, and proposes to  support  the  claim  by  what  is  in
         essence the same evidence as that available  to  the  Appellant  at
         that time, the second  Adjudicator  should  regard  the  issues  as
         settled by the  first  Adjudicator's  determination  and  make  his
         findings in line with that determination rather than  allowing  the
         matter to be re-litigated.  ..."

 1. Judge Griffith reviews the medical evidence in detail in  her  decision
    and as to the weight which she gave that evidence she explained at [63]

         "I attach significant weight to  the  reports  of  Dr  O'Shea,  who
         explains in clear terms what "mild learning disability"  means  and
         how such disability manifests itself in this  appellant.   It  does
         not appear that the Tribunal when making its decision in  2013  did
         not have the benefit of such a clear explanation and  misunderstood
         what  "mild  learning  disability"  meant  in  practice  for   this
         appellant.  In the circumstances, I consider that this  is  one  of
         those cases where I can look at the matter as if that determination
         had never been made."

 2. She continued at [64]

         "I have set out above at some length the conclusions reached by  Dr
         O'Shea and I accept them.  I rely in particular  on  the  diagnosis
         set out in his 2014 report, extracts of which I have quoted  above.
         It is  clear  that  the  appellant  has  significant  difficulties,
         rendering him a vulnerable  adult.   He  is  able  to  function  at
         present with the help and devotion of his parents and his wife, and
         I am satisfied that if that very strong and stable safety net  were
         removed then, as stated in the Amnesty International Report, he  is
         at risk of destitution and of exploitation by criminal gangs."

 3. The fact of there being new and materially  different  evidence  before
    Judge Griffith as to the  appellant's  mental  disability  and  country
    evidence including the Amnesty Report did not  entitle  her  to  simply
    disregard the evidence that had been  given  in  the  past.   The  task
    before her was to weigh all the evidence in order to come to a  legally
    correct decision.  Prior to considering the new evidence in the  appeal
    she would have been aware from the first appeal  when  the  appellant's
    concerns were confined to Article 8 that,

    (i)  The appellant had completed  his  primary  education  obtaining  5
         GCSEs.

    (ii) Although he had indicated in his statement that he had  left  home
         when he was 16 and started living with friends he had not left home
         full-time and had only ever stayed overnight with  a  few  friends,
         usually after some family argument to give everyone  time  to  cool
         off.

    (iii)    He had a relationship with AG of four years' standing and that
         she had played an integral part in his life and they had  plans  to
         get married.  She had visited the appellant regularly whilst he was
         in prison.  In the light of the courses he had undertaken whilst in
         prison she did not believe that it would be too difficult  for  him
         to find employment.

    (iv) The appellant had  obtained  education  qualifications  whilst  in
         prison including the completion of hairdressing  and  doubleglazing
         courses.

    (v)  The appellant would not be able to cope without his family members
         and fianc�e in Venezuela which  he  considered  a  foreign  country
         where he had no relatives and would be alone.  The appellant's step-
         father had concerns about the appellant having a mental age of some
         five or six years younger than his actual age.

    (vi)   The appellant had an essential role in the organisation  of  the
         activity that led to his conviction.

16. The judge would have also been aware from  the  second  appeal  of  the
    appellant's   step-father's   concerns   regarding   the    appellant's
    development were confirmed in the  medical  evidence  we  have  already
    referred to.  The report by  Dr  Hillier  summarises  the  position  as
    follows

         "In summary [SB] is a vulnerable adult with a learning  disability.
         He finds it difficult to process information quickly and  can  find
         social situations challenging and threatening.  [SB's]  personality
         is one in which he wishes to please others takes the course of less
         resistance.  [SB's] personality and willingness to please may  make
         it  difficult  for  people  to  realise  that  he  has  a  learning
         disability when they first meet  him.   Nevertheless,  he  presents
         with a significant handicap and limited understanding.  He has very
         limited skills to look after himself and cannot  cook  or  maintain
         his own finances without a significant level of support from people
         he can trust.  [SB] can find his way  around  the  local  community
         where he is familiar with the road layout but would get lost in  an
         unfamiliar  neighbourhood.   He  is  unlikely  to  hold  down  paid
         employment without this being within a supportive context and  with
         the support of his family around him.  He is therefore unlikely  to
         be able to fend for himself should  he  be  deported  to  Venezuela
         where he has no family, friends or contacts.  Such  a  decision  is
         likely to result in [SB] quickly becoming homeless with no means of
         support."

17. Under cross-examination at the second appeal, Dr Hillier was questioned
    whether it was possible to deliberately score low results on the  tests
    that the appellant had undergone.  He did not know the answer as it was
    not his area of expertise.  He gave evidence that he felt the appellant
    could live independently but in a supported  accommodation  environment
    within five years.  However, he would not be able to  "manage  his  pay
    packet or the practical day-to-day things".

18. Dr Hillier was also asked why the appellant's learning  disability  had
    not been picked up until recently.  The only  explanation  he  had  was
    that "families found it difficult  to  accept  that  a  child  was  not
    perfect and was somehow different: they made compensations  within  the
    family for difficulties that a child had."  Dr Hillier accepted that he
    had not checked with the appellant in regard to all the  qualifications
    he had achieved but did feel "that the appellant's potential  was  much
    greater than he was currently achieving".

19. As to the new medical evidence before Judge Griffith, the first  report
    by Dr O'Shea dated 28 May 2014 explains that he had before him a bundle
    of documents including prosecution papers relating to the case as  well
    as medical and psychological  reports,  including  the  reports  by  Dr
    Hillier and Dr Long.  His examination was carried out on  12  May  2014
    when  he  conducted  a  full  medical  interview   and   mental   state
    examination.  His  diagnosis  was  that  BS  suffers  from  a  learning
    disability within the definition of the International Classification of
    Diseases, 10th edition and that this disability would  be  regarded  as
    being of mild degree within that classification.   His  centile  scores
    carried out by Dr Long suggested he is functioning at lower end of  the
    range of mild learning disability by reference to IQ and he concludes

         "Accordingly  he  has  significant  difficulties  in  relation   to
         language,  processing  of  information,  the   ability   to   weigh
         information by reference to past events and  also  has  significant
         learning problems, particularly when taught by  instruction  rather
         than by demonstration.  In common with many people who have a  very
         committed family and  who  have  learned  some  social  skills  and
         general etiquette within a family setting, [BS]  on  first  meeting
         comes across as being somebody who is of intellectual  functioning.
         However, it is clear, when one spends any length of time with  him,
         that poor comprehension is a very serious difficulty for him and in
         many ways he can only understand issues when they are presented  to
         him as a single premise and also  when  given  sufficient  time  in
         order to understand the issues involved and come to  a  conclusion.
         ..."

    He further considered that

         "The diagnosis of learning disability with  associated  impairments
         of functioning are lifelong and are as relevant today as they  were
         at the time of his arrest."

20.  A  further  report  by  Dr  O'Shea  dated  April  2016  dismisses  the
    possibility that BS was in a  position  to  exaggerate  his  degree  of
    cognitive impairment in a test of cognitive function.  In  his  opinion
    such a feat would be "... highly improbable and totally beyond somebody
    of [BS's] limited intellectual ability".  He thought it  very  unlikely
    to be the case and fabrication became "almost  completely  improbable".
    As to the  probable  effect  of  deportation  to  Venezuela  Dr  O'Shea
    observes that the appellant has a  "particular  difficulty  with  novel
    situations and needs to learn new skills and new ways of  coping  in  a
    tailored person centred and gradual way".  He refers to the appellant's
    limited ability in terms of  understanding  risks  and  considered  the
    appellant has "a significant impairment of intellectual function  which
    means that he finds it difficult to extrapolate from one  situation  to
    another and,  therefore,  requires  constant  support  and  help".   He
    attributes the appellant's intellectual impairment as "intrauterine  in
    nature and therefore, lifelong and probably due to the toxic effects of
    blood alcohol levels in his mother during pregnancy".

21. Whilst it was open to Judge Griffith to give particular weight  to  the
    reports of Dr O'Shea, she was nevertheless required to explain how  she
    factored into her risk assessment the evidence  given  particularly  at
    the first appeal by the appellant which on the face of it  appeared  to
    be at odds in the diagnosis subsequently made.  That  earlier  material
    indicated that the appellant was able to more or less manage  his  life
    and that he had had an organisational role in the activities  that  led
    to his conviction.  This was sufficient for the Tribunal in the  second
    appeal to  reject  the  evidence  of  the  appellant's  step-father  as
    considerably exaggerated and to lead it to a conclusion that the family
    would continue to be able to support the appellant during a  period  of
    reintegration to Venezuela.  The  Tribunal  did  not  accept  that  the
    appellant would be unable to obtain some kind of  manual  of  unskilled
    employment and that arrangements could not be made with the  assistance
    of his mother and step-father for the  payment  of  his  wages  to  his
    landlord if these were concerns.  As we emphasised to Ms Hirst  in  the
    course of her submissions, it  is  not  the  findings  by  the  earlier
    tribunals that were relevant in the third appeal but the evidence  that
    was before them.  Account needed to be had to the evidence as  a  whole
    and Judge Griffith ought to have explained how she resolved the tension
    in the evidence and the weight  that  she  gave  to  each  aspect  when
    reaching  her  decision  on  Article  3  grounds  and   assessing   the
    circumstances over and above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A
    with reference to Section 117C  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  The task before the judge was to decide how well  the
    appellant would be able to function in the light of his  diagnosis  and
    the best evidence of that functioning would include how he had  managed
    so far.  The judge however appears to  have  completely  ignored  these
    aspects and in our view fell into error.

22. To a considerable extent we have sympathy for the  judge  who  was  not
    well assisted by the Secretary of State in the appeal.  The  Presenting
    Officer acknowledged there was no evidence from the Secretary of  State
    addressing the current  situation  in  Venezuela  and  that  there  was
    insufficient evidence to show the high level of violence was enough  to
    entitle the appellant to  a  grant  of  humanitarian  protection.   The
    appellant had produced some 57 items of country information as  to  the
    situation in Venezuela and it was open to the  Secretary  of  State  to
    produce evidence herself if she considered that the appellant with  his
    characteristics would be able to be safely returned.   Mr  Morley,  the
    presenting officer before Judge Griffith, addressed the tension between
    the evidence of the appellant's  previous  behaviour  and  the  current
    medical evidence but submitted that it was "a matter for the  Tribunal"
    whether the new medical evidence was capable of tipping the balance  in
    the  appellant's  favour.   It  is  difficult  to  understand  why  the
    Secretary of State appeared to accept at the hearing that it  was  open
    to the judge to find in the appellant's favour based on the new medical
    evidence but now seeks to  challenge  that  approach  on  appeal.   She
    cannot have it both ways.  If there  were  matters  that  she  did  not
    consider Dr O'Shea had not satisfactorily addressed, it was open to her
    to raise questions for him to answer before  the  hearing,  a  practice
    quite common when expert evidence is being given as alerted by Jay J in
    his decision quoted below.

23. We understand  the  challenge  by  the  Secretary  of  State  to  be  a
    rationality one.  We are not so persuaded.  The error was a failure  by
    the judge to have regard to evidence that was before  her  was  of  the
    kind identified in R (Iran) v SSHD [2005] EWCA Civ 982 per Brooke LJ at
    [6]

         "9.  ...

         (ii) Failing to give reasons or any adequate reasons  for  findings
         on material matters;

         (iii)    Failing to take into account and/or resolve  conflicts  of
         fact or opinion on material matters;

         ..."

24. Jay J was alive to the tension between  the  earlier  evidence  and  Dr
    O'Shea's report when considering  the  challenge  to  the  fresh  claim
    refusal.  At [44] of his judgment he explained,

         "It is quite plain to me that the SSHD is of the opinion  that  the
         Applicant's learning disability has been exaggerated by him, and in
         particular by his step-father, to thwart his removal from  the  UK.
         It is this opinion that enables the  SSHD  to  reject  Dr  O'Shea's
         assessment as "valid",  because  they  are  inconsistent  with  the
         "factual history",  amount  to  no  more  than  bare  opinion,  and
         constitute nothing new.  Furthermore, it is the SSHD's view that Dr
         O'Shea has based himself entirely on the accounts given to  him  by
         the Applicant and his step-father."

25. As to the force of Dr O'Shea's report Jay J observed at [48] to [50],

         "48. However, I remain  troubled  by  the  SSHD's  approach  to  Dr
             O'Shea's report.  First, the SSHD should not have referred  to
             it as "merely Dr O'Shea's opinion".   It  was  expert  opinion
             evidence which  needed  to  be  addressed  and  analysed.   Mr
             Wastell attempted to save this ascription by  using  different
             adjectives such as "subjective", but this  to  me  makes  very
             little difference.  Secondly, Dr O'Shea has not just relied on
             what he was told by the Applicant and his father.  He  carried
             out his own mental state examination of  the  former;  he  has
             interpreted the findings of  the  clinical  psychologists  and
             explained why  in  his  view  confection  or  exaggeration  is
             unlikely; and, he has  explained  the  likely  extent  of  the
             Applicant's disability.  Given that the 2013 tribunal did  not
             accept Dr Hillier's evidence,  albeit  in  so  doing  did  not
             directly address the status and reliability of  the  cognitive
             tests carried out by others, it would in my judgment  be  open
             to another tribunal to reach a different  conclusion  on  this
             key point having regard to Dr O'Shea's different evidence.  To
             my mind, it is not merely a question of the  identity  of  the
             messenger changing (I doubt whether that, without more,  would
             be sufficient); the message  is  different,  as  well  as  the
             reasoning in support of it.

         49.  In my judgment, what comes across very clearly from paragraphs
             170-174 of the SSHD's decision is that she has a  low  opinion
             indeed of Dr O'Shea's report.  No doubt there are  many  fresh
             claim  cases  where,  notwithstanding  WM  (DRC),  the  SSHD's
             personal view, if properly substantiated and  reasoned,  would
             clearly justify the conclusion that there would or could be no
             realistic prospect of success  before  a  tribunal  (or,  more
             precisely,  would  be  immune  from  successful  challenge  in
             judicial review proceedings); but in my judgment, this is  not
             one of them - at least, having regard to the reasons given  by
             the SSHD, subjecting those to  an  anxious  scrutiny.   In  my
             view, in all the circumstances of the present case, which from
             my experience is particularly complex and  multi-faceted,  the
             SSHD has not properly  explained  why  the  Applicant's  case,
             including Dr O'Shea's evidence, has no realistic  prospect  of
             swaying an independent appellate tribunal.

         50.  There is  no  indication  that  the  SSHD  has  sought  expert
             evidence of her own, either to assist her in interpreting  the
             expert reports of others,  or  directly  in  relation  to  the
             Applicant.  Although  the  SSHD  can  act  rationally  without
             obtaining such evidence, she does  leave  herself  potentially
             exposed when it comes to a very close examination of  what  Dr
             O'Shea has said and the reasons for it."

26. With the  greatest  respect  we  agree  with  this  assessment  of  the
    evidence. The reports from Dr O'Shea  read  with  the  earlier  medical
    evidence were comprehensive and  overwhelming  in  their  effect.  This
    evidence served entirely to explain  why  the  appellant  was  able  to
    function  under  supervision  but  nevertheless   suffered   from   the
    difficulties identified. Given the evidence about Venezuela  which  the
    Secretary of State did not challenge in any meaningful way, the  result
    of the appeal was inevitable. Closer attention to the earlier  evidence
    would not in these circumstances have affected the result; there  could
    have only been one answer, which is for the appeal to be allowed  under
    Article  3.   Accordingly,  although  we  have  found  error  by  Judge
    Griffith, we do not consider it requires her decision to be  set  aside
    and as indicated above it will stand.

NOTICE OF DECISION

The appeal by the Secretary of State in the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 16 April 2018

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Dawson

