
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07527/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                          |Decision and Reasons Promulgated |
|on 9 November 2017                        |On 10 November 2017              |
|                                          |                                 |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     R A
                         (Anonymity Direction Made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Winter, Advocate, instructed by Latta & Co,
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals against a decision by First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Mozolowski, promulgated on 31 May 2017.

 2. Permission was granted only the ground 2  that  the  judge  might  have
    erred through the misconception that age assessments came from the same
    source (a social work department) and not from another source (the Home
    Office).

 3. In a letter dated 7 November the appellant's representatives said  they
    would "be seeking permission to be granted on all grounds".  While  the
    UT within its general powers may permit grounds to be amended, or  even
    perhaps new grounds to be added, it is far from clear that it has power
    to revisit its own decision on the grant of  permission  and  to  admit
    grounds  on  which  permission  has  been  refused.   In  view  of  the
    respondent's concession, however, it is not necessary to consider  that
    matter any further.

 4. The respondent conceded that the decision of the FtT errs  in  law  and
    falls to be set aside.  Further procedure was agreed as follows.

 5. The decision of the FtT stands only as a record of what was said at the
    hearing.

 6. The nature of the case is such that  it  is  appropriate  in  terms  of
    section 12(2)(b)(i) of the 2007 Act and of Practice  Statement  7.2  to
    remit the case to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.

 7. The member(s) of the FtT chosen to consider the case are not to include
    Judge Mozolowski.

 8. The FtT made an anonymity direction, which remains in place.


            [pic]


            9 November 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




