
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07297/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19 February 2019                           |On 20 March 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                      THE HONOURABLE MR JUSTICE WAKSMAN
                 (SITTING AS A JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL)
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SMITH


                                   Between

                                    [w M]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss J Bond, Counsel instructed by Freemans
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

This is a challenge to deportation.  Mr [M], the putative deportee, and the
appellant, is a Zimbabwean national aged 38.  The decision to deport arises
from an offending history which included driving while disqualified with a
period of imprisonment of eight weeks in 2009, but then a twelve months
sentence of imprisonment more recently imposed in June of 2016 in respect
of the offence of making financial gain from making false representations.
The decision to deport was made on 11 August 2016.  There was then an
asylum claim which was refused on 19 July 2017.

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal under challenge before us was made
on 14 November 2018.  It is right at this stage for us to say a little bit
about that decision.  This all concerns Mr [M]'s partner, Ms [N].  The
position is that he first met her in 2009.  At paragraph 93 the judge said
that he accepted that the appellant is in a genuine and subsisting
relationship.  The relationship may have started as long ago as 2009, but
they lived apart for many years.  There was a further period of separation
when Mr [M] was in prison.  We accept that they have now been living
together since mid-2017, a period of eighteen months, and notwithstanding
what Miss Bond says, it seems to us that that is a perfectly appropriate
finding to make so that the actual period of cohabitation as partners is no
more than eighteen months.

The judge then comes back to that saying that if this had been a non-
deportation case then the individuals would have to have shown they had
been living together for a period of two years; but here, on the
appellant's own evidence, he had only been living with Ms [N] since his
release from detention and that was only eighteen months.  That finding, at
paragraph 98 of the judgment, was the sole basis on which permission to
bring this appeal was granted by the judge on 10 December 2018.  It seems
to us that what the judge was doing was in fact taking that particular test
to use as an equivalent approach to see whether the person was a partner
for the purpose of Section 117C exception (2) or not.  There is no direct
authority on the point.

Miss Bond makes the submission that it has to be more flexible than that
because otherwise how does one apply Article 8 in those exceptional cases
outside the Rules.  We do not think there is much force in that contention
because, of course, what the Tribunal has to do is to apply the Article 8
considerations as they now appear in the Act, in particular in Sections
117B to 117D. Here, of course, there is not only the provision of the two
exceptions as reflected in 398 to 399A, but then the Article 8 "safety
valve" (if we can describe it thus), being the showing of very compelling
circumstances over and above exceptions (1) and (2). Therefore we think
that on a fair reading, what the judge was doing in paragraph 98 was saying
that in fact the relationship, although it may be genuine and subsisting,
was not long enough to qualify the putative partner of Mr [M] as a partner
for the purpose of exception (2).  On that basis there is no error of law;
however, we also are of the firm view that even if that is an error of law,
it is not a material one for the following reasons.

As we think Miss Bond was bound to accept, not that these matters formed
much, if any, of the grounds of appeal, and certainly did not form any part
of the permission to appeal, the only route to get home, as it were, on the
deportation appeal is either to show that exception (2) is made out or, if
not, to show that there are very compelling circumstances.  So far as
exception (2) is concerned, the difficulty is that while it can be found
that as a former Zimbabwean refugee it would be unduly harsh for the
partner to return to Zimbabwe, it is in our view quite impossible to see
how it could be made out that it would be unduly harsh for her to stay in
the UK.  She has British citizenship, holding down, as we understand it, a
full-time job as a pharmacist.  The judge has found that she is part of a
large family here which she supports and gains support from.  In addition
to that, it is actually worth noting, although he says it briefly at
paragraph 37, that he records the submission that it would not be unduly
harsh for her to remain in the United Kingdom, so he had that point firmly
on board.  One also has to take into account that this is a relatively
short-term relationship of eighteen months.  One knows from cases such as
KO (see in particular paragraphs 33 to 36 of the decision of the Supreme
Court) that it is a sad but inevitable fact of the breakup of any
relationship that there are going to be difficult consequences for both
partners, but if exception (2) is not made out, and it cannot possibly be
here, the only route is very compelling circumstances.  The fact that there
will be a breakup of the relationship by itself goes nowhere near to
satisfying that criterion.  The words of the Act are that they must be very
compelling circumstances over and above the factors concerned with
exceptions (1) and (2).  There is nothing in the decision here and in the
findings, or indeed in the submissions made by Miss Bond which can approach
satisfying that threshold which has been described in other cases as
requiring a "very strong case indeed".  Miss Bond's only point here (and it
is not strictly a ground of appeal as it seems to us), is that the partner
is a Zimbabwean refugee, but it is very hard to see how that fact by itself
can be sufficient to constitute very compelling circumstances.

Miss Bond makes the final point that the judge did not have to deal with
matters in that way because the judge had ruled Ms [N] out as a relevant
partner to begin with.  Well, we see that, but there are ample findings
here to make it plain that neither exception (2) nor very compelling
circumstances would have the remotest prospect of being made out. That
being so, even if there was an error of law, it is not material.

Notice of Decision

We are satisfied that there is no material error of law in the decision of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman promulgated on 14 November 2018.  We
therefore uphold that decision with the consequence that the appellant's
appeal remains dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

Signed            [pic]                      Date: 1 March 2019

Mr Justice Waksman

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Smith
