
[pic]
IAC-BH-PMP-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07706/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford UT                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 25th August 2017                   |On 5th September 2017                 |
|                                      |                                      |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY upper tribunal judge ROBERTS

                                   Between

                                  ms c.p.n.
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss Khan of Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mrs Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
An anonymity direction was made by the First-tier Tribunal. As a protection
claim, it is appropriate to continue that direction.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant a citizen of  Cameroon  (born  [  ]  1984)  appeals  with
    permission to the Upper Tribunal against the decision of  a  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge N M K  Lawrence)  dismissing  her  appeal  against  the
    Respondent's refusal to grant her asylum on account of her sexuality.

 2. The Appellant was initially refused permission to appeal by the  First-
    tier Tribunal but on a renewed application before the  Upper  Tribunal,
    UTJ Rintoul granted permission saying the following:

         "It is arguable that the First-tier Tribunal Judge N M  K  Lawrence
         erred in requiring corroboration  (Ground  2)  and  in  not  taking
         account  of  the  Appellant's  evidence  regarding  difficulty   of
         contacting her daughter (Ground 3).  It is also arguable  that  the
         judge failed to have proper regard to  guidance  in  assessing  the
         Appellant's sexuality, in particular at [26] and [34].

         All grounds are arguable."

 3. The Respondent filed a Rule 24 notice opposing the grant of permission.
     Neither party made any application to adduce further  evidence.   Thus
    the matter becomes before me  to  decide  whether  the  FtT's  decision
    discloses such error of law that the decision must be set aside and re-
    made.

Error of Law

 4. The main thrust of Miss Khan's argument  before  me  centred  upon  the
    failure of the FtT in its assessment of the Appellant's sexuality.  She
    said proper account had not been taken of the relevant guidance  issued
    by the Respondent when assessing a matter of  this  nature.   She  said
    further that the judge's approach was incorrect when dealing with:

          i) the fact that the Appellant had not heard of LGBT groups [26]

         ii) nor had she engaged in a lesbian relationship in the  UK  [27]
             and [34].

    Those were not factors which should be held against her, nor were  they
    ones which entitled the judge  to  make  adverse  credibility  findings
    against the Appellant.  These errors resulted in the  judge's  findings
    as a whole being tainted and  the  decision  should  therefore  be  set
    aside.

 5. Mrs Petterson on behalf of the Respondent did not seek  to  defend  the
    decision.  She said she was of the view that the first ground  set  out
    in paragraph 5 above had been made out. That being so, the decision was
    unsafe and could not stand.

 6. In addition, the Appellant has now given birth to her child.  The child
    is recognised as a British citizen.  Mrs Petterson said this would  now
    need to be factored in to any review hearing.

 7. I find I am satisfied for the reasons set out in the grounds and in the
    grant of permission  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    contains a material error and therefore it must be set aside to be  re-
    heard. I agree with the submissions made by Miss Khan set out above.  I
    set aside the decision in its entirety.

 8. Both parties were of the view that this  is  a  matter  which  must  be
    returned to the First-tier Tribunal.  It  would  appear  that  relevant
    evidence has not been properly considered  by  that  Tribunal  and  the
    effect of  that  error  has  been  to  deprive  the  Appellant  of  the
    opportunity for her case to be properly considered  by  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.  Moreover the extent of the judicial fact-finding exercise is
    such that it would be more appropriate that this appeal be remitted  to
    the First-tier Tribunal in accordance  with  paragraph  7.2(b)  of  the
    Practice Statement of 25th September 2012.

 9. Having reached that conclusion with the agreement of the parties I make
    the following directions:

      i) The decision is set aside and the appeal is remitted to the  First-
         tier Tribunal for rehearing.

     ii) The appeal is not to be listed before FtT Judge N M K Lawrence.

    iii) The appeal is remitted to the FtT sitting at Bradford.

     iv) Any further directions concerning the conduct of the rehearing  are
         to be made by the acting Resident Judge at Bradford.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the FtT  promulgated  on  11th  January  2017  involved  the
making of an error of law sufficient to  require  the  decision  to  be  set
aside and reheard.  Accordingly the appeal is  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal with the directions set out above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.





Signed   C E Roberts                    Date     04 September 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Roberts
