
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07568/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 20th December 2017                |On 17th January 2018                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PARKES


                                   Between

                                 WAHDAT OMAR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant: Mr E Anyene (Counsel)
For the Respondent: Ms N Willocks -Briscoe (Home Office Presenting Officer)

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

1. The Appellant's asylum application was refused by the Secretary of State
   for the reasons given in the Refusal Letter of the 7th of July 2016. His
   appeal against the decision was heard by Judge Miller at Taylor House on
   the 1st of February 2017 and dismissed for the reasons given in the
   decision promulgated on the 22nd of February 2017. The Appellant sought
   permission to challenge the First-tier Tribunal decision and permission
   was granted on the 28th of September 2017 by First-tier Tribunal Judge
   Landes.

2. The Appellant's claim was that he was at risk in Afghanistan after he
   refused to allow his work car to be used in an attack, he was beaten
   losing consciousness, his car was used in attack in which a Police
   officer was killed leading to his being suspected by the Police of being
   involved. The Taliban also held him responsible for one of their members
   being injured. On release from hospital the Appellant's father arranged
   his journey to the UK.

3. The Judge rejected the Appellant's claim to be in danger for a number of
   reasons. The Appellant said that he had been in hospital for 3 months,
   the Judge did not accept that if he was of interest they would not have
   left him alone with only one visit. The Judge did not accept that anyone
   in the car during the attack would have been able to get away. His
   injuries from his beating would have been obviously different from those
   who had been shot. The letter from the Police confirmed that there was no
   further interest in him. Further documents submitted were not originals
   and for a number of reasons, including the absence of features seen on
   genuine documents, they were not accepted as reliable. The Appellant had
   been physically able to travel to the UK and it was not accepted that his
   symptoms demonstrated that he could not be returned.

4. The grounds would have benefitted from being concise. It is suggested
   that at paragraph 36 the Judge was applying a raised standard of proof.
   It is also argued that the Judge had considered the Appellant's
   credibility outside the context of the evidence, his claim overall and
   the evidence for Afghanistan. Paragraph 37 was not evidence based. In
   paragraph 38 the rejected documents on the basis the originals had not
   been produced when they had been sent to the First-tier Tribunal.
   Paragraph 40 risk on return had not been properly assessed. The
   Appellant's medical condition had not been properly assessed in
   paragraphs 41 and 42 and the article 8 assessment was flawed.


5. Permission was granted although Judge Landes noted that the position was
   not entirely as depicted in the grounds. It was arguable that credibility
   had not been assessed in the round having regard to the consideration of
   the medical evidence. She observed that there were powerful points
   telling against the Appellant's credibility.


6. At the hearing the representatives made submissions in line with their
   respective positions. The submissions are set out in the Record of
   Proceedings and are referred to where relevant below.


7. With regard to assessing a decision the document has to be read as a
   whole and narrow textual analysis is to be avoided. The Judge set out the
   burden and standard of proof correctly at paragraphs 3 to 5. The
   reference to Horvath [2000] IMM AR 452 in paragraph 36 is apt, in
   paragraph 27 Stuart-Smith LJ observed "There is no doubt that to
   constitute persecution a high threshold has to be crossed." There is no
   merit in the complaint which relies on taking the observation out of
   context and ignoring the Judge's earlier appropriate self-direction.


8. In paragraph 37 the Judge discussed the Appellant's account. There was
   evidence that the Appellant was not of interest to the Police in the form
   of a letter at page 29. In any event given that on his account was that
   he was in hospital for 3 months the Judge's finding that the police would
   not have been easily put off and would have investigated the matter
   further were entirely justified. The matters discussed in paragraph 37
   were not dependent on an assessment of the Appellant's medical condition
   but were observations on the circumstances that the Appellant described
   and taken at their highest. The findings made were open to him for the
   reasons given and cannot be criticised for not being evidence based, they
   were based on the Appellant's evidence and rejected the claims of danger
   that he had made and not based on inconsistencies or missing details.


9. When considering the documentation the judge one document at page 29 the
   validity of which was not questioned and which supported the contention
   that the Appellant was not of interest to the police, consistent too with
   his not being visited in hospital after the first and only occasion. The
   other documentation was to be assessed in the round and the judge had
   made pertinent observations about the Appellant's case as discussed
   above. As Judge Landes noted in the grant of permission the later
   documents purporting to show that the Appellant was of interest "lacked
   the main features of reliable Afghan police documents." With evidence of
   that nature the judge was entitled to find that the documents were not
   reliable. It may be that he did not refer to Tanveer Ahmed but the
   findings was open taking into account the evidence overall.


10. The Judge considered the Appellant's journey to the UK in the context
   of what it would have taken him to get here. He had a brief period in
   Italy but over a year and a half in France where he received a great deal
   of assistance from others. Section 8 of the 2004 Act required the Judge
   to consider the Appellant's failure to claim on route and given his
   circumstances, particularly with regard to France, it was open to the
   Judge to find that the Appellant's failure to claim could properly be
   held against him.


11. The Judge did find that the medical report was wrong with the diagnosis
   of the Appellant's medical condition but that was in the context the
   Judge had noted the Appellant's travel history and his not claiming
   asylum during his lengthy time in France. For reasons unconnected with
   his medical conditions the Appellant's claim to be in danger in
   Afghanistan had been rejected and as indicated above those findings were
   available to the Judge. The decision at paragraph 43 was brief but the
   evidence was fairly summarised and private life was not argued. Given the
   family that the Appellant has in Afghanistan the evidence did not show
   that the Appellant could not return.


12. The decision has to be read as a whole and with regard to the evidence
   that was presented and the decision was open to the Judge for the reasons
   given. The decision of Judge Miller did not contain an error of law and
   remains as the disposal of this appeal.



CONCLUSIONS

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the
making of an error on a point of law.

I do not set aside the decision.

Anonymity

The First-tier Tribunal did not make an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005 and I make no
order.

Fee Award

In dismissing the appeal I make no fee award.


Signed:

Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal (IAC)

Dated: 15th January 2018











