
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07227/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 23 January 2020                            |On 14 February 2020           |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     MI
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms L King instructed by Qualified Legal Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure of publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who was born on 16 May 1998.  He was
    born in the Iraqi Kurdish Region ("IKR") and  lived  there  until  2004
    when his family moved to Kirkuk.  In  Kirkuk,  he  joined  the  Kurdish
    Democratic Party (the "KDP") in January 2017  and,  in  June  2017,  he
    joined an organisation  called  the  'Immortal  Pathway  Group'.   That
    organisation, associated with the  KDP,  was  specifically  created  in
    connection with the Kurdish referendum on independence.

 3. In August 2017, he began a relationship with a girl ("D") who  was  the
    niece of a senior member of the  PUK  and  closely  associated  with  a
    senior commander of the PUK Peshmerga forces ("J").  I have omitted the
    detail of these individuals in order to protect the  anonymity  of  the
    appellant.

 4. Following the Kurdish referendum in September 2017, the appellant  left
    Kirkuk in October 2017 and returned to the place of his  birth  in  the
    IKR because he feared political persecution in Kirkuk.

 5. In December 2017, he returned to  Kirkuk.   Whilst  he  was  there,  in
    February 2018 and again in April 2018, he proposed marriage  to  D  but
    that was rejected by J.

 6. In May 2018, he again returned to his place of birth in the IKR  as  he
    believed that J had told the  Iraqi  authorities  about  his  political
    activities and feared political persecution.

 7. Shortly after, his girlfriend contacted him and told him that  she  was
    to marry J's son and she threatened suicide.

 8. In the light of this, the appellant returned to Kirkuk in June 2018  in
    order to see her.  When J saw them together, he reacted angrily, firing
    a gun and causing the appellant to run away.   The  appellant  fled  to
    Erbil in the IKR where he remained, living with a  friend  of  his  old
    boss, until August 2018.  Whilst there, his  boss  telephoned  him  and
    told him he was not safe as J was looking for him.  As  a  result,  the
    appellant left the IKR, travelling to Turkey by bus, and from there  on
    to the UK.

 9. The appellant  arrived  in  the  United  Kingdom  clandestinely  on  27
    February 2019.  On 18 May 2019, he claimed asylum.  He claimed that  he
    was at risk on return to Iraq (both in Kirkuk and the IKR)  because  of
    his political opinion and because he was wanted by J.

10. On 19 June 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

The Appeal to the First-tier Tribunal

11. The appellant appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal.   The  appeal  was
    heard by Judge M  Loughridge.   At  that  hearing,  the  appellant  was
    represented but the Secretary of State was not.

12. Judge Loughridge accepted much of the appellant's account.  He accepted
    that the appellant had been a "low-level KDP  supporter/activist".   He
    also accepted the appellant's account of his relationship  with  D  and
    that he would be at risk from J if he returned to Kirkuk.  The evidence
    before the judge, which he accepted, was that D  was  no  longer  alive
    although he did not positively decide, as  was  the  appellant's  case,
    that she had committed suicide.  At para 25-26  of  his  determination,
    Judge Loughridge set out his finding that the appellant was at risk  on
    return to Kirkuk, namely his home area, as follows:

         "25. I have little hesitation in saying that the  Appellant  cannot
             safely return to Kirkuk.  Critical in reaching this conclusion
             is my finding that his girlfriend is no  longer  alive.   That
             fact significantly elevates the risk from [J] because [J] will
             in all probability blame the Appellant for his niece's  death.
             Whether or not this is correctly analysed  as  a  risk  of  an
             'honour killing' - and whether the Appellant  therefore  falls
             within the 'particular social group' of potential  victims  of
             honour-based crimes - is difficult to determine.  Ms King  has
             referred  me  to  objective  evidence  at  page  132  of   the
             Appellant's bundle which contains  information  about  honour-
             based violence most if not all of which appears to take  place
             'within' a family rather than  being  perpetrated  against  an
             'outsider'.  However, on balance it seems to me that  this  is
             probably a situation of potential honour-based violence  given
             the close connection between the risk to the Appellant and his
             wish to marry [J's]  niece.   In  any  event,  the  same  risk
             similarly arises under Article 3.  The  fundamental  point  is
             that if  the  Appellant's  presence  in  Kirkuk  came  to  the
             attention of [J] there would be a real risk to  him  of  being
             harmed/killed by way of revenge for his girlfriend's death.

         26.  For completeness, I will comment further on the issue  of  the
             Appellant's girlfriend's death.  I mentioned above that  I  do
             not make a positive finding that  she  committed  suicide  and
             that  is  because  the  objective  evidence  on   honour-based
             violence specifically refers to one reason for  such  violence
             being refusal of an arranged marriage - which is precisely the
             circumstance  in  which  the  Appellant's   girlfriend   found
             herself.  She was clearly unwilling to marry  her  cousin  and
             there is a distinct possibility that in fact she was a  victim
             of honour-based violence perpetrated by her uncle, indeed  the
             objective evidence is that honour killings are often concealed
             as suicides.  The  precise  circumstances  of  her  death  are
             immaterial to my overall conclusions and it is therefore  open
             to me to leave this issue unresolved, which is what I do.  The
             point, however, is that the Appellant is likely to  be  blamed
             by [J] for the death however it occurred".

13. Having made  that  finding,  at  para  27,  the  judge  identified  the
    remaining legal issue as  being  whether  the  appellant  could  safely
    relocate elsewhere in Iraq and whether it was reasonable for him to  do
    so.  The obvious place of potential relocation was to the IKR  and,  in
    particular, to Erbil.

14. At paras 28-31, the judge considered whether  the  appellant  would  be
    safe in the  IKR,  in  particular  in  Erbil.   Having  regard  to  the
    appellant's circumstances and the relevant CPIN,  the  judge  concluded
    that the appellant could safely live in Erbil.   His  reasons  were  as
    follows:

         "28. The obvious place to consider for relocation is the IKR.  This
             is an autonomous region recognised by the Iraqi government and
             run by the Kurdish  Regional  Government.   It  is  where  the
             Appellant was born and spent the first few years of  his  life
             and is where he fled to from Kirkuk on  three  occasions.   It
             has its own army - the Peshmerga - which in reality  is  under
             the control of the two main factions in  Kurdish  politics  in
             Iraqi, the KDP and the PUK.  The population of the IKR is just
             over 8 million and the principal city, Erbil, has a population
             of almost 900,000.

         29.  I consider that the only risk  to  the  Appellant  is  from  a
             specific  individual  relating  to  a  personal  matter.    In
             particular, although the Appellant was briefly involved in KDP
             politics before he left Iraq there is no cogent evidence  that
             this carries a real risk of serious harm or leads to  a  well-
             founded fear of persecution in the IKR.  There are undoubtedly
             certain tensions between the KDP and the PUK but  I  have  not
             seen   anything   which   suggests    that    low-level    KDP
             supporters/activists - and the Appellant is  clearly  no  more
             than that in terms of his political profile - are targeted  by
             political opponents.  The Respondent's CPIN: "Iraq:  Political
             opinion in the  Kurdistan  Region  of  Iraq  (KRI)"  makes  is
             absolutely clear that there  is  little  if  any  risk  to  an
             'ordinary' KDP member eg paragraph 2.2.2: "The evidence is not
             such that a person will be at real risk  of  serious  harm  or
             persecution simply by being an opponent of,  or  having  taken
             part in protests against, the KDP and/or PUK".

         30.  Is this individual - [J] - likely to have the means/motivation
             to track  down  the  Appellant  in  the  IKR?   Whilst  it  is
             impossible to completely rule this out the risk is at  such  a
             low level that it falls well below the threshold required in a
             protection claim.  The Appellant could relocate to Erbil which
             is a large city and a location  in  which  he  has  previously
             lived for approximately six weeks.  There is no obvious reason
             why his presence in Erbil would even come to  [J's]  attention
             and it is relevant to say that there is no evidence  that  his
             position as a karate champion  elevates  his  profile  to  any
             significant extent,  for  example  such  that  he  is  readily
             recognisable by members of the public.  Furthermore,  although
             [J] is well connected within the PUK it is the KDP rather than
             the  PUK  which  controls  Erbil  -  paragraph  2.4.1  of  the
             Respondent's CPIN: "Iraq: Political opinion in  the  Kurdistan
             Region of Iraq (KRI)".  The CPIN also states -  at  paragraphs
             2.3.1 and 2.3.2 - that "Both the KDP  and  PUK  have  powerful
             militias (the Peshmerga).  A supporter or member of either the
             KDP or PUK will be able, in general, to  avail  themselves  of
             the protection of either the KDP  or  the  PUK,  depending  on
             their  location".   Put  another  way,  the  Appellant's   KDP
             credentials would serve him well in Erbil  in  protecting  him
             from any  risk  which  could  possibly  come  from  [J].   The
             Appellant's suggestion in his oral evidence that [J's] boss, [
             ], has unlimited power in the IKR and can arrest/kill  anyone,
             and is above the law,  is  not  borne  out  in  the  objective
             evidence, at least not with regard to areas of the  IKR  under
             KDP control.

         31.  Taking all the above into account I  conclude  therefore  that
             the Appellant could safely relocate to her Erbil i.e.  without
             any real risk to him from [J].  The situation for him in  that
             location would be vastly different  to  returning  to  Kirkuk,
             particularly to the area of Kirkuk where his  family  and  [J]
             live".

15. At paras 32-38, applying the relevant country guidance decisions in  AA
    (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944  and  AAH  (Iraqi  Kurds  -  Internal
    Relocation) Iraq CG [2018] UKUT 00212 (IAC), the judge  found  that  it
    would be reasonable and not unduly harsh for the appellant to  live  in
    Erbil where, although he did not have any family members, he had  lived
    with the friend of his old boss for about 45 days and he would be  able
    to obtain a replacement CSID and find work in Erbil.

16. Consequently, Judge Loughridge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  on
    asylum and humanitarian protection grounds on the basis that  he  could
    safely and reasonably internally relocate to Erbil in the IKR.



The Appeal to the Upper Tribunal

17. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  a
    number of grounds.  In particular, that the judge had wrongly  assessed
    the risk to the appellant  as  a  "low-level  supporter/activist";  had
    wrongly found that the appellant could  safely  relocate  to  Erbil  by
    concluding that he would not be at risk from J; and was wrong  to  find
    that he could reasonably live in Erbil even if he were not at risk.

18. On 12 November 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (DJ Macdonald) granted the
    appellant permission to appeal.

19. On 21 November 2019, the Secretary of State filed a  rule  24  response
    seeking to uphold the judge's decision, in particular that he would not
    be at risk on account of his political activity.

20. Before me, Ms King, who represented  the  appellant,  relied  upon  the
    grounds and her skeleton argument  which  she  developed  in  her  oral
    submissions.  Principally, she submitted that  the  judge  had  wrongly
    assessed the risk to the appellant based upon his political activity in
    applying the relevant CPIN (Iraq: Political opinion  in  the  Kurdistan
    Region of Iraq (KRI)) (August 2017) given the level  of  his  political
    activity.  It was  not  accurate  to  describe  him  as  a  'low-level'
    activist and supporter given his activities in  Kirkuk.   Secondly,  Ms
    King submitted that the judge had wrongly  assessed  the  risk  to  the
    appellant in Erbil from J.  He had failed  to  take  into  account  the
    appellant's  profile  as  a  national  karate  champion  which,  if  he
    continued his sport on return, would raise his profile such that he was
    at risk of coming to the attention of J.  Further,  Ms  King  submitted
    that the judge had failed to give adequate reasons in para  30  of  his
    determination for concluding that J did  not  have  the  motivation  to
    track him down.  The judge had failed to take into account that  J  had
    continued to pursue him and, following a phone  call  from  his  former
    boss, that was why he had left Erbil  and  Iraq  to  come  to  the  UK.
    Finally, although with somewhat less vigour, Ms King submitted that the
    judge had been wrong to find that it was reasonable for  the  appellant
    to live in Erbil as it was speculation whether the friend of  his  boss
    would provide him with support and sponsorship.

21. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells acknowledged  that  he  was  at
    some disadvantage as there was no record in his file of the evidence as
    the  respondent  had   not   been   represented   before   the   judge.
    Nevertheless, in assessing the risk to the  appellant  in  Erbil  as  a
    result of his political opinion, Mr Howells submitted that the  judge's
    finding was consistent with the CPIN as the appellant would  be  living
    in a KDP controlled area and there was no basis  for  finding  that  he
    would be at risk from the KDP because of his past  (or  indeed  future)
    activities supporting the KDP.  As regards the risk  to  the  appellant
    from J, Mr Howells submitted that J was part of the PUK  and  that  the
    judge had been entitled to find at para 30  that  the  appellant  could
    seek the protection  of  the  KDP  in  Erbil  against  J.   Mr  Howells
    submitted that the judge was entitled to find, if the appellant was not
    at risk, that it would be reasonable to live in Erbil.



Discussion

22. As I have already indicated, Judge Loughridge found that the  appellant
    was at risk of persecution and/or treatment contrary to Art  3  of  the
    ECHR in his home area of Kirkuk.  That risk arose from J because of his
    attitude to the appellant as a result of the  appellant's  relationship
    with J's niece.  It does, however, seem apparent that as  a  result  of
    the appellant's political activities in Kirkuk, he  was  also  at  risk
    from the Iraqi authorities.  That was part of his account as to why  he
    left Kirkuk in May 2018.  The judge's finding in relation to  the  risk
    to the appellant in Kirkuk at paras  25-26  (which  I  set  out  above)
    relates only to the risk from J if the appellant were  in  Kirkuk.   It
    does not appear, however, from the appellant's grounds of appeal or the
    submissions made before me that it is contended that the judge erred by
    failing to find that the appellant was also  at  risk  from  the  Iraqi
    authorities.  In truth, he may well also be at risk on  that  basis  in
    Kirkuk.  In any event, the judge's failure to make any finding in  that
    regard is not material to his decision or, indeed, to any re-making  of
    the decision since the crucial issue, as was  accepted  before  me,  is
    whether the appellant can safely and reasonably relocate to the IKR, in
    particular Erbil.  The relevant matters to that issue are  whether  the
    appellant would be at risk because of his political activities or  from
    J in Erbil and, if he would not, whether it would be reasonable and not
    unduly harsh for him to live there.

23. As regards the risk to the appellant  in  Erbil  as  a  result  of  his
    political  activities,  it  is  extremely  difficult  to  see  how  his
    political activities in support of the KDP could put  him  at  risk  in
    Erbil which is a KDP controlled area.  Judge Loughridge referred to the
    relevant  CPIN  in  relation  to  political   opinion   in   the   IKR.
    Unfortunately, the Tribunal's file did not contain a copy of that CPIN.
     The judge made reference to a number of paragraphs in  that  document,
    in particular para  2.2.2  at  para  29  of  his  determination.   That
    paragraph must be seen in the context of the immediately preceding para
    2.2.1 and the following para 2.2.3.  Paragraphs 2.2.1-2.2.3 provide  as
    follows:

         "2.2 Assessment of risk

                2.2.1    The   democratically-elected   Kurdistan   Regional
                      Government (KRG) is broad-based, with representatives
                      from all the major parties, although it is  dominated
                      by  the  Kurdistan  Democratic   Party   (KDP)   (see
                      Kurdistan  Regional  Government   (KRG)).    However,
                      ongoing tensions exist between the main parties:  the
                      KDP; its main rival, the Patriotic Union of Kurdistan
                      (PUK); and the Gorran  ('Change')  party,  which  has
                      emerged in recent years to challenge the dominance of
                      the KDP and PUK.

                2.2.2  The evidence is not such that a  person  will  be  at
                      real risk of serious harm or  persecution  simply  by
                      being  an  opponent  of,  or  having  taken  part  in
                      protests against, the KDP and/or PUK.  Each case must
                      be considered on its merits.

                2.2.3  There are reports that political opponents of the KRG
                      and/or  the  KDP  and/or  PUK  have  been   arrested,
                      detained, assaulted and even killed by the  Kurdistan
                      authorities.  However, there is no evidence that such
                      mistreatment is systematic.   In  general,  a  person
                      will not be at risk of serious harm or persecution on
                      the basis of political activity within the  Kurdistan
                      Region of Iraq (KRI).  Decision makers must, however,
                      consider each case on its  merits.   Decision  makers
                      must consider that those more likely to be at risk of
                      such mistreatment include:

                         .  journalists/media  workers  and   human   rights
                           defenders, particularly

                           ?    independent journalists who do not have  the
                               protection of either the KDP or PUK;

                           ?    those  who  write  about  certain  subjects,
                               including  corruption,  the  lack  of  human
                               rights in the  region,  women's  rights  and
                               anything  that   could   be   construed   as
                               endangering the security of  the  region  or
                               public morality;

                         . those critical  (or  perceived  as  critical)  of
                           prominent figures in the KDP or associated organs
                           such as the Peshmerga (see Arrests and  detention
                           and Restrictions on media freedoms)".

24. Ms King submitted that the judge had wrongly applied para 2.2.2 as  the
    appellant was not merely an "opponent" or, indeed as the judge found, a
    "low-level activist" given his involvement in Kirkuk which had included
    supporting the KDP and the independence movement  where  a  banner  had
    shown the appellant and had been torn  down  and  burnt  by  the  Iraqi
    authorities.

25. Mr Howells submitted that the relevant guidance was concerned with  the
    risk to an individual arising from his political activities when he was
    in an area in the IKR controlled by the other group: namely,  political
    activity for the KDP carried out in a PUK area  or  political  activity
    for the PUK carried out in a KDP area.   Here,  the  area  of  proposed
    relocation was to a KDP area and  it  was  political  activity  by  the
    appellant on behalf of the KDP which it was now said put him at risk.

26. Whilst it is somewhat unclear in its terms, it does seem likely that Mr
    Howells' submission is correct.  It would be consistent with para 2.3.2
    dealing with "protection" where it is stated:

         "A supporter or member of either the KDP or PUK will  be  able,  in
         general, to avail themselves of the protection of either the KDP or
         the PUK, depending on their location".

27. In my judgment, Judge Loughridge did not err in law in finding that the
    appellant would not be at risk because of his political activities,  on
    behalf of the KDP, if he relocated to Erbil which is a  KDP  controlled
    area.  In my judgment, the background material  does  not  support  the
    appellant's case that he  would  be  at  risk  whether  or  not  he  is
    perceived as a "low-level supporter or activist" of the KDP based  upon
    his past political activities in Kirkuk and, although the  evidence  on
    this is less clear, his future political activities (if any) in  Erbil.
    He would not be at risk from the KDP itself and, simply on the basis of
    political activity, the judge's conclusion that he could safely live in
    Erbil is supported by and, entirely consistent with, para 2.3.2 that he
    would be able to obtain protection from the KDP if it was suggested his
    political activities would be of interest to the PUK.

28. However, in relation to the risk, if any, to  the  appellant  in  Erbil
    from J, I accept the substance of Ms King's submissions that the  judge
    failed properly  to  consider  all  the  evidence  as  to  whether  the
    appellant would come to the attention of J whilst living in  Erbil  and
    whether J had the motivation to track him down.

29. First, whilst the judge makes reference to the fact that the  appellant
    is a "karate champion" he goes on to state in para 30  that  there  was
    nothing in the evidence which "elevates his profile to any  significant
    extent, for example such that he is readily recognisable by members  of
    the public".  Ms King, relying upon the grounds of appeal, pointed  out
    to me that the judge  had  failed  to  set  out  the  entirety  of  the
    appellant's evidence.  The appellant's evidence was that he was "number
    one" in Kurdistan; he  was  the  national  champion  in  2007,  he  had
    competed in Turkey and Iran  and  the  competitions  were  reported  on
    television and in the newspapers and  there  were  photographs  of  him
    competing available on social media.  The judge made  no  reference  to
    that evidence which, Mr Howells could not dispute was  the  appellant's
    evidence in the absence of a Presenting Officer's record.  Further,  Ms
    King submitted that the judge had failed to take into account that  the
    appellant would likely continue his  sporting  activity  on  return  to
    Erbil and that would heighten his profile and  potentially  lead  to  J
    discovering his whereabouts.  I accept that submission.

30. Further, as Ms King submitted, the judge appears to have concluded that
    J  had  no  motivation  to  seek  out  the  appellant.   However,   the
    appellant's evidence was that he left Erbil to come to the  UK  because
    his former boss had told him that J was still seeking him  and  he  was
    not safe.  The  judge  accepted,  in  large  measure,  the  appellant's
    evidence.  In para 20, he made no reference to this  evidence  and,  if
    accepted, it would appear to be inconsistent with the  judge's  finding
    in answer to his own question of whether J  was  "likely  to  have  the
    means/motivation to track down the appellant in the IKR",  that  whilst
    it was "impossible to completely rule this out the risk is  at  such  a
    low level that  it  falls  well  below  the  threshold  required  in  a
    protection claim".

31. Likewise, in relation to the risk of J having the  means  to  find  the
    appellant, the judge failed, in my view, to have sufficient  regard  to
    the senior role played by J within the PUK and that of his boss in  the
    PUK Peshmerga.  Of course, in para 30, relying on paras 2.3.1 and 2.3.2
    of the CPIN, the judge noted that protection might  be  available  from
    the KDP to the appellant.  That was, however, said in the context of  a
    risk to an individual as a supporter or  member  of  the  KDP,  in  all
    probability, in the context of their political activity  for  the  KDP.
    The risk to the appellant from J, given his senior position  (and  that
    of his boss) in the PUK required the judge not simply to state the CPIN
    policy but to engage with the background evidence.  There was  evidence
    before the judge, referred to in para 36 of the grounds,  derived  from
    the EASO, Country  of  Origin  Information  Report  Iraq  Targeting  of
    Individuals (March 2019) at para 1.10.2 that:

         "A   small   group   of   persons   in   top   of   the   political
         parties,  KDP  and PUK, can do anything they want  without  fearing
         sanctions etc.  In general, the KDP and PUK are in control.   If  a
         person has a conflict with a powerful figure from these two parties
         or the Asayish, that person would be in trouble".

32. I do not say that the judge was bound to find that the appellant was at
    risk from J but rather that his finding that he was not at risk from  J
    failed  to  consider,  and  take  into  account,  all  the  appellant's
    evidence, together with the background evidence.

33. It follows, therefore, that the judge erred  in  law  in  reaching  his
    finding in para 31 that the appellant could safely  relocate  to  Erbil
    because there would be no real risk to him from J if he lived there.

34. That, in itself, is sufficient to set aside the  judge's  decision  and
    finding in relation to internal relocation.  Ms  King  also  challenged
    the judge's findings and reasons at  paras  32-39,  that  it  would  be
    reasonable and not unduly harsh for the appellant to live in Erbil.  As
    the judge's decision in respect of internal relocation must be re-made,
    and that the appellant is likely to  give  further  oral  evidence,  it
    would not be right, in my judgment, to preserve  the  judge's  findings
    and reasoning in paras 32-39.  Indeed, it was common ground between the
    representatives, that if I found that the judge had erred  in  law  and
    his decision was set aside, the only findings of the judge which should
    be preserved were in paras 18-22 and 25-26 of his determination.

35. Consequently, I am satisfied that the judge erred in law in  dismissing
    the appeal in finding that the appellant could internally  relocate  to
    Erbil.

Decision

36. For the above reasons, the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  to
    dismiss the appellant's appeal on asylum  and  humanitarian  protection
    grounds involved the making of an error of law.  That decision  is  set
    aside.

37. The parties agree that, in these circumstances, it was appropriate  for
    the appeal to be remitted to the First-tier Tribunal in order that  the
    decision  could  be  re-made  in  respect  of  the  issue  of  internal
    relocation to the IKR, in particular to  Erbil.   Given  that  this  is
    likely to involve further evidence, including oral  evidence  from  the
    appellant, I am satisfied having regard  to  para  7.2  of  the  Senior
    President's Practice Statement, the appropriate disposal of this appeal
    is to remit it to the First-tier Tribunal.

38. On remittal,  the  judge's  findings  in  paras  18-22  and  25-26  are
    preserved.  In essence, the appellant has established that he would  be
    at risk of persecution and/or Art 3 ill-treatment in his home  area  of
    Kirkuk and the sole legal issue is that of  internal  relocation.   The
    appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on that basis to be heard
    by a judge other than Judge Loughridge.


                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal
                                                            13 February 2020
