
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07178/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Newport                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 January 2019                            |On 7 May 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                    [M K]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms V Dirie, Counsel, instructed by Migrant Legal
Project (Cardiff)
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant. born in May 2001  is  a  national  of  Iraq  of  Kurdish
    origin, who arrived in the UK in May 2017 and  claimed  asylum  shortly
    after.  He claimed that his father had been killed because he  used  to
    be a member of the Ba'ath Party.  His mother and sister had  also  been
    killed.  Members of the  government  also  looked  for  him.   He  also
    claimed that he feared returning to Iraq because ISIS had  invaded  his
    village.  On 23 April 2018 the respondent refused to grant  him  asylum
    and humanitarian protection; although  granting  him  leave  to  remain
    until 1 November 2018.  In a decision sent on 3  September  2018  Judge
    Barrowclough of the First-tier Tribunal (FtT) dismissed his  appeal  on
    asylum, humanitarian and human rights grounds.  The judge concluded  at
    paragraph 32 that the core of his account of having experienced serious
    harm in Iraq was not credible.

2.   The appellant's grounds contend first of all that the  judge  erred  in
    reaching adverse credibility grounds without considering the  objective
    country evidence.  I consider this ground of  challenge  unsustainable.
    Although the judge did not refer specifically to any country background
    material when setting out his reasons, he  did  identify  the  parties'
    bundles at paragraph 2, which included such material and also  referred
    to the UT country guidance case of AAH [2017] UKUT 000182 which,  inter
    alia, contains an extensive analysis of such material up to that  date.
    The representative's submissions clearly made reference to materials in
    the bundles.  There is no good basis for considering that the judge did
    not have this evidence fully in mind.

3.   The appellant's  second  ground  contends  that  the  judge  failed  to
    properly consider the appellant's circumstances under Article 15(c)  of
    the Qualification Directive and did not properly address the  issue  of
    whether the appellant's home area was still a contested area or whether
    he would be able to return via Baghdad or relocate within the IKR.   It
    was said that there was a lack of clarity about whether  the  appellant
    would be able to obtain all the documentation he would need to  return,
    including a CSID.

4.   Taken on its own, I do not consider ground (2) is made  out.   Although
    the respondent did state in the reasons for refusal letter that  Kirkuk
    was a contested area (paragraph 90), he had also said in  paragraph  79
    that  internal  relocation  was  possible  in  "the  parts  of   Kirkuk
    governorate in and around Hawija".  It was the appellant's own  account
    that he and his family lived in villages (Kubayba and Mama)  that  were
    close to Hawija.  Hence the judge did not err in considering  that  the
    appellant could not succeed in his asylum and  humanitarian  protection
    or Article 3 claim unless able to show that he would be at risk in  his
    home villages.  Nevertheless, given that it  was  the  appellant's  own
    evidence that ISIS had occupied his village in 2014, the  judge  should
    have confirmed whether or not  he  considered  that  they  had  now  no
    presence there and were not part of a contested area.

5.   In relation to the judge's treatment of the issue  of  the  appellant's
    documentation, there is a difficulty in regard to what  was  stated  at
    paragraph 30.

         "30. There is the anomaly, pointed out by Ms Williams, that whereas
             the appellant felt able to walk more or  less  freely  in  the
             villages of Mama and Haweja up until 2014, he did not  venture
             out of Mohammed's property in  the  city  of  Kirkuk  for  the
             following two years.  Additionally, the appellant says that he
             does not think that he would be able  to  recognise  Mohammed,
             who he last saw only two years ago in 2016, that he  does  not
             think that Mohammed would be willing to help  him  if  he  was
             returned to Iraq, and that he  has  not  tried  to  trace  him
             through the Red Cross.  I find that to be surprising, since on
             the  appellant's  account,  Mohammed   is   the   person   who
             effectively saved, housed  and  protected  him  following  the
             death or disappearance of all members of his family,  and  who
             arranged and presumably paid  for  his  flight  from  Iraq  to
             safety.  I agree with Ms Williams that it is  remarkable  that
             agents should have been arranged to  take  the  appellant  not
             simply  out  of  Iraq  and  away  from  the  dangers  that  he
             apparently faced there, but all the way across Europe  to  the
             UK, at no doubt considerable extra expense.  Finally, there is
             a significant inconsistency in the appellant's  account  about
             the identity documents that he brought out of Iraq  -  whether
             he knew that they were, whether he even opened the  folder  in
             which they were kept to look at them, whether  he  could  read
             and understand what they were, partially or at all.  It  seems
             to me highly probable that the purpose and importance  of  any
             such document would have been explained to him before he  left
             Iraq, and I found the appellant's evidence  in  re-examination
             concerning this issue to be unconvincing."

6.   The difficulty with this assessment is that it really just  establishes
    that the judge did not believe the appellant's account that he had lost
    contact with family and friends or that he  would   be  unable  to  re-
    establish such contact.  That may have sufficed if  the  appellant  had
    been an adult, but since he was still a minor it was necessary for  the
    judge to explain the basis on which he considered the  appellant  could
    obtain a CSID.

7.   This difficulty takes on greater force when one turns to  consider  the
    judge's decision in the  light  of  the  appellant's  third  ground  of
    appeal, whose essence is that the judge failed to consider the issue of
    risk on return on the hypothesis that the appellant would  be  returned
    at the date of the appeal hearing.  Plainly the  judge  did  fall  into
    error in this regard.

8.   The judge refers throughout to the appellant  being  returned  to  Iraq
    after his 18th birthday: see paragraphs 26 and 31.  Mr Howells said  he
    accepted that this was a serious error on the part of the judge.

9.   In light of the foregoing, it is unnecessary for me to  address  ground
    4.

10.  I am persuaded that the judge's failure to assess the appellant's  case
    on the basis of a hypothetical return whilst he was still a  minor  and
    his failure to make specific findings on how he concluded the appellant
    would be able to obtain a CSID, resulted in a  material  error  of  law
    necessitating that I set aside the decision.

11.  There is a cursory challenge in the  grounds  to  the  judge's  adverse
    credibility grounds, it being alleged at paragraph 18 that the  judge's
    error regarding ex nunc assessment "brings into  question  whether  ...
    the credibility assessment was effectively informed by UNHCR  and  Home
    Office guidance and policy on considering  children's  asylum  claims",
    but I do not consider that this allegation  is  made  out.   First  the
    judge  expressly  noted  the  appellant's  status  as  a   child   when
    considering the significance of  inconsistencies  (see  paragraph  31);
    and, second, this ground is wholly  unparticularised  and  contains  no
    explanation for why it was thought the  judge  would  have  come  to  a
    difficult conclusion if he had applied a more child-sensitive approach.



Direction

12.  The above conclusion has consequences for the scope  of  the  direction
    that I now give the next FtT judge who will have the task of  rehearing
    the appeal.  I direct that the next  Tribunal  takes  as  its  starting
    point that the appellant's account  of  his  past  experiences  is  not
    credible and that all can be accepted about him is that he is an ethnic
    Kurd from the villages close to Hawija.  Clearly the focus of the  next
    hearing must therefore be on whether on the  basis  of  the  up-to-date
    country information his home area is safe (if it  is  found  not,  then
    there will need to be an assessment of whether the appellant can safely
    and reasonably relocate to Kirkuk or the IKR or other  areas).  If  his
    home area is considered safe and reasonable for him to return to,  then
    there will need to be specific findings on  whether  it  is  considered
    reasonably likely that he will be able to obtain  an  appropriate  CSID
    with help from family or friends.  Whilst it  is  appropriate  for  the
    appellant to give further oral evidence about  this  issue,  its  scope
    must be confined to this issue.

13.  For the above reasons:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The case is remitted to the FtT (not before Judge Barrowclough) with  a
    direction set out at para 12 above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed                                  Date: 15 February 2019

             [pic]
Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
