
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07750/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 27 June 2019                      |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     T M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Beech, instructed by Nelson- Singleton
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Fox promulgated on 2 February 2018  dismissing  his
    appeal against the decision of the respondent to refuse  the  same  for
    asylum.  The applicant's case  is  put  simply  that  he  is  a  Syrian
    national who cannot return home  owing  to  the  current  situation  in
    Syria.  The Secretary of State did not however accept the appellant  is
    a Syrian national for a number of  reasons,  firstly  as  a  result  of
    enquiries made using his fingerprints which resulted in a positive  hit
    with the Department of Homeland Security in the United  States  to  the
    effect that the fingerprints had been taken on  17  September  2015  in
    Amman Jordan and that the person to whom the fingerprints relate  is  a
    [TE] born on 4 July 1968 and had  a  Jordanian  passport.   The  second
    reason for disbelieving is on account  the  results  are  a  linguistic
    analysis.  The Secretary of State also considered that after  questions
    the appellant was able  to  answer  correctly  in  interview  were  not
    sufficiently probative.

 2. The appellant's explanation for the fact that the fingerprints appeared
    on the American database (a fact which he does not dispute) is that  he
    got an agent to make an application on his behalf. The agent  took  his
    photographs and his fingerprints and made  an  application  to  the  US
    Embassy.  This issue was the subject of a  Case  Management  Review  at
    which the appellant was given an opportunity to  provide  documents  to
    address this and to provide a skeleton argument.

 3. The judge heard evidence from the appellant and  made  findings  as  to
    credibility.  He started at paragraph [15] with findings in respect  of
    Section 8 of the 2004 Act.  He records  the  fact  the  respondent  had
    received information from  the  US  authorities  that  the  appellant's
    fingerprints were linked to a [TE] a  Jordanian  national.   The  judge
    records that the fingerprints were submitted with a visa application on
    or about 17 September 2015, stating:

         "The appellant disputes this.  He does  not  demonstrate  that  the
         fingerprints were not  his.  He  claims  himself  to  be  a  Syrian
         national... He acknowledges that he had his own passport  this  was
         lost prior to departure."

 4. The judge then goes on to consider other matters turning to credibility
    at paragraph [20].  The  judge  says  rightly  that  the  core  of  the
    application is the appellant's identity and  nationality.   He  records
    that the appellant is aware of this issue.  He then goes on  to  relate
    at [22], [23] and [24] how the issue was developed before him  by  both
    representatives.

 5. The judge  then  goes  on  to  deal  with  the  fingerprints  again  at
    paragraphs [26] to [27] stating [26]:

         "The appellant has not been able to demonstrate, even to the  lower
         standard of, that these are not his fingerprints."

    That was not, however, how  the  appellant  put  his  case.  The  judge
    continued:

         "There is no suggestion from anyone that the fingerprints  held  by
         the US  authorities  are  not  the  appellant's.   It  is  for  the
         appellant to demonstrate that these are  not  his  fingerprints  or
         that some mistake has arisen that he can explain in some fashion no
         such explanation is put before me today."

 6. The judge then states that it is clear from the  information  that  all
    application to the US authorities must be accompanied in person by  the
    applicant, noting that the appellant  himself  acknowledges  he  claims
    that he had not gone to the embassy but that this would  appear  to  be
    untrue.

 7. The judge said [27]:

         "I acknowledge some doubt must hover over  this  finding.   The  US
         authorities and respondent have not provided a photograph that  may
         have accompanied the  US  visa  application  which  may  have  lent
         further  weight  to  the  respondent's  point.  However,  there  is
         sufficient evidence before me today to  make  a  finding  that  the
         appellant did apply as a Jordanian national for a US visa in 2015."



 8. The judge then goes on to make a number of other factors rejecting  the
    documentary evidence and concluding at 38 that:

         "The appellant may be safely returned to his home country  which  I
         find  on  balance  is  more  likely  to  be  Jordan  without  fear,
         misfortune, adverse attention or otherwise.  I find he can also  be
         returned  to  Syria  also  without  fear  or  misfortune,   adverse
         attention or otherwise."

    There is thus a finding by the  judge  the  appellant  is  a  Jordanian
    national.

 9. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had acted irrationally in his approach  to  the  evidence  of  identity
    particularly the fingerprints and had failed to give  adequate  reasons
    for his finding taking in paragraph 18  and  thereby  making  a  flawed
    analysis with regard to Section 8 of the 2004  Act.   Second  that  the
    judge failed to have in line with Tanveer Ahmed to make an  alternative
    finding  in  respect  to  the  documents.   Third   the   judge   erred
    irrationally in ignoring evidence  the  appellant  signed  one  of  the
    authorities' forms.

10. It is also noted the judge erred in finding the appellant can be safely
    returned to Syria and thereby failing to make any findings in light  of
    country guidance KB (Failed asylum seekers) Syria CG [2012] UKUT 426.

11. There is an apparent inconsistency  in  the  judge's  approach  to  the
    appellant's  evidence  put  forward  as   the   explanation   for   his
    fingerprints appearing  on  the  American  database  and  linked  to  a
    Jordanian national.  The judge observes that the applicant has made  no
    explanation at paragraph 26 yet  goes  on  apparently  to  consider  an
    explanation at paragraph 27.  It is evident from what the judge says in
    the phrase "he claims that he did not go to the US Embassy  that  would
    appear to be untrue" that he  found  the  explanation  untrue.  Equally
    there is an equivocation when the judge refers to some doubt  "hovering
    over this finding".

12.  On  a  proper  analysis  of  paragraph  26  it  is  clear  that  "such
    explanation" refers back to the previous sentence that is, "It  is  for
    the appellant to show that these are not his fingerprints or that  some
    mistake has arisen that he can explain in some fashion".  But  that  is
    not quite what the appellant's case was.  That said, it is  clear  from
    the following paragraph that the explanation - that the agent had taken
    the fingerprints -  was  considered.  For  that  reason,  the  apparent
    confusion at [26] is not necessarily relevant or material.

13. It is I consider sufficiently clear from what is said at  paragraph  27
    that the judge did take into account the  appellant's  explanation  for
    not having been present at the embassy when the evidence was that  this
    was necessary, and the judge rejected that in  light  of  the  evidence
    from the background information that all applications made  to  the  US
    must be accompanied in person.  It was open to him to note  some  doubt
    but it was not necessary for the Secretary of State to prove this  case
    on  the  identity  point  to  the  criminal  standard.  Some  doubt  is
    consistent with a finding that on the  balance  of  probabilities  that
    this issue is made out.

14.  It  has  to  be  remembered  that  the  appellant'  accepts  that  his
    fingerprints did appear on  an  American  database.  It  was  also  the
    evidence  that  applications  have  to  be  made  in  person.  That  is
    inherently  likely,  otherwise  it  would  not  be  possible  to   link
    fingerprints  to  a  particular  individual  with  certainty,   thereby
    defeating the purpose of taking fingerprints. I consider  that  in  the
    circumstances that albeit the decision is  unclear  in  places,  it  is
    sufficiently clear from the decision that the judge did have regard  to
    the explanation put forward  by  the  appellant  for  his  fingerprints
    appearing on an American database and  rejected  it  in  light  of  the
    evidence.  I consider that that was the decision open  to  him  and  is
    adequately and sufficiently reasoned. I do not accept that the apparent
    confusion at [26] and earlier at [15] undermine  the  core  finding  on
    this aspect.

15. I do not consider  that  the  decision  was  infected  by  the  judge's
    approach to section 8 of the 2004 Act about which he made  observations
    at paragraph 15 of the decision. That is  because  although  the  judge
    refers section 8, he does not in reality make any findings of substance
    on that point with an exception in paragraph 16 which  relates  to  the
    failure to claim in Turkey.  There has to be a starting point in making
    findings, and it is evident also that the judge did not reject all  the
    evidence in this case noting in particular the evidence from the  voice
    analysis this is not a sufficient basis for determining the appeal.

16. Whilst it is evident that the judge did not refer directly  to  Tanveer
    Ahmed it is in the context of the current findings open to the judge to
    reach the conclusion he did with regard to  the  documents.  I  do  not
    consider that it can be properly said that he simply adopted  the  view
    set out in the refusal letter.

17. I do not consider that the remainder  of  the  grounds  identified  any
    material errors.  The issue with regard to  the  finding  at  paragraph
    [35] being unclear is not capable of  being  relevant  given  the  core
    finding is sustainable.  At paragraph  [39]  there  is  an  unfortunate
    errors: whilst I accept that the judge may have erred  in  saying  that
    the appellant could return safely to Syria thereby failing properly  to
    engage with KB and Others it is not I consider material, given that the
    judge for sustainable reasons  found  the  appellant  was  a  Jordanian
    national who could be returned to Jordan.  On  that  basis  the  issues
    regarding return to Syria was not a material error. The judge for  good
    reasons found the appellant to be Jordanian and, absent a finding  that
    he was at risk there (or as well as in Syria had he been found to be  a
    dual national), he was simply not a refugee  as  he  did  not  have  to
    return to Syria.

18. Accordingly, for these reasons I conclude the decision  of  the  First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of  an  error  of  law  and  I
    uphold it.



Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul








