
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07951/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Cardiff Civil Justice Centre         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 March 2020                              |On 28 April 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB


                                   Between

                                     JA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Razzaq-Siddiq, counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr C Howells, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. Pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008  (SI  2008/2698)  I  make  an  anonymity  order  prohibiting   the
    disclosure of publication of any matter likely to lead  to  members  of
    the public identifying the appellant.  A failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to Contempt of Court proceedings.



Introduction

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh who  was  born  on  1  January
    1960.  He left Bangladesh on 5 October 2005  and  subsequently  entered
    the United Kingdom as a visitor.  His leave expired on 4 November  2005
    and his subsequent application for leave outside the Rules was  refused
    on 26 November 2009.  He was served with an IS151A illegal entry notice
    on 8 December 2009.

 3. On 3 October 2018, the appellant claimed asylum.  He  claimed  that  he
    was at risk on return to Bangladesh because he was  politically  active
    with the BNP and a number of false allegations had  been  made  against
    him by members of the  Awami  League.   He  feared  persecution  if  he
    returned to Bangladesh.

 4. On 19 July 2019, the Secretary of State refused the appellant's  claims
    for asylum, humanitarian protection and under the  European  Convention
    on Human Rights.

The Appeal

 5. The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal.  In a decision  sent
    on 29 September 2019, the First-tier Tribunal (Judge Suffield-Thompson)
    dismissed the appellant's appeal on all grounds.   The  judge  made  an
    adverse credibility finding and rejected the appellant's  account  that
    he was a BNP activist and that  he  would  be  at  risk  on  return  to
    Bangladesh.  She also rejected the appellant's claim under Art 8 of the
    ECHR.

 6. The appellant sought permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal against
    the judge's adverse decision dismissing his asylum claim.  No challenge
    was made to her decision to dismiss the claim under the ECHR.

 7. Initially, the First-tier Tribunal rejected  his  application  "as  not
    admitted" because it was made out of time and  the  judge  (Judge  J  K
    Swaney) declined to exercise her discretion to extend time.   She  also
    found the grounds not to be arguable.

 8. The appellant renewed his application to  the  Upper  Tribunal.   In  a
    decision dated 17 December 2019 the Upper Tribunal (UTJ Finch)  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal on the following basis:

         "In her decision the Judge failed to give sufficient  consideration
         to a number of pieces of evidence in the Appellant's large  bundle.
         In particular, she failed to take into account the letter from  Mr.
         Miah and documents relating to the Appellant's political activities
         in Bangladesh.

         It is also clear that a large number  of  the  documents  had  been
         translated and certified in the United Kingdom.

         As a consequence, there were material errors of law  in  First-tier
         Tribunal Judge Suffield-Thompson's decision and it  is  appropriate
         to grant permission to appeal".



An Initial Point

 9. It will be clear from the history of this appeal which I have set  out
    above that Judge Swaney, when considering the appellant's  application
    for permission to appeal, declined to admit the application as it  was
    out of time and she declined to exercise discretion  to  extend  time.
    When the renewed application came before the Upper Tribunal,  it  was,
    therefore, a case to which rule 21(7) of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper
    Tribunal) Rules 2008 (SI 2008/2698 as amended)  applied  (see  Bhavsar
    (late application for PTA: procedure)  [2019]  UKUT  196  (IAC)).   In
    particular, by virtue of rule 21(7)(b):

         "The Upper Tribunal must only admit the application  if  the  Upper
         Tribunal considers that it is in the interests of justice for it do
         so".

10. In granting permission, UTJ Finch did not address this issue under rule
    21(7).  Before me, Mr Howells, who represented the Secretary of  State,
    accepted that I could, and I should,  exercise  discretion  under  rule
    21(7) to admit the application in the interests of justice in  all  the
    circumstances.  I should then consider the merits of the appeal on  the
    basis of the grounds.

11. In my judgment, that is an appropriate course to take.   Judge  Finch's
    grant of permission was, in effect, a conditional grant  of  permission
    which I can perfect by exercising discretion  under  rule  21(7)(b)  to
    admit the application in the  interests  of  justice  and,  thereafter,
    adopt Judge Finch's grant of permission.  I take into account  all  the
    circumstances including the merits of the  application  and  I  see  no
    reason  to  disagree  with  Mr  Howells'  invitation   to   admit   the
    application.   Consequently,  I  exercise  discretion  to   admit   the
    application in the interests of justice and I turn now to the merits of
    the grounds.

The Submissions

12. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq, who represented  the  appellant,  relied  upon  three
    grounds which, he submitted, demonstrated that the judge had materially
    erred in law in reaching her adverse credibility finding.

13. First, he submitted that the judge had failed to take into account,  as
    Judge Finch had eluded to in her grant of permission, a letter from  Mr
    Miah at page 15 of bundle A.  This letter, he  submitted,  complemented
    the letter from the appellant's wife which the  judge  referred  to  in
    para 55 of her determination and supported her evidence  that  she  had
    been harassed, verbally abused and  threatened  with  kidnap  by  Awami
    League activists as a result of her  husband's  political  activism  in
    Bangladesh.  He pointed out that Mr Miah was the chairman of the  local
    Kelayal  Union  Council  and  attested  to  these  matters   "following
    investigations by my people".  The judge had made no reference to  this
    letter when she had concluded that she would give  "little  weight"  to
    the letter from the appellant's wife supporting his claim.

14. Secondly, Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submitted that the  judge  had  fallen  into
    error by failing to take into account a number of  documents  contained
    within the respondent's bundle.  He relied upon on a supportive  letter
    from the President of the BNP in Bristol (at  A);  further,  he  relied
    upon a number of documents  relating  to  two  false  claims  that  the
    appellant said had been made against his father and himself in 2002 and
    2013 respectively by Awami League members.   The  first  relates  to  a
    claim against his father relating to land (at B)  which  the  appellant
    explained at para 15 of his witness statement as follows:

         "The letter to the Nawabgani Police Station is a claim made against
         the family land.  When the dispute mentioned therein was  initially
         raised my father was still alive.  At this time BNP were in  power,
         a community group, led by the Awami League made the  claim  against
         the land.  This dispute was a direct retaliation of my  appointment
         to 3rd in the BNP of our locality.  This dispute is still ongoing".



15. He also relied upon a report  document  (at  X)  which  related  to  an
    application for "anticipatory bail" in June 2004.  Further,  he  relied
    upon a document amounting to a complaint  by  a  person  in  the  Awami
    League alleging, falsely  he  claimed,  conspiracy  to  embezzle  money
    which, as he explained in para 20 of his witness statement, was brought
    by the chairman of a company who was running for election in  2001  for
    the Awami League: "He had asked me to join the party and I had  refused
    as a senior member of the BNP.  [MR] was a manager within  the  company
    and it was him who brought the complaint.  I had to attend  the  police
    station many times as a result of this complaint". [At H].  Finally, he
    relied upon a letter from the BNP Branch in Dhaka supporting his  claim
    to be a BNP activist and at risk.

16. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submitted that the judge  had  failed  to  take  these
    documents into  account.   The  plausibility  of  these  documents  was
    supported by the CPIN 2018 Report which spoke of "political  motivated"
    charges being brought in Bangladesh (see  para  6.1.11).   He  accepted
    that at para 54 the judge had made reference to "two Bangladeshi  court
    cases against him" but, at para 57 the judge had said  this  about  all
    the documents excluding the letter from his wife:

         "The other documents before the Tribunal had  been  translated  but
         not in the UK but in Bangladesh which  does  not  comply  with  the
         Tribunal's Practice Directions.  There were some errors  identified
         in the translations  as  well  so  overall,  I  gave  them  limited
         weight".

17. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq submitted that there was no requirement in the  First-
    tier Tribunal's Practice  Directions  that  translations  of  documents
    should be made in the UK.  In any event, as  he  took  me  through  the
    documents, he pointed out that the vast majority had been translated by
    a company "Ace Language Services" based in Newport.

18. Thirdly, Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  criticised  the  judge's  assessment  of  a
    photograph at paras 51 and 52 of her determination.  He submitted  that
    the Secretary of State's position had  been  that  the  photograph  was
    doctored and that it was, therefore, a fraud.   The  judge  had  failed
    properly to assess whether it was fraudulent and to take  into  account
    any explanation by the appellant.

19. On behalf of the respondent, Mr Howells accepted  that  the  judge  had
    erred in law by failing to take into  account  Mr  Miah's  letter  when
    assessing the reliability and  weight  to  be  given  to  that  of  the
    appellant's wife.  Further, he accepted that the judge had  been  wrong
    to fail to take into account documents on the basis that they had  been
    not translated in the UK.  He accepted that that was not a  requirement
    of the Rules and, in any event, most had been translated in the UK.  He
    did not accept that the judge had erred in assessing the reliability of
    the photograph relied upon by the appellant said to  be  taken  with  a
    prominent Bangladeshi politician.

20. Mr Howells, on behalf of the respondent, submitted that any  errors  by
    the judge were not material to her decision.

21. As regards the assessment of the letter from the appellant's  wife,  Mr
    Howells pointed out that the judge, in para 55  of  her  determination,
    noted that the appellant's own evidence was that he and his family  had
    not been threatened in Bangladesh so, on the  basis  of  that  material
    inconsistency between her letter and his evidence, had the judge  taken
    into account Mr Miah's letter it would not have affected  her  decision
    in relation to the weight to be given to the wife's  letter.   Further,
    in assessing the documents, the judge did note both in paras 13 and  57
    of her determination that there were errors in  translation.   On  that
    basis, Mr Howells submitted she would not have accepted  the  documents
    as reliable in any event.  Finally, Mr Howells  pointed  out  that  the
    judge had given a number of reasons for  disbelieving  the  appellant's
    account including  that  he  only  had  a  vague  knowledge  about  the
    documents and the BNP itself (see paras 45-49).  The  grounds  did  not
    challenge a number of significant credibility findings at  paras  45-46
    and 48-49.  Mr Howells submitted that the appellant's reliance upon the
    CPIN Report that opposition parties, such as the  Awami  League,  might
    use "politically motivated cases" was contained in a 2015 and 2018 Home
    Office Reports  and  could  not,  contrary  to  the  appellant's  (now)
    submission, support the plausibility  of  politically  motivated  cases
    over fifteen years ago.  Mr Howells also pointed out that the judge had
    relied upon s.8 of the Asylum and Immigration (Treatment of  Claimants,
    etc.) Act 2004 and the "huge delay" which  "seriously  impacts  on  his
    credibility".  In short, therefore, Mr Howells submitted that the judge
    would have reached the same adverse credibility finding even if she had
    not fallen into error.

Discussion

22. Mr Howells accepts that the first two grounds relied upon by Mr Razzaq-
    Siddiq were errors  of  law.   I  agree.   They  are  the  points  that
    particularly led Judge Finch to grant permission.  I  accept  that  the
    judge fell into error in assessing  the  weight  to  be  given  to  the
    supportive letter from the appellant's  wife  by  not  considering  the
    letter from Mr Miah which,  on  its  face,  was  consistent  with,  and
    supported, what was being said by  the  appellant's  wife.   I  do  not
    accept Mr Howells' submission that  the  judge  would  inevitably  have
    rejected both the letter from the appellant's wife and (now) Mr Miah on
    the basis that the appellant in question 62  of  his  asylum  interview
    appears to have said that his family were not personally  targeted  and
    forced to leave their village.  It is far from  clear  that  read  with
    question 61 that is precisely what the appellant was saying.  There, he
    says that "they came to the city and they need  to  change  homes  when
    they are targeted".  In any event, I cannot be certain that  the  judge
    grappling with the evidence from the appellant's  wife,  from  Mr  Miah
    and, to the extent it  is  inconsistent,  the  appellant's  answers  at
    interview would inevitably have reached the adverse view that  she  did
    concerning both the letter from the appellant's wife and from  Mr  Miah
    which were supportive of his claim.

23. Likewise, as Mr Howells accepts, the  judge  fell  into  error  by  not
    taking into account (she said give "little weight" to) documents relied
    upon by the appellant (and to which Mr Razzaq-Siddiq referred me in the
    hearing) at least in part because, in her view, contrary to the  First-
    tier  Tribunal's  Practice  Directions  they  had  been  translated  in
    Bangladesh.  As Mr Howells conceded, it is not  a  requirement  of  the
    Practice Direction that documents should be translated in the  UK  but,
    in any event, most of the  documents  were  in  fact  translated  by  a
    professional translation service based in Newport.  I do not accept  Mr
    Howells' submission that the brief rejection of the  documents  by  the
    judge in para 57, based in part  upon  that  error,  was  not  material
    simply because, as the appellant had accepted in relation  to  some  of
    the documents, there were errors in translation.  The  judge  does  not
    set out any of those errors and it is  not  possible  to  discern  what
    significance they would have had.  I  am  unpersuaded  that  the  judge
    would necessarily have rejected all  the  documents  had  she  properly
    considered them.  I reach that view without regard  to  the  CPIN  2018
    which may have limited value  in  assessing  claims  made  against  the
    appellant a number of years ago.

24. That then leaves the third ground relating  to  the  photograph  relied
    upon by the appellant showing him, he said, in the company of a leading
    Bangladeshi politician.  That photograph  was  torn  and,  it  was  the
    respondent's case, that the appellant's head had been  "photo  shopped"
    onto the picture.  The judge dealt with this  at  paras  51-52  of  her
    determination as follows:

         "51. I had before me various photographs of the  Appellant.   There
             was one in particular that the Home Office had concerns about,
             and this is a photo that has been damaged and the  top  right-
             hand section is missing.  The other two pieces have been  torn
             apart and put back together.  It shows a group of  people,  at
             what seems to be some kind  of  rally,  one  of  whom  is  the
             Appellant.  However, the Home Office submit that the  head  of
             the Appellant has been 'Photo shot' (sic)  onto  this  picture
             over the head  of  the  real  person  there.   The  Respondent
             submits that not only is it  clear  that  his  head  has  been
             superimposed but it  is  clear  that  this  has  affected  the
             picture of the man standing behind him.

         52.  Mr. Razzaq-Siddiq submitted that the onus is on the Respondent
             to prove that this the photograph has been  doctored  if  they
             allege it is part of some kind of  attempted  fraud  and  they
             have not done so as they have not submitted it to be analysed.
              I did not have an expert report before me, but I  did  notice
             that there were some unusual aspects to the photograph such as
             the size of the Appellant's head, the angle of  his  head  and
             the perspective of the picture.  Looking at the  photograph  I
             give it little, if any, weight in this appeal".

25.  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq  took  issue  with  the  judge's  approach  to   the
    respondent's case that the photo was, in  effect,  a  fraud.   Although
    that was clearly the respondent's position, namely  that  it  had  been
    manufactured and was, therefore, not genuine, the judge's reasoning  in
    para 52 is also consistent with her finding that the photograph was not
    reliable because "there were some unusual  aspects  to  the  photograph
    such as the size of the Appellant's head, the angle of his head and the
    perspective of the picture".

26. Having heard Mr Razzaq-Siddiq's  submissions,  I  then  looked  at  the
    photograph myself.  In fact, a colour photograph  with  the  right-hand
    quarter of the photograph torn away was attached to the judge's  Record
    of Proceedings.  A judge must be cautious in assessing whether  aspects
    of a photograph are inconsistent with it being genuine in  the  absence
    of expert evidence.  Of course, there may be very  obvious  cases  that
    call into question the authenticity of the photograph.  Here, the judge
    relies upon the size and  position  of  the  appellant's  head  in  the
    photograph and, although what is precisely meant by  this  is  unclear,
    also the "perspective of the picture".

27. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq accepted that  the  judge  was  entitled  to  consider
    whether or not the photograph was a fraud but in doing  so  he  had  to
    consider the appellant's "innocent  explanation".   However,  the  only
    evidence of that to which Mr Razzaq-Siddiq could direct me was set  out
    in para 13 of the judge's decision where the judge said:

         "He denied that the damaged photograph of him at the rally had been
         doctored or altered in any way".

28. That of course is not an "explanation" but rather an assertion that the
    respondent's claim that it is a fraud (having  been  doctored)  is  not
    true.

29. It may well be that the judge's basis for her conclusion in para 52 was
    not one which would necessarily have been adopted by every  judge.   In
    the circumstances, I do not accept  Mr  Razzaq-Siddiq's  submission  on
    ground 3.  The judge, in  all  probability,  actually  found  that  the
    photograph was unreliable.  Indeed, if  she  had  thought  it  was  not
    genuine it is difficult to see why she concluded  she  should  give  it
    "little ... weight" rather than no weight  at  all.   However,  if  her
    reasoning was, agreeing with the respondent's submission, that it was a
    manufactured photograph where the  appellant's  head  had  been  "photo
    shopped" onto it, her reasoning does not, in my judgment, fall  outside
    the range of reasonable reasons and decision which would amount  to  an
    error of law.

30. Nevertheless, on the basis of grounds 1 and 2, I am satisfied that  the
    judge's adverse credibility finding was materially flawed  in  law.   I
    accept, as Mr Howells submitted, that the judge gave a number of  other
    reasons that cumulatively led her to  find  the  appellant  not  to  be
    credible.  Those reasons are not challenged in the grounds.   I  accept
    that those reasons might have been sufficient to  sustain  the  judge's
    adverse credibility finding.  However, for her error not to be material
    I must be satisfied that those reasons alone would inevitably have  led
    her to conclude that the appellant's account was not credible.  That is
    a conclusion which I am unable to reach reading the determination as  a
    whole.  Her reasons are intertwined, cumulative and it is not possible,
    in my judgment, to 'blue pencil' out her errors and conclude  that  her
    remaining reasons would inevitably have led  her  to  make  an  adverse
    credibility finding.

31. For those reasons, therefore, I am satisfied that the judge  materially
    erred in law  in  reaching  her  adverse  credibility  finding  and  in
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on asylum grounds.

Decision

32. Accordingly, the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the
    making of a material error of law and its decision cannot stand.  I set
    that decision aside.

33.  The  decision  to  dismiss  the  appellant's  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection and under the ECHR was not challenged  in  the  grounds  and
    there is no reason, therefore, that that aspect of the judge's decision
    should be re-made.  All that has to  be  re-made  is  her  decision  to
    dismiss the appeal on asylum grounds.

34. Mr Razzaq-Siddiq sought to persuade me that the decision should be  re-
    made in the Upper Tribunal.  The difficulty with that course of  action
    is that no factual findings by the judge can be preserved  in  relation
    to the appellant's asylum claim.  Having concluded that the judge erred
    in reaching her adverse credibility finding, a new credibility  finding
    has to be made and, despite Mr Razzaq-Siddiq's  suggestion,  that  will
    require a judge to assess the truthfulness of the appellant's  evidence
    which may well not be limited to his written witness statement and  the
    documentary evidence.  Also, no factual findings can be  preserved  and
    so all fact-finding has  to  be  undertaken  again.   This  is,  in  my
    judgment,  applying  para  7.2  of  the  Senior  President's   Practice
    Statement, an appropriate case to remit to the First-tier Tribunal  for
    a de novo rehearing albeit limited to the appellant's asylum claim.

35. In those circumstances, therefore, I remit the appeal to the First-tier
    Tribunal to re-make the decision de novo in respect of the  appellant's
    asylum claim to be heard by a judge other than Judge Clemes.

                                                                      Signed
                                                                       [pic]
                                                                     A Grubb
                                                 Judge of the Upper Tribunal

                                                               18 March 2020





