
                                    [pic]



Upper Tribunal

(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal number:  PA/07898/2019 (P)



                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS



|Decided under Rule 34              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 6 July 2020                     |On 20 July 2020                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP



                                   Between

                                     AM

                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)

                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent



                          DECISION AND REASONS (P)

1. The appellant, a citizen of Iraq and an ethnic Kurd, has appealed to  the
   Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of   the   First-tier   Tribunal
   promulgated 2.1.20, dismissing his appeal against  the  decision  of  the
   Secretary of State, dated 8.8.19, to refuse his claim  for  international
   protection made on grounds of fear of persecution on  return  on  grounds
   relating to religion and the non-Convention reason  of  having  lost  his
   dignity because his sister was recorded having sex and the  video  posted
   online. He claimed to be a member of a particular social group  (PSG)  on
   the basis of being at risk of sexual violence in an IDP camp.

2. Whilst the First-tier Tribunal refused permission to appeal to the  Upper
   Tribunal, on renewal of the application permission was granted  by  Upper
   Tribunal Judge Lindsley on 25.2.20.

3. The matter had been listed for an error of law hearing in  North  Shields
   on 15.4.20, a date which had  to  be  vacated  because  of  the  COVID-19
   pandemic. On 20.3.20 the Vice President issued directions proposing  that
   the error of law issue be resolved on the papers without an oral hearing,
   providing for further written submissions.

4. In response to those directions, on 3.4.20 the  Upper  Tribunal  received
   the respondent's written submissions, drafted by Mr Jarvis in the absence
   of the appellant's further submissions, which were not  received  by  the
   Tribunal until 8.4.20.

5. I have  had  regard  to  the  Senior  President  of  Tribunals'  Practice
   Direction, Pilot Practice  Direction:  Contingency  Arrangements  in  the
   First-tier Tribunal and the Upper Tribunal,  to  the  UTIAC  Presidential
   Guidance Note No 1 of 2020, Arrangements during  the  COVID-19  pandemic,
   and to rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008  (as
   amended).

6. I have taken account of the view expressed by the parties as  to  whether
   to hold a hearing and the form of such a hearing. In fact, neither  party
   has opposed the error of law issue being resolved on the papers without a
   hearing. Both parties have submitted detailed  written  submissions  such
   that the Upper Tribunal is able to proceed with a full  understanding  of
   the arguments of each party. In the circumstances  and  for  the  reasons
   outlined, I am satisfied that it is appropriate to determine this  appeal
   without a hearing. I therefore proceed to  consider  and  determine  this
   appeal on the papers.

7. I have carefully considered the relatively brief decision of  the  First-
   tier Tribunal,  dismissing  the  appeal  in  the  light  of  the  written
   submissions and the grounds of appeal against  the  respondent's  refusal
   reasons.

8. The Tribunal noted that since a Daesh attack in 2014, the  appellant  and
   his two siblings relocated to an IDP camp in Zakho, which is  within  the
   IKR. The respondent accepted that account and conceded that he  had  been
   of the Islam faith but no  longer  practised  that  faith.  The  Tribunal
   proceeded on the basis that the appellant might be at risk on  return  to
   the camp because of anti-Islamic remarks he  had  made  and  the  ensuing
   perception that he was not a 'believer'. At [18] the judge accepted  that
   the Convention was engaged on religious grounds. It was also accepted  at
   [19]  that  the  appellant's  sister  had  been  involved  in  a   sexual
   relationship in the camp, the precise nature of which  was  unclear,  and
   that he was threatened that he must act  against  her  on  the  basis  of
   honour, and that if he did not do so,  he  would  face  a  similar  fate.
   However, the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  no  satisfactory  evidence  to
   demonstrate that the video recording was published beyond  the  camp  and
   thus it was not reasonably likely that persons  outside  the  camp  would
   either be aware of his sister's actions, or associate him  with  her.  It
   was pointed out that the appellant had left the camp and would not in any
   event return to it.

9. Complaint is made that at [20]  of  the  decision  the  judge  speculated
   that, given that Daesh was no longer in control of any  Iraqi  territory,
   the camp may well have been disbanded and the inhabitants able to  return
   to their home areas, or elsewhere. It is said that this issue was not put
   to the appellant or his representative for comment and that there  is  no
   reason to believe that the camp no longer exists. Nevertheless, for those
   reasons, the  judge  was  not  persuaded  that  the  appellant  would  be
   reasonably likely to meet people from the camp on his return to Iraq.  In
   the circumstances, the Tribunal found no risk on return on the  basis  of
   anything which may have happened in the camp. Noting that it had not been
   a problem for him in the past, the judge also  found  that  his  lack  of
   adherence to Islam would not be an issue for him on return.  It  was  for
   those reasons that the judge  dismissed  the  Refugee  protection  claim.
   Neither did the prevailing circumstances suggest a  need  for  subsidiary
   protection.

10. The judge found that the  appellant  would  not  be  able  to  access  a
   replacement CSID and that he would therefore be at  risk  of  destitution
   which would cross the article 3 ECHR threshold. The appeal was allowed on
   that basis only.

11. I note that the appellant  has  not  challenged  the  dismissal  of  the
   religious identity claim.

12. The grounds first argue that the judge erred in suggesting that the  IDP
   camp may well have been disbanded and that this should have been  put  to
   the appellant at the hearing. However, it is clear that  whether  or  not
   the IDP camp has in fact been disbanded, the appellant made clear he  had
   left it and had no intention of returning, and, therefore, as  the  judge
   found, there was no real risk of him encountering anyone  on  return  who
   was aware of his sister's sexual relationship or, even if  they  knew  of
   it, who would associate him to her. Neither was there any risk to him  on
   religious grounds. The appellant did not establish that he was reasonably
   likely to have to reside in that IDP camp on return  and  that  he  would
   there face a risk of harm arising out of his  sister's  sexual  activity.
   The burden of establishing such risk was on the appellant, to  the  lower
   standard of proof. If the appellant failed on that primary ground, as the
   judge found, this issue of reasonableness of internal relocation does not
   properly arise at all in relation to the Convention claim.

13. It is also argued that this issue should have  been  considered  on  the
   balance of probabilities. I do not follow the logic of  this  ground,  as
   the judge decided the issue of risk of encountering someone from the camp
   on the lower standard of proof, as was required. If that  lower  standard
   had not been met, the burden being on the appellant to demonstrate a real
   risk, it is obvious that it could not have been resolved any  differently
   on the balance of probabilities.

14. The grounds also argue at [3(d)] that if  the  appellant  had  fled  for
   reasons engaging the Refugee Convention and could not relocate  elsewhere
   because of conditions which would breach article  3,  the  appeal  should
   have been allowed under the Refugee Convention instead of article  3,  as
   it would be unduly harsh for him to relocate within  Iraq.  However,  the
   fact remains that the appellant failed to discharge  the  burden  of  the
   facts engaging the Convention. In this regard,  the  appellant's  written
   submissions point to [18] of the  decision,  suggesting  there  that  the
   judge accepted that the appellant's claim engaged the Refugee Convention.
   However, the judge was there merely accepting that taken at  its  highest
   the nature of the claim based on religion only was one which would engage
   the Convention; it was not a decision  on  the  merits  of  the  religion
   claim, which was rejected at [20] of the decision, a  finding  which,  in
   fact, has not been appealed to the Upper Tribunal. It  follows  that  the
   argument advanced in the appellant's written  submissions  fails  at  the
   first hurdle; the Convention was not engaged. For completeness,  the  PSG
   claim in relation to sexual violence was also rejected.  In  the  refusal
   decision, the respondent had considered  the  claimed  risk  of  violence
   arising from his  sister's  sexual  activity  fell  outside  the  Refugee
   Convention. It does not appear that the judge accepted  the  argument  in
   this regard advanced by the appellant's representative and noted at  [18]
   of the decision. In any event, the judge did not accept  that  there  was
   any satisfactory evidence that  the  video  footage  had  been  published
   outside the camp. Nowhere in the decision does the judge accept that  the
   appellant fled the IDP camp for Refugee Convention reasons.

15. Finally, complaint is made that the decision discloses no  reference  to
   the Country Guidance of SMO, KSP & IM (Article 15(c); identity documents)
   Iraq CG [2019] UKUT 004100 (IAC), and AA (Iraq) v SSHD  [2017]  EWCA  Civ
   944. However, the grounds concede that the  findings  of  the  First-tier
   Tribunal were made in line  with  that  Country  Guidance  and  that  the
   absence of specific reference to the authorities "may not necessarily  be
   material." If the appellant cannot suggest  that  there  was  a  material
   error in this regard, the Upper Tribunal need  consider  that  ground  no
   further.

16. In the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, I find no  error
   of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal so that it must be  set
   aside.





Decision

      There is no error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal;

      The appellant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed;

      It follows that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal dismissing the
      appellant's appeal must stand as made.

      I make no order for costs.



Signed: DMW Pickup

Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup

Date:       6 July 2020



        _____________________________________________________________

                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1. A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision must  make  a
written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any  such  application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2. Where the person who appealed  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

 3. Where the person making  the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4. Where the person who appealed to the First-tier Tribunal is  outside  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if the notice  of
decision is sent electronically).

5. A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or  a  Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.  The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on  the  covering
letter or covering email




