

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                          Appeal Number:
PA/07440/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Stoke                            | Determination Promulgated       |
|On 10 August 2017                         | On 15 August 2017               |
|                                          |                                 |


                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'RYAN

                                   Between

                                   Mr K R
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Holmes, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1     This is an appeal brought by the Appellant  against  the  decision  of
      Judge of the First-tier Tribunal I F Taylor  dated  2.2.17  dismissing
      the Appellant's appeal against the  Respondent's  decision  of  8.7.16
      refusing his claim for protection. The Appellant is a national of  the
      Russian Federation, and last entered the United  Kingdom  on  10.1.16,
      arriving at Heathrow, where he claimed asylum.

2     The Appellant's claim for protection was on the basis that  he  feared
      serious  harm  from  non-state  agents,  principally  Colonel   Valery
      Borisovich Platanov, said to be an agent of the FSB (Federal  Security
      Service), and Gagarina Nelli Gennadieva, the Mayor's  'Deputat'  (City
      Councillor), in the town of Dzerzhinsky, in the suburbs of Moscow. The
      Appellant owned  a  construction  company,  and  had  entered  into  a
      construction project in the town of Dzerzhinsky.

3     Ms Gennadieva was involved in the project in a capacity that does  not
      need to be examined in this decision. The Appellant's case was that Ms
      Gennadieva was corrupt and that she had sought to involve one  Colonel
      Platanov in the project. It was said that Platanov  had  attempted  to
      coerce the Appellant into signing further documents which  would  have
      resulted in the Appellant surrendering his own financial  interest  in
      the project, but whilst still bearing the burden of  construction.  It
      was alleged that Platanov had physically assaulted  the  Appellant  on
      three occasions in 2012, 2014, and 2015.

4     The Appellant had relied upon a variety  of  documents  regarding  the
      construction project and the contractual relations between the parties
      in support of his claim for protection.

5     The Judge had made the following positive findings:

           '26  The  Appellant  relies  upon  a   substantial   amount   of
           documentary evidence in relation to his building project.  I  do
           not doubt that there was corruption involved  in  this  building
           project..."

           27. Overall, I am satisfied that  the  Appellant  has  been  the
           victim of corruption leading to  substantial  monetary  loss  to
           himself in relation  to  the  building  project  in  Dzerzhinsky
           city.'

6     However, the Judge dismissed the Appellant's appeal for the  following
      reasons, in summary:

      (i)    The  Judge  found  that  in  the  initial  contact  and  asylum
           registration form (ICARF) (aka screening  interview)  there  had
           been no mention of  a  Colonel  Platanov  or  his  role  in  the
           construction of the building. The Judge found it 'inconceivable'
           that if  Colonel  Platanov  existed  and  was  involved  in  the
           building project in the way described by the Appellant  that  he
           would not be mentioned at section 4.1 of  the  form.  The  Judge
           held that this matter 'significantly undermines the  credibility
           of the Appellant's account' [20].


      (ii)  The Judge noted that  the  Appellant  had  been  in  the  United
           Kingdom previously, from 16.7.15, and had visited  a  number  of
           other European countries at the end of 2015, before returning to
           Russia on 9.1.16, where he remained for one day,  before  flying
           back to the United Kingdom on 10.1.16, and claiming asylum.  The
           Judge held that the Appellant's failure to claim asylum  in  the
           prior visit to United Kingdom represented behaviour  as  defined
           under section 8 of the  Asylum  and  Immigration  (Treatment  of
           Claimants, etc) Act 2004  to  which  he  would  have  regard  as
           diminishing the Appellant's credibility. Although the  Appellant
           claimed that his return to Moscow  was  an  attempt  to  see  if
           things had settled down, and on finding on his arrival that they
           had not, and immediately returned to the UK, the Judge  did  not
           accept this explanation for the Appellant claiming  asylum  only
           on return to the UK. The  Judge  noted  for  instance  that  the
           Appellant had continued to receive threats from Platanov  during
           his earlier visit to the UK.

      (iii) The Judge found that the Appellant's account of meeting a former
           classmate in Moscow on 9.1.16, who informed the  Appellant  that
           Platanov was still interested in him, was implausible,  and  the
           Judge noted that there was no witness evidence from this  former
           classmate to support the Appellant's contention.

      (iv)  The Judge noted that amongst the Appellant's documentation there
           was no reference 'at all' to a  'Colonel  Platanov'.  The  Judge
           noted there were two documents referring to a V B Platanov,  and
           that this individual was stated to be  president  of  a  company
           called 'Agricultural Holding Lubyanka', created for the  purpose
           of implementation of the Federal  Program  of  the  Ministry  of
           Agriculture of  the  Russian  Federation  in  order  to  provide
           assistance to servicemen in the organisation of  their  personal
           farm enterprises. However, the Judge  held  that  these  letters
           referencing V B Platanov did not assist the Appellant.

      (v)   The Judge held at [27]:

                 "... I am not satisfied on  the  evidence  before  me  that
                 Colonel Platanov is  a real person and in  the  alternative
                 if he was a real person, that he had any  involvement  with
                 this building project at all.  I  am  satisfied   that  the
                 Appellant had referred to Colonel Platanov  for  the  first
                 time in his asylum interview in an  attempt  to  strengthen
                 what is in my estimate a weak case."

7     Grounds of appeal dated 10.2.17 assert (in summary) that:

      (i)   It was unclear whether and for what reasons the  Judge  rejected
           the Appellant's claims of being attacked in 2012, 2014, 2015.

      (ii)  The Judge had erred in his assessment of the evidence  contained
           in the screening interview,  which  made  reference  to  both  a
           Mayor, and a Major, thus evidencing that more  than  one  person
           was being referred to in the screening interview,  even  if  the
           specific name of Colonel Platanov was not mentioned. The grounds
           suggested that the  Judge  had  failed  to  apply  the  relevant
           guidance in the case of JA (Afghanistan) v  SSHD  [2014]  1  WLR
           4291, which gave cautionary  advice  as  to  the  weight  to  be
           attached to  interviews  in  the  asylum  process,  particularly
           bearing in mind the circumstances in which such interviews might
           take place.  The  grounds  asserted  that  the  purpose  of  the
           screening interview was to take brief details of the claim only,
           and it was improper for the Judge  to  have  placed  significant
           weight on the absence of a direct reference to Colonel  Platanov
           in the screening interview.

      (iii)       The grounds also assert that the Judge had erred in law in
           failing to properly apply s.8 of the 2004 Act by failing to take
           into  account  the  fact  that  the  Appellant  claimed   asylum
           immediately upon his most recent arrival in the United  Kingdom,
           and that he had returned to Russia  believing  that  the  threat
           against him had abated.

8     Permission  to  appeal  was  granted  on  all  grounds  by  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson in a decision dated 24.5.17

9     I heard submissions from both parties. Having  perused  the  documents
      in the Respondent's bundle, I noted that there was in fact a  document
      at page D10, dated 4.9.12, from a government department  addressed  to
      the Appellant and to Ms  Gennadieva,  referring  to  the  construction
      project, and a 'verification process'  which  had  involved  'Platanov
      Valeriy Borisovich', Chairman of the General Meeting  of the  Veterany
      (sic) Krapovyie Berety LLC members.  The existence  of  this  document
      within the papers, referring to  the  full  name  of  Platanov,  might
      suggest that the Judge had overlooked one element of the corroborative
      evidence on which the Appellant relied.

10    The Judge's lack of reference to this document is not  a  matter  that
      is raised in the Appellant's  grounds  of  appeal.  However,  upon  my
      drawing the existence of this document to the parties, it becomes,  in
      my view, a Robinson obvious point for the Appellant to take, that  the
      Judge had failed to take into account this relevant evidence regarding
      Platanov's involvement in the construction project. Mr  Holmes  sought
      permission to rely upon this additional matter, and, with no objection
      from Mr McVeety, I granted permission for this  to  be  argued  as  an
      additional ground of appeal.

11    Mr Holmes addressed me on the content of the screening interview,  and
      the Judge's failure to take proper account  of  the  contents  of  the
      same. It is apparent at question 4.1 of the screening  interview  that
      the Appellant mentioned, as part of his fear of harm  in  the  Russian
      Federation,  the  role  of  the  Mayor  of  the  town,  and  also  the
      involvement of a Major. Both parties and I agreed that the words Mayor
      and Major were distinctly set out at that question  in  the  screening
      interview, rather than the evidence making reference only to the Mayor
      of the town. Although the reference to the rank of  Major  is  clearly
      distinct from the rank of  Colonel,  the  reference  to  a  person  of
      military rank at all in the screening interview is clearly capable  of
      suggesting that this represented a reference by the Appellant, at  the
      outset of his claim, in the screening  interview,  to  the  person  he
      later and identified as FSB officer Colonel Platanov.

12    Further, Mr  McVeety  helpfully  and  very  fairly  indicated  to  the
      Tribunal, following his review of the note of  evidence  taken  by  Ms
      Simbi, Presenting Officer attending at the First-tier hearing, that no
      question appeared to have been put to the Appellant during the  course
      of the hearing before Judge about the  absence  of  any  reference  to
      Colonel Platanov in the screening interview.  I note that  this  issue
      was also not taken in the Respondent's refusal letter dated 8.7.16.

13    A further potential issue therefore arises, that the  point  taken  by
      the Judge at paragraph 20, 26, and 27 about the absence of a reference
      to Colonel Platanov in the screening interview,  does  not  appear  to
      have been one which was raised by the Judge with the Appellant at  the
      hearing. Mr McVeety did not object to Mr Holmes seeking to raise  this
      matter as a challenge to  the  Judge's  decision  on  the  grounds  of
      procedural  fairness.  Indeed,  Mr  McVeety  agreed  that,  given  the
      significance that the Judge had clearly attached to the absence  of  a
      reference  to  Colonel  Platanov  in  the  screening  interview,  when
      considered with the clear reference to a person of  military  rank  in
      the  screening  interview,  and  a  reference  at  page  D10  of   the
      Respondent's bundle to the full name Platanov within  the  Appellant's
      documentation, all amounted  to a material error of law on the part of
      the Judge, in failing to have adequate regard to the  evidence  before
      him, and/or proceeding unfairly.

14    I find that such errors exist within  the  Judge's  decision.  I  also
      find that the Judge's decision that the other  two  documents  in  the
      Appellant's bundle, referring to V B Platanov, gave no  assistance  to
      the Appellant, was an approach which, if not  necessarily  irrational,
      at least represented a failure to have proper regard to  the  evidence
      before the Judge. Documentation identifying a V B Platanov, apparently
      associated with some sort of veterans association for  servicemen,  is
      clearly capable of lending weight to the Appellant's  submission  this
      was a reference to Colonel Platanov, an FSB government agent.

15    I also find that the Judge failed to make specific  findings  of  fact
      as to whether the Appellant had been attacked in 2012, 2014, and 2015.



16    Although, as  mentioned  above,  the  Judge  gave  other  reasons  for
      dismissing the appeal, I find that the errors of law I have identified
      above are such that it cannot be said that the Judge would  inevitably
      have made the same decision, had such errors not been made.

17    With agreement of both parties, therefore, I find  that  the  decision
      of the Judge involved the making of a material error of law.

18    I set aside the decision of the Judge.

19    Again, with the agreement of the parties, I direct that  the  findings
      of the Judge at paragraph 26 and 27 of the Judge's decision as set out
      in paragraph 5 above, are not vitiated by any error of law, and are to
      be  retained,  notwithstanding  the  setting  aside  of  the   Judge's
      decision.

20    Clearly, however, further findings of fact need  to  be  made  in  the
      present appeal in order to determine any risk of harm that  may  arise
      to the Appellant. I find that the degree of fact finding  required  is
      such that it is appropriate to remit  the  appeal  to  the  First-tier
      Tribunal, subject to the findings of fact set out at paragraph 5 above
      being retained.

21    The matter is to be listed before a Judge of the First-tier  Tribunal,
      other than Judge I F Taylor.

      Decision:

22    The decision involved the making of a material error of law.

23    The decision is set aside.

24    The matter is remitted to the First tier Tribunal.

25    Findings at para 5 above are to be retained.

      Anonymity Direction

    A protagonist in this account is said to be an officer of  the  Russian
    Federation FSB. I have anonymised the Appellant in this  decision,  but
    it has been unavoidable to name the alleged FSB  agent.  Until  such  a
    time as this appeal is finally determined, at which time  the  relevant
    Judge may at their discretion review the direction I now make,  I  find
    that it is in the Appellant's  best  interests  to  make  an  anonymity
    direction in this matter.

    Thus, pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)
    Rules 2008 (SI 2008/269) I make an anonymity order.  Unless  the  Upper
    Tribunal or a Court directs otherwise, no report of  these  proceedings
    or any  form  of  publication  thereof  shall  directly  or  indirectly
    identify the original appellant. This  direction  applies  to,  amongst
    others, all parties. Any failure to comply with  this  direction  could
    give rise to contempt of court proceedings. We do so in order to  avoid
    a likelihood of serious harm arising to the appellant from the contents
    of his protection claim.


Signed:                                 Date: 14.8.17
[pic]

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge O'Ryan





