
                                    [pic]

In the Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: Pa/07024/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On Tuesday, 16 October 2018          |On Wednesday, 24 October 2018        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                               MR AWDER hasid
                       (anonymity direction NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Unrepresented
For the Respondent:    MR TARLOW, a Home Office presenting officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Iraq who is believed to have been born on
    first July of 1998. He appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  (UT)  with  the
    permission of First-tier Tribunal Judge Alis given on 4 September  2018
    against the decision of Judge BROE  (the  immigration  judge)  in  that
    tribunal (the FTT)  to  refuse  his  appeal  against  the  respondent's
    decision to  refuse  his  application  for  international  humanitarian
    protection and asylum.

 2. In granting permission Judge Alis identified that the immigration judge
    might have  decided  the  matter  on  immaterial  matters  rather  than
    considering  the  contents  of  the  appellant's   skeleton   argument.
    Furthermore, it was at least arguable that the  immigration  judge  had
    not made specific findings on matters set out in  paragraph  3  of  the
    grounds of appeal to this tribunal.  Arguably,  the  immigration  judge
    should have dealt with most of the matters  in  paragraph  3  of  those
    grounds of appeal whereas in  fact  he  had  only  dealt  with  certain
    matters such as age and nationality. The findings in  paragraph  29  of
    the decision were identified as potentially  particularly  relevant  as
    they related to the appellant's risk on return to Iraq. The immigration
    judge's findings were arguably "flawed", Judge Alis thought.

The appellant's asylum claim

 3. The appellant entered the UK on 20 February 2016 and claimed asylum two
    days later. The appellant claims to be of Kurdish ethnicity. The  basis
    of his claim was that his father had been a member of the Baath party -
    Saddam Hussein's own party. Following the US led  invasion  in  2003  a
    widespread attempt to side-line  politicians  of  that  background  had
    occurred. The  appellant  claimed  to  fear  for  personal  safety  and
    therefore fled to the UK.  However,  he  failed  to  attend  an  asylum
    interview on 14 August 2016. He made submissions on  14  December  2016
    but the respondent was not persuaded that he was genuinely in  need  of
    international  humanitarian  protection  or  qualified  as  a  refugee.
    Accordingly, on 30th of April 2018 the respondent gave  notice  of  her
    decision to refuse asylum and the human rights  claim  and  reject  the
    appellant's claim for humanitarian protection.

 4. The appellant appealed that decision to the First-tier  Tribunal  (FTT)
    by notice of appeal on 4 June 2018.

The appeal hearings

 5. The appellant claimed in the FTT that not only was he a minor deserving
    of protection but also that returning him to Iran would place the UK in
    breach of its obligations under the Refugee Convention. He  provided  a
    witness statement written in English in support. He claimed that  as  a
    Sunni Muslim in a largely  SHIA  Muslim  state.  His  father  had  been
    involved with the Baath party.

 6. The appellant attended the hearing at the U T unrepresented and without
    an interpreter. It appears that he did not request such an interpreter.
    An interpreter in Sorani Kurdish had to be booked at  short  notice  by
    HMCTS. Mr Aziz was able to attend  the  UT  to  enable  the  appeal  to
    proceed. However, the hearing did not begin until 14.40. It finished at
    approximately 15.15.

 7. I tried to explain to the appellant the nature of his appeal,  although
    he expressed unfamiliarity with the contents of the decision of the FTT
    which he had been unable to read. I did my best  to  set  out  the  key
    points  that  arose  from  that  document  to  give  the  appellant  an
    opportunity to comment on them. He believed that the hearing below  had
    not been conducted properly as the judge and not let him finish certain
    answers. He also criticised the respondent's interviewer who, he  said,
    had not necessarily recorded his answers accurately.

 8. Mr Tarlow for the respondent said that there was no material error  but
    later changed his mind and stated that it was  possible  to  reach  the
    view that if matters had not been fully put to  the  appellant  at  the
    hearing or properly analysed in the decision the matter would  need  to
    be remitted to the FTT for a de novo hearing. I indicated to Mr  Tarlow
    that I would need to consider carefully the contents of  the  file  and
    what had transpired at the hearing before I took the view, first,  that
    there was an  error  of  law  based  on  the  evidence  given  and  the
    submissions made before the FTT, and, secondly, if there were  such  an
    error, whether it was necessary to set aside the decision. Thirdly,  it
    would be necessary to decide whether, if there was such an  error,  the
    matter could be disposed of in the UT or had to be remitted to the FTT.
    There was generally common ground that some form of additional  hearing
    would be  needed  if  the  current  fact  findings  were  found  to  be
    inadequate or incomplete.

 9. At the end of the hearing before the UT I reserved my decision which  I
    will later give.

Discussion

10. Ground 3 of the present grounds pose the following questions:

      i) What was the appellant's nationality?

     ii) What was his age?

    iii) Whether A's  father  was  a  Baath  party  member  who  worked  for
         intelligence?

  And, if so:

     iv) Did he provide intelligence to the Sadam-led government in relation
         to the activities of Shias and Kurds?

      v) Having regard to the above, was it plausible that  the  appellant's
         father would remain hidden from the present Shia led government?

     vi) Was it plausible or accurate atht ISIS within Iraq is a compilation
         of ex Baathists?

    vii) Did ISIS force the appellant's father to fight for ISIS?

  And, if so:

   viii) Whether there was a real risk of harm to A from the Shia government
         and or anyone else?

     ix)  Is it feasible to return the appellant?

      x) What about his alleged lack of documentation?

11. Judge Alis said that findings should have been made on  "most"  of  the
    matters set out above.

12. The burden rested on the appellant to  show  that  he  qualified  as  a
    refugee within the meaning of the U N Convention relating to the Status
    of Refugees 1951 (Refugee Convention) or that he would  be  subject  to
    death or face inhuman or degrading  treatment  within  the  meaning  of
    articles 2 and 3 of  the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  1950
    (ECHR). The standard of proof is a low one - was the appellant able  to
    establish his case to a reasonable degree  of  likelihood,  or  whether
    there were substantial grounds for believing his  claim.  A  person  is
    entitled to international humanitarian protection under paragraph  339C
    of the Immigration  Rules  where  there  are  substantial  grounds  for
    believing that there is a real risk of serious harm to the appellant on
    return to his own country, in this case Iraq.

13. The appellant gave oral evidence before the FTT and was cross-examined.
    He also gave a full account of his  claim  in  interview.  He  has  not
    criticised the manner of his representation.  I  am  entitled  to  look
    critically at the conduct of the hearing but can find nothing  untoward
    in the manner of the conduct of the hearing. If the  immigration  judge
    failed to allow the appellant to answer  any  point,  objection  should
    have been made and it was not. I am not sure that  Judge  Alis  had  an
    opportunity to read fully the notes of the hearing but  these  seem  to
    suggest that the points in the appellant's skeleton argument were fully
    considered. This tends to dispose of point 2 made by Judge Alis in  his
    grant of permission.

14. Adverse credibility points should  only  be  taken  by  a  judge  where
    justified and based on conflicts on the evidence/inconsistencies rather
    than basing such an assessment merely  on  the  appellant's  demeanour.
    Implausible and inconsistent evidence is very much the  domain  of  the
    judge who hears or reads and weighs up that evidence.

15. Here the immigration judge found that there were inconsistencies  which
    he identified  (paragraph  25).  Having  listed  a  number  of  adverse
    credibility  points,  the  immigration   judge   concluded   that   the
    appellant's  account  could  not  be  trusted.  He  referred   to   the
    appropriate case  law  at  pargaprgh  28  of  his  decision  and  fully
    considered the risk on  return,  this  included  consideration  of  the
    plausibility of the appellant returning to the IKR.

16. Turning to the specific questions raised in paragraph 3 of the  grounds
    of appeal to the U T referred to above:

      i) The respondent doubted A's  nationality  at  paragraph  19  of  the
         refusal but at paragraph 27 the immigration judge accepted that the
         appellant was an Iraqi Kurd and there is no  cross  appeal  against
         that finding.

     ii) The appellant's evidence of his age was not accepted either by  the
         local authority, who assessed it under the principles in  R  (B)  v
         Merton London Borough Council [2003] EWHC 1689 (Admin), or  by  the
         respondent who interviewed him. This  was  an  adverse  credibility
         point that the immigration judge was entitled to take into  account
         when judging whether to accept the appellant's other evidence.  The
         adverse credibility findings in relation to the appellant's age and
         a number of other parts of his evidence formed part the immigration
         judge's overall assessment of the case.

    iii) Whether A's  father  was  a  Baath  party  member  who  worked  for
         intelligence? The appellant claimed that his father was a member of
         the Baath party and as such they had  not  been  unable  to  obtain
         proper id cards after Sadam's fall as "people would have been  able
         to work out (that he and his family were)  former  Baathists".  The
         notes of hearing disclose that it lasted from 10.15 until 11.25 and
         that the appellant was cross examined at length about his statement
         including this part of his statement.  Having  set  out  fully  the
         nature of the appellant's claim the immigration  judge,  implicitly
         perhaps, did  not  accept  the  appellant's  father's  Baath  party
         membership. The point about the ID  card  was  that  his  statement
         summarised above was inconsistent with his interview where he  said
         his father had not told him whether or not he was  a  member  of  a
         particular tribe.

     iv) Did he provide intelligence to the Sadam-led government? There were
         many features of the appellant's case which were unsatisfactory. If
         the appellant's father really was a  senior  figure  in  the  Baath
         regime, as the appellant had claimed, I find it hard to accept that
         the appellant would have been brought up  illiterate  and  in  some
         poverty as he claimed,  but  leaving  that  on  one  side,  as  the
         immigration judge said at paragraph 26, the appellant provided  "no
         evidence of  his  father's  notoriety".  Overall  it  seems  highly
         unlikely that the appellant's father provided intelligence  to  the
         former regime. If the immigration judge did not spell this  out  in
         his decision he did not have to do so.

      v) Was it plausible that the appellant's father  would  remain  hidden
         from the  present  Shia-led  government?  The  immigration  judge's
         reasons for rejecting this evidence  are  recorded  principally  at
         paragraph 26 where he said that he did not find  it  credible  that
         the appellant's father would be able to remain living in  the  same
         area for  "so  many  years"  without  being  detected  if,  as  the
         appellant had claimed, his father was a member of the  Baath  party
         and one of Sadam's executioners.

     vi) Was it plausible and  or  accurate  that  ISIS  within  Iraq  is  a
         compilation of ex Baathists? The immigration judge dealt with  this
         issue by finding at paragraph 26 that the appellant's father  would
         not have chosen to become involved with the ISIS organisation if he
         was a former member of the Baath party as it would  have  been  too
         dangerous to do so.

    vii) Did ISIS force the  appellant's  father  to  fight  for  ISIS?  The
         immigration judge rejected this evidence because,  as  he  said  at
         paragraph 26, this would only bring him to  the  attention  of  the
         authorities.

   viii) Whether there was a real risk of harm to A from the Shia government
         and/or anyone else? The immigration judge's  consideration  of  the
         issue was brief. He said at paragraph 29 of his decision  that  the
         appellant  "might  face  risk"  on  return  but  because   of   the
         appellant's account of the  reasons  for  his  departure  were  not
         credible it was not accepted he was at risk. The immigration  judge
         also explained that the appellant would be returned to Bagdad, from
         where he would be able to travel to the IKR safely and it  had  not
         been suggested by the appellant or his  representatives  that  this
         was not a course open to him. The immigration judge also  made  the
         point that the appellant had relatives  who  would  assist  him  in
         providing a safe  place  for  him  to  go.  The  rejection  of  the
         appellant's claim to having "no relatives who could assist  him  in
         Iraq" flowed from the judge's overall rejection of the  credibility
         of the appellant's evidence. The immigration judge's conclusion  in
         this respect was supported to some extent by the  country  guidance
         case law recited at paragraph 28 of his  decision.  This  tends  to
         indicate that return to Bagdad may be safely  achieved  subject  to
         exceptions. From there it is possible for a Kurd to travel  to  the
         IKR.  The   issue   of   documentation   for   returnees   is   not
         straightforward but I understand the immigration judge to be saying
         that the appellant had not left the country illegally and  that  he
         would be able to obtain ID documents as nothing  adverse  would  be
         known about him.

Conclusions

17. These were findings the immigration judge was entitled to  come  to  on
    the evidence. I can find nothing in the account of the  proceedings  to
    suggest that the appellant was not given a full opportunity to  present
    his case with the aid of competent counsel. If the analysis is short on
    detail and there are matters that have been insufficiently dealt  with,
    they  are  not  material  to  the  adverse  view  of  the   appellant's
    credibility which the judge came to. In the light of these findings and
    conclusions, there is no material error of law in the decision  of  the
    FtT.

Notice of Decision

The appeal is /dismissed on asylum grounds/ humanitarian protection  grounds
/ human rights grounds/ under the immigration rules

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 18 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


Signed                              Date 18th October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury

