
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07907/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17 August 2018                             |On 25 October 2018            |

                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CONWAY


                                   Between

                                    [M B]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Friel, instructed by McGlashan MacKay Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Ms M O'Brien, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant, a national of Uganda, appeals to this  Tribunal  against
    the decision of Judge Farrelly in the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissing
    her appeal against the refusal of her asylum claim.

 2. The appellant came to the United Kingdom aged  nearly  20,  in  January
    2006, as a student.  She obtained  further  leave  for  study  purposes
    until February 2010.  Following the expiry of that leave  she  remained
    without leave: she had a relationship  with  a  Polish  man,  whom  she
    sought permission  to  marry,  but  the  application  was  subsequently
    withdrawn, the relationship broke up, and in June 2011 she reported him
    to the police for domestic violence and sought leave to remain  on  the
    basis of domestic violence.  That was  refused,  but  she  was  granted
    discretionary leave until August 2014.  When that was about to  expire,
    she sought a review of it seeking its extension, but also claimed  that
    she  had  a  well-founded  fear  of  persecution  based  on  a  claimed
    conversion from Islam to Christianity, and further that she was at risk
    from her family because of her relationship with  the  Polish  national
    and her change of religion.  That claim was refused and  the  appellant
    appealed.  In the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Bradshaw  dismissed  her
    appeal, for numerous reasons set out in the decision: he did not regard
    either of the elements of her claim as credible.  Permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal was refused.  The appellant became appeal  rights
    exhausted in the autumn of 2015.

 3. She has not said that she did not know she was remaining without leave.
     In early 2017 the Secretary of State served her with notices requiring
    her to report to an Immigration Official.  She failed  to  do  so.   In
    March 2017 she made a new asylum  claim  on  the  basis  that  she  was
    bisexual and would be at risk on return  to  Uganda.   That  claim  was
    refused in August 2017 and Judge Farrelly's decision is on  the  appeal
    against that refusal.

 4. It is apparent from Judge Farrelly's determination that  the  appellant
    attempted to reargue her previous claims: Judge Farrelly  decided  that
    there was no basis for him to reconsider the decision  taken  by  Judge
    Bradshaw; no question is now raised about that.   In  relation  to  her
    claim to be bisexual and at risk as such, Judge Farrelly said this:

              "23. I also do not find the appellant has established she  is
              bisexual.  I do not find her account to be  credible.   I  am
              influenced by the late stage at  which  she  introduced  this
              claim.  I do not accept she was unaware this could  form  the
              basis  of  a  claim.   She  has  highlighted   how   same-sex
              relationships were  considered  in  her  home  country.   She
              refers to being reprimanded on occasion by  her  half  sister
              and at school for what they said was inappropriate behaviour.
               She was aware,  on  her  account,  this  was  something  not
              displayed in public and could get her into trouble in Uganda.
               She describes how in  the  company  of  Africans,  even  the
              United Kingdom, she would be guarded.  Consequently,  on  her
              evidence she knew being attracted to the same  sex  behaviour
              was something of significance in her home country yet she did
              not raise this earlier.

              24. On her account, she was aware from her early  teens  that
              she was bisexual.  She came to the United  Kingdom  and  said
              she carried out some research on  the  internet.   Her  first
              relationship did not occur for a number of  years.  She  said
              she was able to advise her girlfriend's mother about  how  to
              progress with her own claim to remain in the United  Kingdom.
              She advised her to change lawyers.  The appellant herself had
              a lawyer.  She made application to remain  on  the  basis  of
              domestic  violence.   She  then  introduced  a  claim   about
              religion. If there were substance to her claim of bisexuality
              it should have been introduced at this stage.

              25. The chronology is significant.  The inference is that she
              is desperate to remain in the United Kingdom and having  been
              unable to remain on the basis of previous applications she is
              now trying another avenue of claim.

              26. I find she has attempted to bolster this  claim  for  the
              appeal.  This is  evidenced  by  her  detailed  statement  in
              contrast  to  her  earlier  vagueness.   She  also   provided
              statements from a woman she claims was her former  girlfriend
              and a former boyfriend about  his  suspicions.   Neither  has
              attended to support the statements  and  I  draw  an  adverse
              inference from this.

              27. She said [she] did not join any Gay organisations because
              she could not find groups in the Glasgow  area.   It  is  not
              credible that she was unaware of any LGBT  groups  given  her
              ability to use the internet and contacts.  There has been  no
              independent evidence to support her claimed sexuality."

 5. Judge Farrelly thus dismissed the appeal, concluding, as Judge Bradshaw
    had done, that the appellant's claim was not credible.

 6. The grounds  of  appeal  to  this  Tribunal,  on  the  basis  of  which
    permission was granted,  are  twofold.   First,  in  reference  to  the
    appellant having, according to Judge Farrelly, waited too  long  before
    making her claim, the grounds say that waiting too long would have been
    a sufficient reason had the appellant not sought to explain why she did
    not previously refer to or found on her sexuality.  She  had  explained
    how she first learnt of it and the circumstance in which it  developed.
    Further, while she had another  reason  for  remaining  in  the  United
    Kingdom, she had no need to refer to  it  anyway.   The  second  ground
    relates to Judge Farrelly's treatment of  the  statements  of  the  two
    individuals who were not called as oral witnesses.  It is  asserted  in
    the grounds that no  inference  could  be  drawn  from  their  evidence
    without seeing what it was that they said.  It was  wrong  to  draw  an
    adverse inference simply from their absence.

 7. There is a rule 24 response from the Secretary of State,  which  argues
    that the appeal is simply disagreement with the judge's  findings.   In
    relation to her sexuality the response reads as follows:

              "Given that, as is recorded, the appellant's own  account  is
              that she  was  aware  from  her  early  teens  that  she  was
              bisexual, it is reasonable for the judge  to  draw  inference
              from the fact that the appellant only raised  the  matter  as
              part of her claim following previous failed attempts to  gain
              leave to  remain  in  the  UK,  despite  her  knowledge  that
              bisexuality would be a significant issue in her home country.
               The appellant's account is not, as  the  grounds  of  appeal
              suggest, that the realisation of her sexuality was a  gradual
              process that has only recently become clear, particularly  as
              the appellant is  now  in  her  thirties  and  therefore  her
              awareness dates back around fifteen years or more."

 8. So far as the second ground is  concerned,  the  respondent's  response
    points out that the judge clearly had the whole of the evidence in mind
    and was entitled to reach the view that he did about it.

 9. We heard oral submissions from Ms Friel and Ms O'Brien.  In relation to
    the first ground, Ms Friel's  difficulty  was  made  apparent  when  it
    became clear that although the ground  of  appeal  is  founded  on  the
    appellant's having good reasons  for  failing  to  mention  her  sexual
    orientation in any previous claim, there is no  detectable  reason  for
    her failure  to  mention  it  either  during  the  appeal  in  2015  or
    immediately after that appealed  failed,  when  she  became  liable  to
    removal to Uganda.  After that appeal failed,  as  we  have  said,  the
    appellant was not in contact with  the  Home  Office,  and  indeed  was
    formally an absconder when she did not respond to the notices requiring
    her to report.  She only got in touch with the Home Office when she was
    ready to make her new claim on this new basis.  That delay  is  perhaps
    not wholly inconsistent with the truth of her claim, but it is a factor
    of very great importance in determining her  credibility,  and  despite
    the judge's conclusions about it, nothing  that  was  provided  in  the
    course  of  the  appeal  before  us  offers  any  explanation  for  the
    appellant's failure to claim on this basis until March  2017.   In  our
    view, both the respondent's points and  the  judge's  points  are  well
    made, and the appellant's arguments do not undermine them in any way.

10. In relation to ground 2, the position is that the judge was  shown  two
    pieces of paper  which  were  said  to  be  statements  by  individuals
    supporting the appellant's claim.  No information about the individuals
    was provided, other than that which could be derived from the pieces of
    paper produced.  There  was  no  other  oral  evidence  supporting  the
    appellant's claim.

11. It seems to us that the judge was amply entitled to treat the  evidence
    before him  in  the  way  he  did.   Despite  the  appellant's  claimed
    bisexuality for a long period of time, nobody was prepared  to  support
    her claim by oral evidence, and the written  support  was  confined  to
    these two unattested letters.  The authors of the letters could not  be
    cross-examined; but the very sparseness of the evidence was itself,  in
    our judgment, a matter that entitled  the  judge  to  draw  an  adverse
    inference as he did.  The fact that the  appellant  wholly  implausibly
    claimed to know nothing of LGBT organisations in Glasgow, a matter  not
    referred to in the grounds or Ms Friel's submissions, helps to  confirm
    the decision the judge made.

12. For the foregoing reasons we are entirely unpersuaded  that  the  judge
    erred in  law  in  his  conclusions  in  relation  to  the  appellant's
    credibility and his dismissal of the appeal.  His  judgment  dismissing
    the appeal therefore stands.






                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 19 October 2018.

