
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07093/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 9th October 2018                           |On 8th November 2018          |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRIMES


                                   Between

                                   mr T N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr B Ali, Solicitor Advocate instructed by Sohaib
Fatimi
     Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. The Appellant, a citizen of Afghanistan,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the Secretary of State  dated  26th  May
    2018 to refuse his application for protection in  the  UK.   First-tier
    Tribunal Judge James dismissed the appeal in a decision promulgated  on
    18th July 2018.  The  Appellant  now  appeals  to  this  Tribunal  with
    permission granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Landes on  17th  August
    2018.

Discussion and conclusions

 2. The Grounds of Appeal  put  forward  two  grounds.   The  first  ground
    contends that the judge made a  misdirection  as  to  the  standard  of
    proof.  I do not accept that this ground has been  made  out.  Although
    the judge used a number of different phrases in assessing the  evidence
    at paragraph 26 it is clear that she  had  the  appropriate  burden  in
    mind.

 3. It is contended in the second ground that the judge made  a  number  of
    errors of law, undertook speculation and made a misdirection as to  the
    evidence, had a lack of reasoning and reached  irrational  conclusions.
    The grounds put forward a number of  suggested  mistakes  of  fact  and
    matters of speculation.  In the course  of  his  submissions  Mr  Tufan
    accepted that the judge made  several  mistakes  of  fact,  however  he
    submitted that these were not material errors.

 4. At paragraph 26(b) the judge said:-

         "...Moreover, having never met this commander, I am  not  persuaded
         that the Appellant would know who he was even if he  met  him,  let
         alone what pair of shoes the Appellant owned in order to place them
         into the commander's shoes.  In addition,  it  is  highly  unlikely
         that the Appellant would be able to identify the commander's  shoes
         from amongst very many shoes left outside  the  prayer  room  of  a
         mosque, and equally unlikely that a person putting their shoes back
         on would not feel a sim placed in their shoes, or that such a  high
         profile Taliban commander with five person  security  detail  would
         leave this potential security risk unattended (Q78)".

 5. As accepted by Mr  Tufan,  some  of  these  findings  are  based  on  a
    misreading of the Appellant's responses in his  asylum  interview.   At
    question 52 the Appellant said that  he  knew  who  the  commander  was
    because sometimes he came to the Appellant's village and  that  he  was
    famous and that he had seen him in the mosque and that he was senior in
    the Taliban (52 to 56).  The Appellant described what happened when the
    commander arrived at the mosque - he described how he watched where the
    commander put the shoes, what they looked like, and  described  putting
    the sim card in the shoes (Q78-87). Accordingly, it Is  clear  that  at
    paragraph 26(b) the judge failed to assess the Appellant's evidence  in
    relation to the issues considered there.

 6. At paragraph 26(e) the judge said:-

         "It is difficult to reconcile that the Appellant claimed  he  lived
         in the Loghar province and that he heard the bomb kill the  Taliban
         commander, even though he then claimed the commander was killed  in
         Sangar (Q96)".

    And at paragraph 26(t) the judge said that the commander was killed  in
    Eastern Laghman province which was:-

         "...nowhere  near  Logar  (sic),  the  centre  sector,  where   the
         Appellant lived and thus he could not have  been  in  the  mountain
         with the sheep near the village mosque where he claims he heard the
         explosion that killed this Taliban commander".

 7. Again, Mr Tufan accepted that this was a mistake of fact.  Mr Ali could
    not find any reference to the Appellant saying that he lived in Loghar.
     In fact he said that he lived in Sangar.  Mr Tufan was unable to point
    to anywhere in his interviews where the Appellant said that he lived in
    Loghar.  Accordingly, at paragraph 26(e)  and  (t)  the  judge  made  a
    mistake of fact as to where the Appellant claimed that he lived.

 8. At paragraph 26(r) the judge noted that the Appellant  claims  to  have
    left Afghanistan at Eid-ul-Adha in 2014 and that the  assassination  of
    the commander occurred the following early morning.  The judge said "Ei-
    al-Adha took place on 29th July 2014, and thus  again  the  Appellant's
    claims regarding the chronology or date of events are  awry".   In  his
    submissions Mr Ali contended that there was no evidence for the judge's
    conclusion that Eid-ul-Adha took place on 29th July  2014.  He  pointed
    out that at paragraph 18 of his witness statement of 21st June 2018 the
    Appellant said  that  Eid-ul-Adha  started  on  4th  October  2014.  He
    submitted that this was consistent with the Appellant's claim  that  he
    left Afghanistan after the commander's death.  Neither Mr  Ali  nor  Mr
    Tufan were able to point to any evidence before  the  judge  indicating
    that Eid-ul-Adha took  place  on  29th  July  2014.   Accordingly,  the
    judge's conclusion at paragraph 26(r) is  not  based  on  any  evidence
    before her.

 9. There are a number of other submissions in relation to other aspects to
    the judge's decision but in my view these have not been made out on the
    evidence.  Mr Tufan submitted that the errors identified above were not
    sufficient to undermine  the  judge's  findings  overall.   However,  I
    disagree with  that  submission.   It  is  clear  that  each  of  those
    conclusions separately and certainly all  of  them  read  together  are
    sufficient to amount to material mistakes of fact and misunderstandings
    of the evidence which are  capable  of  fundamentally  undermining  the
    credibility findings made by the judge.

10. In my view the judge made a number  of  material  misunderstandings  in
    relation to the evidence which amount to material mistakes of fact.  In
    these circumstances all of the findings  of  credibility  made  by  the
    judge are undermined.  Accordingly I set  aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal in its entirety.

11. In light of the Presidential Practice Statements the nature  or  extent
    of the judicial fact finding which is necessary for the decision in the
    appeal to be re-made is such that,  having  regard  to  the  overriding
    objective in rule 2 of the Tribunal Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
    2008, it is appropriate to remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.



Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains a number of  material
errors and I set it aside.

I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal for the decision  to  be  made
afresh.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date: 31st October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes




TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appeal is being remitted to the First-tier Tribunal the  issue  of  a
fee award is to be considered by the First-tier Tribunal Judge remaking  the
decision.


Signed                              Date: 31st October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Grimes
