
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07453/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Oral Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 17 October 2017                    |On 23 October 2017                    |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JORDAN


                                   Between

                             mrs thi kheo nguyen
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr A Khan, Counsel instructed by Thompson & Co
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr P Deller, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Vietnam and was born in 1937.  She is now
    80 years old and she  was  present  at  the  hearing  before  me.   The
    appellant's immigration history is set out in the determination.

 2. She arrived in the United Kingdom in December 2005, that is now  nearly
    twelve years ago, using a visit visa which was only  valid  until  June
    2006  and  thereafter  she  made  no  further  applications  to  remain
    lawfully.  Since that time she has been living with her daughter who is
    settled in the United Kingdom.  Quite understandably the daughter would
    like her mother to remain with her in the United  Kingdom.   There  was
    only one apparent avenue open to the appellant to remain and so  on  21
    January 2016 she made an asylum claim and she said that she feared  for
    her life in Vietnam because her son was a member of a  Catholic  Church
    group and he had been involved in a demonstration and had been arrested
    in 2014.

 3. In paragraph 24 the First-tier Tribunal Judge set out the  evidence  in
    support of the appellant's claim.  It was not, unsurprisingly, given by
    the appellant herself but by her daughter, Mrs Nguyen.   She  said  she
    visited Vietnam in October 2014 until 1  December  2014.   During  that
    time she herself experienced no difficulties but that  her  account  is
    entirely explicable by the fact that it was only after that visit  that
    events took a turn for the worse and they took a turn  for  the  worse,
    literally, within a few days of her returning to the United Kingdom.

 4. Whilst the daughter was in Vietnam her brother was not present but  his
    wife and children were and the claim arises because of a telephone call
    from a neighbour received upon the daughter's return.  It is said  that
    in the course of this telephone call there were reasons to believe that
    the appellant's son was under the adverse attention of  the  Vietnamese
    authorities.  The judge records the evidence in this way:

         "The appellant's daughter was unsure in her oral  evidence  whether
         the neighbour knew whether these items were  taken  away  from  the
         house were papers or leaflets or  indeed  whether  the  police  had
         actually been seen by  the  neighbour  taking  items  away  or  the
         neighbour was merely guessing that the police had taken items away.
          The information from the neighbour  had  been  obtained  over  the
         phone."

 5. Accordingly, on the daughter's own  evidence  there  was  nothing  that
    could be  said  to  be  compelling  or  persuasive  evidence  that  the
    appellant's son was the subject  of  adverse  attention  and  certainly
    there is no suggestion that his wife and children were the  subject  of
    such adverse attention.  Insofar as there was an incident in which  the
    police called at the house, there was no evidence that this put anybody
    at risk.

 6. The principal piece of evidence recorded  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge in paragraph 24 is that the appellant's daughter said in evidence
    that the neighbour had told her that the appellant had been seen on  TV
    as having been arrested in the north  for  participating  in  an  anti-
    government demonstration organised by a Catholic group.  Thereafter the
    appellant's daughter did not know what had  happened  to  her  brother.
    This was the sole piece of evidence, obtained from the neighbour in the
    course of a telephone call.  The evidence is not augmented by  anything
    that is said from the brother's wife and children.   Her  sister-in-law
    had called her to say that she was going back to her parents'  village.
    The neighbour who provided the information had moved on to Taiwan.   On
    the basis of that claim the judge found in paragraph 25:

         "It is to be noted that these events are said to have  occurred  in
         or about December 2014 yet no claim for asylum was made  until  the
         end of January 2016.  Moreover, it was only after  friends  of  the
         appellant in the UK said she should seek  to  regularise  her  stay
         that the claim  for  asylum  was  made.   These  facts  damage  the
         appellant's daughter's credibility when consideration is  given  to
         what she claims she learned from her neighbour on the  phone.   The
         appellant does not claim to have had any discussions  herself  with
         the neighbour.  Also very damaging to  the  appellant's  daughter's
         claims is the undisputed desire  of  both  the  appellant  and  her
         daughter long before 2014 that the appellant should remain  in  the
         UK living with her daughter and her  family,  notwithstanding  that
         the appellant had no legal right to be here,  and  the  appellant's
         daughter's collusion in the appellant remaining here illegally."

    That adverse credibility finding was in my judgment  properly  open  to
    the judge.

 7. In paragraph 27 he says:

         "In view of the low standard applying in asylum claims I proceed to
         consider the asylum claim on the assumption  that  the  appellant's
         son was arrested because he took  part  in  a  demonstration  by  a
         Catholic group.  Even proceeding on  that  assumption  however  the
         appellant herself is not a member of that group, there is no reason
         to think that the government would arrest the appellant because  of
         her son's activities.  There is  no  evidence  that  any  forbidden
         material was found in the appellant's  house.   In  any  event  the
         appellant has an alibi in that at the time of her son's arrest  she
         had been in the UK for the preceding 9 years."

    That makes very good  sense  to  me.   Were  I  to  consider  that  the
    appellant was at any risk of being harmed, I would, without hesitation,
    say that her claim was made out but, bearing in mind the evidence  that
    was provided in support of this claim, I am quite  satisfied  that  the
    judge made a rational decision about the risk.

 8. In the grounds of appeal it is said that the judge failed to take  into
    account the respondent's country policy and information  note  entitled
    'Vietnam: political opponents' and in particular paragraphs  2.2.6  and
    3.1.1 and 3.1.2.  There within the country information is evidence that
    where a person is perceived to have taken part in opposition  political
    activities and, as a result, would have come to the  adverse  attention
    of the authorities they would face a  real  risk  of  persecution  and,
    importantly, that  the  risk  may  also  extend  to  members  of  their
    families.  That is repeated in paragraph 3.1.2.  In some  cases  family
    members may also be at risk of ill-treatment.   I  am  quite  satisfied
    that that background information is not only  correct  but  makes  good
    sense in the  context  of  a  regime  which  does  not  like  political
    opposition.  However, that background material has to be considered  in
    the  context  of  the  appellant's  claim  as  expressed  through   her
    daughter's evidence and the fact that the judge did  not  believe  that
    daughter's evidence.

 9. In  my  judgment  it  is  simply  inconceivable  that  this  small  and
    defenceless 80  year  old  woman  would  be  of  any  interest  to  the
    Vietnamese authorities by reason of her son's attending a demonstration
    in Vietnam in December 2014.  There is simply no  evidence  about  what
    the consequences of attending that demonstration were, no  attempt  has
    been made to follow through any evidence about what happened to the son
    but, even if he was arrested and even if the judge accepted, as he did,
    that the arrest took place because he took part in a demonstration by a
    Catholic group, that is a far cry from saying that  this  appellant  in
    the United Kingdom throughout the relevant period, who has never  shown
    any interest in this group, would be at risk of arrest and persecution.
     I think the judge got it entirely correct when he took the  view  that
    the appellant is not at risk even had the appellant's son been arrested
    as was claimed.

10. In my judgment the  determination  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    reveals no error of law and accordingly I dismiss this appeal from that
    determination.

DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal Judge made no error  on  a  point  of  law  and  his
determination of the appeal shall stand.




                                                               ANDREW JORDAN
                                                 JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL



