
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07437/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 24th January 2019                          |On 11th February 2019         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                 SHOUKAT [Z]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E Fitzsimons of Counsel, instructed by Duncan
                    Lewis & Co Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision of  Judge  Sullivan
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 12th July 2018.

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan who arrived in the UK on 25th
    April 2013.  His date of birth is disputed but the judge found that his
    date of  birth  was  1st  January  1994.   The  judge  disbelieved  the
    appellant's account of being at risk in Afghanistan and  dismissed  his
    appeal.

 3. The appellant sought permission  to  appeal  on  a  number  of  grounds
    including procedural unfairness, namely  a  failure  by  the  judge  to
    adjourn the  appeal  to  obtain  medical  evidence.   The  failure  was
    material because the judge did not treat him as  a  vulnerable  witness
    and as a consequence, did not make his  credibility  findings  in  that
    context.

 4. It was also argued that he treated the  evidence  from  the  Red  Cross
    erroneously in a manner inconsistent with the lower standard  of  proof
    and failed to have regard to material matters in his treatment  of  the
    country expert report.

 5. Permission was granted by Judge Hollingworth on 2nd November 2018.

 6. At the hearing Mr Walker accepted that there  had  been  a  very  short
    period of time between the claim and the listing of this  appeal.   The
    appellant had  only  been  given  four  weeks'  notice,  and  in  those
    circumstances he agreed that it would not have  been  unreasonable  for
    the judge to grant an adjournment and that as  a  consequence,  it  was
    arguable that the appellant had been deprived of his right  to  a  fair
    hearing.  He did not oppose a remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

 7. This matter is therefore set aside to  be  reheard  in  the  First-tier
    Tribunal at Hatton Cross after a six week period in order to allow  the
    appellant to obtain the medicolegal report which he originally  sought.
    He will need a Dari interpreter.

Notice of Decision

The original judge erred in law.  His decision is set aside.  It will be re-
made in the First-tier Tribunal.

No anonymity direction is made.



Signed[pic]                             Date 7 February 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor


