
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                  Appeal Number:
PA/07925/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Birmingham                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 30 July 2019                        |On 08 August 2019               |
|                                       |                                |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                                    V S B
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Ms S Conlan of Paragon Law
For the Respondent:       Mr D Mills, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This decision discusses  the  appellant's  mental  health.  There  is  no
public interest in identifying the appellant.  I  make  an  anonymity  order
under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008,
precluding publication of any information regarding  the  proceedings  which
would be likely to lead members of the public to identify the appellant.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Chohan promulgated on 3 October  2018,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's  appeal  on  Asylum  and  Humanitarian  protection  grounds  but
allowed the appeal on article 8 ECHR grounds.


Background


3. The Appellant was born on 8 May 1989 and is a national of  Swaziland.  On
8 June 2017 the respondent refused the appellant's protection claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Chohan ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  on  Asylum  &  Humanitarian
Protection grounds but  allowed  the  appeal  on  article  8  ECHR  grounds.
Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 4 March 2019 Upper Tribunal Judge  Lane
granted permission to appeal stating inter alia

      The Judge's findings and conclusions as regards  article  3  ECHR  are
      arguably unclear (cf [27] and [28]). It  is  also  arguable  that  the
      Judge's findings in respect  of  the  appeal  on  asylum  grounds  (in
      particular, sufficiency of protection and membership of  a  particular
      social group) are unsound. Permission is granted on all grounds.

The Hearing

5. (a) Before Ms Conlan moved the grounds of appeal, Mr Mills  set  out  the
respondent's position. The Judge  has  allowed  this  appeal  on  article  3
grounds only because the appellant suffers from paranoid  schizophrenia.  In
light of the Judge's decision, on 23 October  2018  the  respondent  granted
the appellant three years discretionary leave to remain. Mr  Mills  took  me
to the respondent's own guidance on humanitarian protection which  says,  at
page 16

      Cases where it is claimed that  removal  would  breach  article  3  on
      medical grounds are not usually eligible for HP. In M'Bodj  v  Kingdom
      of Belgium (Case C-542/13)[2015] 1 WLR 3059 the Court  of  Justice  of
      the European Union (CJEU) confirmed that subsidiary protection  status
      requires that the harm from which the applicant seeks protection  must
      emanate from the conduct of a third party, and therefore cannot simply
      be the result of a naturally occurring illness combined  with  general
      shortcomings in the health system of the country of  proposed  return.
      As such, cases raising medical or mental health issues must usually be
      considered under the discretionary leave policy.

(b) Mr Mills told me that if the appellant's appeal  succeeded  because  the
article 3 risk came from a third party, then humanitarian  protection  would
have been granted; but because the respondent believes that  the  article  3
risk relates  to  the  appellant's  naturally  occurring  illness,  and  the
general shortcomings in the health system of Swaziland, then  the  appellant
is entitled to discretionary leave rather than humanitarian protection.

6. (a) For the appellant, Ms Conlan moved the grounds of appeal.  Ms  Conlan
told me that the  risk  the  appellant  emanates  from  third  parties.  She
referred me to the medical evidence, summarised  in  the  Judge's  decision,
and emphasised the contents of Dr Hickel's report, from which  extracts  are
quoted in the Judge's decision. Ms Conlan told me that the medical  evidence
indicated that the appellant is  a  member  of  a  particular  social  group
because he suffers from an  enduring,  serious,  mental  illness  for  which
there is inadequate treatment in Swaziland. She told me that  the  risk  was
from third parties because, when the appellant's illness is  not  adequately
treated, the symptoms of his illness cause erratic behaviour.  In  Swaziland
that behaviour will attract the  attention  of  non-state  actors  who  will
attack the appellant believing him to be a witch

(b) Ms Conlan told me that the appellant is a member of a particular  social
group  as   a   paranoid   schizophrenic   in   Swaziland.   The   immutable
characteristic is  that  (in  Swaziland)  his  illness  is  untreatable  and
enduring. Ms Conlan relied on Dr Hickel's report (at pages 46 and 47 of  the
appellant's bundle) which identifies the risk to the appellant  as  societal
discrimination because of his reaction to the symptoms of his illness.

(c) Ms Conlan asked me to set the decision aside and to  substitute  my  own
decision, or to remit this case to the first-tier tribunal for further fact-
finding.

7. (a) For the respondent, Mr Mills told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain an error of law. He told me that no challenge  has  been  raised  to
the article 3 decision (but he described that as "a mistake").  He  told  me
that,  at  [6]  of  the  decision,  the  Judge  succinctly  summarises   the
appellant's claim. He told me that between [7]and [12] of the  decision  the
Judge carries out  an  adequate  consideration  of  the  appellant's  asylum
claim. He told me that the Judge was correct to find that the  appellant  is
not a member of a particular social group, so that  the  refugee  convention
is not engaged.

(b) Mr Mills summarised the argument for the appellant by saying that  there
may be a risk of serious harm to the appellant as an  undertreated  paranoid
schizophrenic whose symptoms lead to targeting by his neighbours, but  would
not  concede  that  the  appellant  might  be   entitled   to   humanitarian
protection. He urged me to dismiss the appeal.

Analysis

8. At [6] the Judge summarises the appellant's protection claim. At  [10]  &
[11] the Judge bemoans the lack  of  reliable  objective  evidence.  In  the
final sentence of [11] the Judge says

      Certainly, there is nothing to  indicate  that  such  individuals  are
      members of a particular social group, as seems to be  argued  for  the
      appellant.

9. At [12] the Judge accepts  the  evidence  that  there  is  discrimination
against those with mental health difficulties in Swaziland.  He  (correctly)
distinguishes persecution from discrimination & stigmatisation.

10. In essence, what is argued is that the judge should have placed  greater
weight on Dr Hickel's report. It is clear from the decision that  the  Judge
considers all of the medical evidence carefully. The Judge quotes at  length
from Dr Hickel. It is equally clear from the decision  that  the  Judge  had
more than just Dr Hickel's evidence. The Judge  manifestly  considered  each
strand of evidence before coming  to  the  conclusion  that  there  was  not
enough reliable evidence before him (even to the lower  standard  of  proof)
to enable  him  to  make  a  finding  that  the  public  discrimination  and
stigmatisation  of  paranoid  schizophrenics  in   Swaziland   reaches   the
threshold to become persecution.

11. Between [6] and [12] the Judge makes  clear  findings  which  were  well
within the range of reasonable findings available to the  Judge.  The  Judge
finds that the appellant will suffer discrimination,  not  persecution,  and
for that reason the refugee convention is  not  engaged.  In  addition,  the
Judge finds that there is not sufficient  evidence  to  establish  that  the
appellant is  a  member  of  a  particular  social  group.  Those  are  also
conclusions well within the range of reasonable conclusions available.

12. Even though the Judge's conclusion in relation to  article  3  might  be
challengeable, it has not been challenged and so  stands.  The  Judge  found
that the appellant succeeds on article 3 grounds after  considering  all  of
the medical evidence and drawing the conclusion from that evidence that  the
risk to the appellant is created  because  of  the  absence  of  appropriate
treatment which would lead to a serious, rapid, and irreversible decline  in
his mental health.

13.  On  pages  4  and  5  of  his  report,  Dr  Hickel  argues   that   the
discrimination the appellant will face is more serious than  the  respondent
realises. Ms Conlan relies on Dr Hickel's report and argues that his  report
produces incontrovertible evidence that the risk is from a third party.

14. The Judge quotes at length from Dr Hickel's report at [8] & [9]  of  the
decision.  The  skeleton  argument  prepared  by  counsel  representing  the
appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  the  Judge's  record   of
proceedings indicate that the argument made for the appellant was  that  the
risk to  the  appellant  was  of  deteriorating  mental  health  because  of
inadequate facilities in Swaziland.

15. At [11], when considering the asylum appeal, the Judge finds that  there
is no objective evidence to establish that individuals  with  mental  health
problems face a real risk of persecution or ill  treatment.  Having  reached
that finding, the Judge could not make a  finding  that  the  risks  to  the
appellant comes from third parties who overreact  to  the  manifestation  of
the symptoms of his illness.

16. There was evidence from Dr Hickel's report about the extent of
discrimination and the risk of the perception of the presence of
witchcraft. The Judge did not ignore that evidence. Having considered the
totality of evidence, the Judge found that the appellant faces a risk of
discrimination and stigmatisation.

17. Article 2 (e) of the Qualification Directive defines a "person  eligible
for subsidiary protection" as


      A third country national or stateless person who does not qualify as a
      refugee but in respect of whom substantial grounds have been shown for
      believing that the person concerned, if returned to his or her country
      of origin, or in the case of a stateless person, to his or her country
      of former habitual residence, would face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
      serious harm as defined in Article 15, and to whom Article 17  (1)  or
      (2) do not apply, and is unable, or owing to such risk,  unwilling  to
      avail himself of the protection of that country.

18. Article 15 of  the  Qualification  Directive  defines  serious  harm  as
    follows:

      Serious harm consists of:
      (a) death penalty or execution; or
      (b) torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of  an
    applicant in the country of origin; or
      (c) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by
    reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or
    internal armed conflict.

19. Paragraph 339CA of the Immigration Rules states:

    ...Serious harm consists of:
    (i) the death penalty or execution;
    (ii) unlawful killing;
    (iii) torture or inhuman or degrading  treatment  or  punishment  of  a
    person in the country of return; or
    (iv) serious and individual threat to a civilian's life  or  person  by
    reason of indiscriminate violence in  situations  of  international  or
    internal armed conflict.
20. Inhuman or degrading treatment covers a wide-range  of  ill  treatments
reaching a certain degree of severity.  The assessment of the minimum level
of severity is relative.  It depends on all the circumstances of  the  case
such as the duration of the treatment, its physical and mental effects  and
in some cases, the gender, age and state of health of the victim.   Further
factors include the purpose for which the treatment was inflicted  together
with the intention or motivation behind it, as well as its context, such as
an atmosphere of heightened tension and emotions (Bures  v  Czech  Republic
application 37679/08 (paras 83 and 84)).

21. In M'Bodj v Etat Belge (case C-542/13 CJEU Grand  Chamber  it  was  held
that the risk of  deterioration  of  health  of  a  third  country  national
suffering from a serious illness as a result of the absence  of  appropriate
treatment in his country of origin was not sufficient to warrant  the  grant
subsidiary protection  unless  the  person  was  intentionally  deprived  of
health care. Serious harm in Article 15(b) of  the  Qualification  Directive
did not cover inhuman or degrading treatment arising from a  serious  health
condition unless there was an intentional deprivation of health care in  the
country of origin.

22. If the Judge had made a finding (relying on  Dr  Hickel's  report)  that
there risk to the appellant comes from third  parties,  then  the  appellant
would be entitled to a grant of humanitarian protection. The Judge  did  not
make that finding. The Judge  clearly  considered  Dr  Hickel's  report  and
finds that the entirety of his report indicates  that  there  is  sufficient
and available protection. Having considered all of the evidence,  the  Judge
found that the risks to this appellant was solely a  risk  of  deteriorating
mental health because of inadequacy of treatment in his country of origin.

23. This appeal does not identify  a  material  error  of  law.  It  is,  in
reality, an attempt to argue that the Judge should have made  on  additional
finding of fact.

24. In Shizad (sufficiency of reasons: set aside) [2013] UKUT 85  (IAC)  the
Tribunal held that (i) Although there is  a  legal  duty  to  give  a  brief
explanation of the conclusions on the central issue on which  an  appeal  is
determined, those reasons need not be extensive if the decision as  a  whole
makes sense, having regard to the  material  accepted  by  the  judge;  (ii)
Although a decision may contain an error of law where  the  requirements  to
give adequate reasons are not met, the Upper  Tribunal  would  not  normally
set aside a decision of the First-tier Tribunal  where  there  has  been  no
misdirection of law, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised  and  the
relevant  Country  Guidance  has  been  taken  into  account,   unless   the
conclusions the judge draws from the primary data were not  reasonably  open
to him or her.

25. A fair reading of the decision demonstrates that the Judge  applied  the
correct test in law. The Judge carried out a holistic assessment of  all  of
the evidence. There is nothing unfair in the procedure adopted  nor  in  the
manner in which the evidence was considered. There  is  nothing  wrong  with
the  Judge's  fact-finding  exercise.  The  appellant  might  not  like  the
conclusion that the Judge arrived at, but that conclusion is the  result  of
the correctly applied legal equation. The  correct  test  in  law  has  been
applied. The decision does not contain a material error of law.

26.   The decision does not contain a material error  of  law.  The  Judge's
decision stands.

DECISION


27.   The appeal is dismissed. The  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,
promulgated on 3 October 2018, stands.

Signed
                   Date 2 August 2019
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
