
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/07579/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                 |           Decision & Reasons           |
|                                     |Promulgated                             |
|On 23 May 2019                       |           On 25 June 2019              |
|                                              |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PERKINS

                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                william kpato
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Manager
For the Respondent:    Mr D Jones, Counsel instructed by Sutovic and
Hartigan
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. This is an appeal brought by the Secretary of State against the  decision
of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  allowing  the  appeal  of  the   respondent,
hereinafter "the claimant" against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
refusing him leave to remain on human rights grounds.

2. Essentially the grounds present a two-pronged attack.

3. The first is, I  find,  clearly  without  merit.  It  alleges  procedural
unfairness and that is something the Tribunal  will  always  look  at  very
seriously.  It alleges that the Presenting Officer was  unfairly  prevented
from pursuing a number of lines of cross-examination.  More than that it is
not specified.  The nature of the prevention is not clear but,  still  more
significantly for present purposes, there is  nothing  in  the  grounds  to
indicate what would have been pursued, and what would have been put, if, as
alleged, the line of questioning had been restricted. I find  that  a  very
important omission because it means that the grounds wholly fail to address
the question of materiality.

4. The second prong possibly does  not  make  the  best  of  the  underlying
complaint that the Secretary of State might have. That is not the fault  of
Ms Everett's who must make the best of the grounds that have  already  been
drawn. The ground claims that no proper  regard  was  had  for  the  expert
evidence. That is unsustainable.  It is patently clear that regard was  had
and no other criticism is made of the approach to  that  evidence  and  the
conclusion reached.

5. It follows therefore that there is nothing of substance in these  grounds
when they are looked at with the care and assisted  consideration  that  is
possible  a  hearing  if  not  always  when  a  permission  application  is
determined. Ms Everett wholly properly and professionally decided that  she
could do no more than draw them to my attention and leave matters there.

6. This case has not been made out and I dismiss the  Secretary  of  State's
appeal.


|Signed                               |                                     |
|Jonathan Perkins                     |                                     |
|Judge of the Upper Tribunal          |Dated 19 June 2019                   |



