
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07254/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 22nd January 2018                  |On 7th March 2018                    |
|                                      |                                     |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FARRELLY

                                   Between

                                    Y A B
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr R Subramanian, Lambeth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brockelsby-Weller, Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of Trinidad and Tobago, born  on  13  August
    1973. He appeals against the  decision  of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Herlihy, promulgated on 26 April 2017, dismissing  his  appeal  against
    deportation and the refusal of his asylum and human rights claims.

2.   The Appellant's human rights claim was certified under Section  94B  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and Asylum  Act  2002  and  therefore  his
    appeal was exercisable only after  he  had  left  the  United  Kingdom.
    Accordingly, the Appellant was not present at  his  appeal  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal. He was represented by counsel and his partner gave
    oral evidence in English.

3.   Permission to appeal was  sought  on  the  ground  that,  although  the
    decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  predated  the  decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in R (on  the  application  of  Kiarie  and  Byndloss)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2017] UKSC  42,  there  was
    procedural unfairness in proceeding with the appeal in the  absence  of
    the Appellant. It was submitted that  certificates  under  Section  94B
    could be unlawful  because  the  Appellant  was  unable  to  give  live
    evidence at his own appeal which could lead to unfairness.

4.   The grounds also submit, in addition to the Appellant being  denied  an
    effective appeal, that the Respondent failed to apply relevant guidance
    following SF and Others (Guidance, post-2014 Act) Albania  [2017]  UKUT
    00120 (IAC)  and  the  judge  failed  to  consider  the  provisions  of
    paragraph 398 of the Immigration Rules.

5.   Permission was granted by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Chohan  on  the
    following grounds: "The grounds seeking permission argue that following
    the Supreme Court decision in the case of Kiarie and Byndloss the judge
    (sic) decision erred in law because  the  hearing  took  place  in  the
    absence of the Appellant. It does seem  that  the  appellant  had  been
    deported and the hearing took place in his  absence.  However,  at  the
    time the judge made the decision the above Supreme Court  decision  had
    not been reported. Therefore, no criticism can be made  of  the  judge.
    Having, said that, following the Supreme Court decision,  there  is  an
    arguable point of law."




The judge's findings

6.   The judge found that the Appellant had not established  a  well-founded
    fear of persecution and had  not  shown  that  there  were  substantial
    grounds for believing that he would  face  a  real  risk  of  suffering
    serious  harm  on  return  to  Trinidad  and  Tobago.   She  considered
    paragraph 339C and Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive.   The
    judge then directed herself in relation to MF (Nigeria) v Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2013]  EWCA  Civ  1192  and  Hesham  Ali
    (Iraq) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60. She
    found at paragraph 47 that the Appellant had a genuine  and  subsisting
    parental  relationship  with  his  stepson  and  two  daughters  and  a
    subsisting and genuine  relationship  with  his  partner  who  are  all
    British citizens. However,  she  concluded,  applying  the  Immigration
    Rules, that following paragraph 398(b) the Appellant's deportation  was
    conducive to the public good as he had been sentenced to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least twelve months. The  judge  considered  whether
    the Appellant's deportation was unduly harsh under paragraph 399(a)  of
    the Immigration Rules and concluded:

         "50. It is  clearly  in  the  best  interests  of  the  Appellant's
         children to remain in the care of their parents and the deportation
         of the Appellant has clearly affected the lives  of  the  Appellant
         and their children that they previously  enjoyed.  The  Appellant's
         partner is the children's  main  carer  and  it  appears  that  the
         Appellant himself has never worked in the United Kingdom."

7.   The judge found that the Appellant had lived in Trinidad and Tobago  up
    to the age of 30 and that his mother still lived there. The Appellant's
    partner also had strong ties with Trinidad and Tobago. Her  mother  was
    from Trinidad and Tobago and the Appellant was  currently  living  with
    her mother's siblings. The Appellant's partner and children  had  lived
    in Trinidad and Tobago for nine months with  the  Appellant  after  his
    deportation. The Appellant's  partner  decided  to  return  to  the  UK
    because it was causing undue stress for the children. Her eldest child,
    aged eight, did not attend school. She said that it  was  her  decision
    not  to  send  him  to  school  because  she  had  concerns  about  the
    environment: it was hot, there was a lack of provisions and  equipment,
    and she was worried about the levels of violence.  However,  the  judge
    concluded that there would not be any difficulty in terms of language.

8.    The  judge  also  took  into  account  the  following   matters.   The
    Appellant's stepson, the eldest child, was having  difficulties  coping
    with separation from the Appellant, but he was  receiving  support  and
    counselling. The problems arose while  the  Appellant  was  in  prison.
    There was no evidence  of  any  difficulties  whilst  the  family  were
    reunited in Trinidad and Tobago  other  than  the  Appellant's  partner
    deciding not to send her son to school and  that  he  was  missing  his
    friends. The other two daughters had not yet begun school and the judge
    found there would not be any significant difficulties in them adjusting
    to life in Trinidad and Tobago where the Appellant and his partner  had
    considerable family support. The judge concluded that it would  not  be
    unduly harsh for the Appellant's partner and his children  to  relocate
    to Trinidad and Tobago or indeed for them to remain in the  UK  without
    the Appellant. In coming  to  this  conclusion,  the  judge  took  into
    account that  they  had  been  cared  for  by  their  mother  for  some
    considerable time and she was able to adequately care for them  in  the
    UK.

9.   The judge applied Section 117C  and  concluded  that  in  the  case  of
    foreign criminals there was a statutory  presumption  that  deportation
    was in the public interest. In relation to the Appellant's future  risk
    of re-offending, she found that it was some time since  his  conviction
    and his previous conviction was for possession of  cannabis.   However,
    the lack of reoffending was in adherence to the law and societal  norms
    and a reasonable  expectation  of  both  United  Kingdom  citizens  and
    foreign nationals. It was not an exceptional factor,  but  evidence  of
    ongoing rehabilitation, although this had to  be  weighed  against  the
    Appellant's knowledge that his immigration status  was  precarious  and
    that the Respondent had made a deportation order against him.





10.  The judge considered his level of  integration  and  that  he  was  not
    financially independent. He was previously supported by  his  wife  and
    subsequently his partner.  The judge  attached  little  weight  to  his
    private life in  accordance  with  Section  117B(4).   The  Appellant's
    immigration status had always been precarious and it was  known,  since
    the expiration of his initial  six  months'  leave  in  2004,  that  he
    remained in the UK illegally. Nevertheless,  he  began  a  relationship
    with his first wife  and  he  met  his  current  partner  and  began  a
    relationship in 2013. He has known throughout that  he  had  no  lawful
    right to  remain  in  the  UK  and  to  develop  his  family  life  and
    relationship with  his  partner's  stepson.  The  judge  considered  AJ
    (Zimbabwe) and concluded that  there  was  nothing  special  about  the
    nature of the family relationship. Separation of parents from  children
    where deportation is sought is the  norm  and  such  separation  cannot
    reach the threshold of exceptional circumstances. The  judge  concluded
    at paragraph 60:

         "In considering all the evidence in the round, I do not  find  that
         the Appellant has established  that  there  are  truly  exceptional
         circumstances which would outweigh the public interest in deporting
         him. To rebalance the scales in favour  of  the  Appellant  against
         deportation there must be very compelling  reasons  which  must  be
         exceptional and I do not find that in weighing up all the  relevant
         factors that the Appellant has  established  that  very  compelling
         reasons exist to outweigh the public interest given the seriousness
         of the Appellant's crime, the need to protect society against crime
         and the need for a deterrent policy."




Submissions

11.  Mr Subramanian relied on his skeleton argument and submitted  that  the
    Appellant was not present at his appeal hearing and there was no video-
    link. He had been told, by the Appellant's  previous  solicitors,  that
    the Section 94B certificate had been challenged on judicial review, but
    he had no information as to when the application was made or whether it
    was successful.

12.  Mr Subramanian relied on  paragraph  55  of  Kiarie  and  Byndloss  and
    submitted that Lord Wilson made  unambiguous  comments  that  the  task
    facing any person against whom  deportation  action  is  pursued  is  a
    "formidable" one and that such a person  must  "be  in  a  position  to
    assemble and present powerful evidence." He  relied  on  Lord  Wilson's
    list of  factors  that  should  be  considered  in  an  appeal  against
    deportation.

    (a)  The depth of the Appellant's integration in UK society in terms of
         family, employment and otherwise.

    (b)  The quality of his relationship with any child, partner  or  other
         family member in the UK.

    (c)  The extent to which any relationship  with  family  members  might
         reasonably be sustained even after deportation,  whether  by  their
         joining him abroad or otherwise.

    (d)  The impact of his  deportation  and  the  need  to  safeguard  and
         promote the welfare of any child in the UK.

    (e)  The likely strength of the obstacles to  his  integration  in  the
         society of the country of his nationality,  and,  surely  in  every
         case,

    (f)  Any significant risk of his re-offending in  the  UK,  judged,  no
         doubt with difficulty, in the light  of  his  criminal  record  set
         against the credibility of his probable assertions of  remorse  and
         reform.

13.   Mr  Subramanian  submitted  that  the  Appellant  was  in  a   genuine
    relationship with his partner and their three British citizen children.
    The judge erred in law in finding that the children  could  follow  the
    Appellant to Trinidad and Tobago. This was contrary to the Respondent's
    policy and the case of SF and Others (Guidance post-2014  Act)  Albania
    [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC). It was not the Respondent's policy for British
    citizen children to follow an appellant and therefore the  decision  to
    deport this Appellant was not in accordance with policy.

14.  Further, the original refusal did not mention  the  best  interests  of
    the child or Section 55 and neither did the judge. The  Respondent  had
    not considered the impact on the children and the judge had  failed  to
    consider the impact  on  the  children  in  isolation.  Following  Kaur
    (children best interests/public interfaces) [2017] UKUT 00014,  in  the
    proportionality and balancing exercise, the best interests of  a  child
    must be assessed in isolation  from  other  factors  such  as  parental
    misconduct. The assessment of best interests should only be carried out
    at the beginning of the balancing exercise. The judge had failed to  do
    this.

15.  Mr Subramanian referred me to the report of the school  counsellor  and
    the impact that separation from the Appellant had on  his  stepson.  He
    also referred to the doctor's report  dated  15  March  2017.  He  then
    referred me to paragraph 75 of The Queen on  the  application  of  Paul
    Nixon and another v Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2018]
    EWCA Civ 3 and submitted that paragraph 75(ii) and (v)  were  relevant.
    Paragraph 75(ii) and (v) state:-

         "(ii)    Where the  Secretary  of  State  precludes  an  in-country
             appeal, by  (e.g.)  certifying  a  human  rights  claim  under
             Section 94B, that is  not  necessarily  unlawful;  but  it  is
             sufficient to establish  a  potential  interference  with  the
             proposed deportee's Article 8 rights, such that  a  burden  is
             imposed on the Secretary  of  State  to  establish  that  that
             interference is justified and proportionate, and that  removal
             from the UK without waiting for an appeal to  run  its  course
             strikes  a  fair  balance  between  the  adverse   effect   of
             deportation at that stage on relevant rights under  Article  8
             and the public interest.   In  particular,  the  Secretary  of
             State will need to show that an out-of-country appeal will  be
             effective to protect the Article 8 rights in play.

         (v)  The extent to which the individual's appeal will be  adversely
             affected if he is not returned to the UK will also  be  highly
             relevant.  It will be adversely affected  if  it  is  assessed
             that, if he is restricted to bringing or maintaining an out-of-
             country appeal, that will be inadequate to protect the Article
             8 rights of the individual and his  relevant  family  members.
             The continuing absence of  the  individual  from  the  UK  may
             adversely affect his ability to present his appeal properly in
             a variety of ways, for example he may be  unable  properly  to
             instruct legal representatives; he may  be  unable  to  obtain
             effective professional expert evidence; he may  be  unable  to
             give evidence, either effectively or  at  all.  If  the  court
             assesses that, even if the exercise would  be  more  difficult
             than pursuing  his  appeal  in  the  UK,  the  deportee  could
             effectively pursue his appeal from abroad, that is  likely  to
             be finding of great weight and will often be determinative  in
             favour of exercising the court's  discretion  not  to  make  a
             mandatory order for return.  On the other hand, if  the  court
             assesses that he could not effectively pursue an  appeal  from
             abroad, then that may  well  be  determinative  in  favour  of
             exercising that discretion in favour  of  making  a  mandatory
             order for return."

16.   Mr  Subramanian  submitted  that  the  Appellant's   deportation   had
    interfered with his Article 8 rights and affected the best interests of
    his children. There was  also  unfairness  because  the  Appellant  was
    outside the UK and this was  affecting  his  children.  Mr  Subramanian
    relied on JO and Others (Section 55 duty)  Nigeria  [2014]  UKUT  00517
    (IAC) and submitted that the judge had  erred  in  law  in  failing  to
    consider the best interests of the  children  and  the  effect  on  the
    Appellant's partner.

17.  Ms Brockelsby-Weller submitted  that  the  issue  in  this  appeal  was
    whether an out-of-country appeal materially affected the  human  rights
    involved in the disposal of the appeal.   The  Supreme  Court  had  not
    ruled that Section 94B certificates were unlawful in  all  cases.  They
    had ruled that they were unlawful in the case  of  the  two  Appellants
    before them.  She relied on paragraph 65 of Nixon which states:-

         "In  response  to  the  procedural  matters   relied   upon,   Miss
         Giovannetti submitted that the evidence before the court below  and
         this court simply did not show  that  an  out-of-country  right  of
         appeal was ever, and  is  now,  an  inadequate  protection  of  the
         Article 8 rights of Mr Nixon and his family. There was no  evidence
         that Mr Nixon had had any difficulties  in  instructing  his  legal
         team.  He had apparently made no attempt to obtain  an  independent
         social worker report whilst he was still in the UK, and he  had  18
         months to do so between the challenged decision in March  2015  and
         his deportation in September 2016.  In that time,  there  had  been
         some social services intervention in respect of  the  family  as  I
         have described (see paragraph 29 above), but no attempt appears  to
         have been made to obtain any reports made by them,  although  Judge
         Pacey considered such reports must exist. Of course,  for  part  of
         that 18 months, it seems that Mr  Nixon  was  prohibited  by  court
         order from contacting his wife; and there is no evidence that there
         was any active relationship between Mr Nixon on the one  hand,  and
         his wife and son on the other, after he  was  sent  to  prison  for
         assaulting her in August 2014, the most recent  available  evidence
         being that of Mr Nixon dated 24 June 2015.  That confirms that they
         had not seen each other - and Mr Nixon had not seen his son - since
         he was imprisoned nearly a year before.  Even  if  he  were  to  be
         returned to the UK now, it is uncertain what,  if  any,  access  he
         would have to J-Kwon. Mr Nixon has not indicated that he wishes  to
         give oral evidence in support of his appeal; but, if he  does  wish
         to do so, there are facilities in place for him to give  video-link
         evidence from Jamaica - and the Secretary  of  State  has  made  an
         application for video-link evidence to be received at the  6  March
         2018 hearing."

18.  Ms Brockelsby-Weller relied on the  judge's  conclusions  at  paragraph
    124:

         "However, as I have explained, Kiarie & Byndloss does conclude that
         an out-of-country appeal  against  a  human  rights  claim  in  the
         deportation context cannot be effective. It confirmed that  whether
         such an appeal will be effective, or a  breach  of  the  procedural
         requirements of Article 8, will depend upon  the  circumstances  of
         each particular case. The Secretary of State's difficulty in Kiarie
         & Byndloss was that there was no evidence that she  had  considered
         the practical difficulties in, and potential undermining effect of,
         an out-of-country appeal in those two cases.  But here, she clearly
         did.  As I have described, at the time of  the  relevant  decision,
         her decision-maker said that there  were  facilities  available  in
         Jamaica that would enable Mr Tracey to have  sufficient  access  to
         instruct his representatives, and take advice from  them;  and  for
         him to play an  appropriate  part  in  any  appeal,  including,  if
         necessary, by giving evidence by video-link.  At any  hearing,  the
         Tribunal would, of course, have an obligation to  ensure  that  his
         rights were properly protected,  and  take  appropriate  action  to
         ensure that they were. I am not saying  that  the  Tribunal's  duty
         under the Human Rights Act 1999 can be relied upon in every case to
         ensure compliance with Articles 6 and 8 of the ECHR.  But, in  this
         case, there is simply no evidence that Mr Tracey's Article 8 rights
         would be adversely affected by his appeal being dealt with  out-of-
         country."

19.  Ms  Brockelsby-Weller  submitted  that  whether  the  appeal  could  be
    effective was dependent on the circumstances of the case. In this  case
    the evidence was not in dispute. It was accepted that the Appellant was
    in a genuine and subsisting relationship and  the  judge  proceeded  on
    that basis. The judge then  applied  the  Immigration  Rules.  She  had
    direct evidence from the Appellant's partner as to what  occurred  when
    the family relocated to Trinidad and  Tobago  and  she  had  a  witness
    statement from the Appellant which is referred to in the decision.  The
    Appellant had given evidence consistent with that of his partner.

20.  Ms Brockelsby-Weller submitted that  the  guidance  relied  on  in  the
    Appellant's submissions did not relate to deportation cases  and  there
    was precedent in the Court of  Appeal  that  the  Tribunal  should  not
    consider the separation of a parent and child to be a trump  card.  The
    judge was well aware of the support and  counselling  that  the  family
    members had received. She had not closed her mind to the  repercussions
    of separation and the need for counselling and support.  There  was  no
    evidence  adduced  as  to  any  difficulties  on   reunification.   The
    Appellant's partner was in an excellent position to talk about  it  and
    she had stated that her  son  was  fearful  of  going  to  school.  The
    Appellant could only have provided corroborative evidence of that.

21.  At paragraph 56, the judge stated that there was  no  evidence  of  the
    risk of re-offending. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that the  decision
    did not turn on this point. The lack of re-offending was  not  a  trump
    card and the Appellant had been an immigration offender for a number of
    years prior to his criminal conviction so even if he was remorseful and
    had no propensity to re-offend the judge was able to rely on  his  poor
    immigration history in relation  to  the  public  interest.  The  judge
    looked at exceptional circumstances and properly applied AJ (Zimbabwe).
    SF (Albania) was not relevant.  There  was  no  error  of  law  and  no
    challenge in the grounds of appeal or in  submissions  to  the  judge's
    finding that it would not be unduly harsh for the Appellant's  children
    and his partner to relocate to Trinidad and Tobago or indeed  for  them
    to remain in the UK without him. Any evidence the Appellant could  have
    given would not have changed the result. The Appellant  had  relied  on
    Article 8 and the evidence from his partner was  sufficient  to  ensure
    fairness.

22.  In response, Mr Subramanian submitted that the best  interests  of  the
    children had been overlooked. He referred me to the sentencing  remarks
    of the judge and submitted that the Appellant could have given  further
    evidence on that. The children's best interests  must  be  assessed  in
    isolation and the judge had failed to give adequate weight to the  fact
    that the separation was affecting the  children  adversely.  The  judge
    gave the impression  that  counselling  was  sufficient  to  deal  with
    separation anxieties.  However, the Appellant's presence in the UK  was
    required. The children were affected and an in-country right of  appeal
    would have made a material difference. There was no evidence  except  a
    statement and the judge was assessing credibility without  hearing  the
    Appellant or without a video-link.  This was material  because  of  the
    effect of  personal  evidence.  The  Appellant  could  have  been  more
    forceful in explaining to the judge how the children had been  affected
    by his deportation. In his statement the Appellant stated that he  took
    care of the children so that his wife could get a job and he  explained
    how his absence was affecting his wife. The  court  did  not  have  the
    benefit of hearing him on the real impact of that statement.

23.  Mr Subramanian submitted that, if we found that there was an  error  of
    law, according to paragraph 75(vii) of Nixon we should give a direction
    that the Appellant be brought back to  the  UK.  Paragraph  75(vii)  of
    Nixon states:

         "(vii)   There is a public interest in deporting foreign  criminals
               - and in not  returning  foreign  criminals  who  have  been
               deported - although that may be a  point  of  little  weight
               where the relevant individual would have had  the  right  to
               remain in the UK during the course of his appeal but for  an
               (unlawful) certificate.  There is also a public interest  in
               public money not being expended on arranging for returning a
               deportee to this country to conduct an  appeal  which  could
               adequately and fairly be conducted from abroad."

Discussion and Conclusion

24.   We  are  not  persuaded  by  Mr  Subramanian's  submission  that   the
    Respondent had failed to follow her own policy guidance and  take  into
    account SF (Albania).  The  guidance  states  that  save  in  cases  of
    criminality, the decision maker must not take a decision in relation to
    the parent or carer of a British  citizen  where  the  effect  of  that
    decision would be to force that British Citizen child to leave the  EU,
    regardless of the age of that child. The guidance was not  relevant  to
    deportation appeals and the Appellant's children would not be  required
    to leave the UK because their primary carer was able to remain  in  the
    UK with them.

25.  We are not persuaded by Mr  Subramanian's  submission  that  the  judge
    failed to consider the  best  interests  of  the  children.  The  judge
    specifically found that the best interests  of  the  children  were  to
    remain in the care of both parents and that the Appellant's deportation
    had clearly affected their lives such that the Appellant's stepson  had
    had problems at school which required counselling. The judge had  taken
    into account the effect of deportation on the Appellant's children  and
    dealt with their best interests.  There was no error of law in relation
    to the application of Kaur.

26.  The remaining issue is  whether  the  Appellant's  appeal  hearing  was
    ineffective or unfair because he was deported and therefore  unable  to
    give oral evidence at his appeal.

27.  The judge dealt with the factors in Lord Wilson's list at paragraph  55
    of Kiarie  and  Byndloss,  even  though  the  decision  post-dated  her
    dismissal of the Appellant's appeal. The Appellant had no basis of stay
    in the UK having overstayed his six months' visit visa in 2004. He  had
    formed his family and private life whilst his leave was precarious  and
    had then committed a criminal offence. He did not work in  the  UK.  He
    had a genuine and subsisting parental relationship with his stepson and
    two children who were all British citizens. The Appellant's partner and
    his children had lived with him in Trinidad and Tobago for nine months.
    They had the support of  family  members  and  his  children  were  not
    prevented from going to school. They had not done  so  because  of  his
    partner's fear that her son would miss his friends and that the  school
    provisions were not adequate. The Appellant's partner had strong family
    and cultural links to Trinidad  and  Tobago.  His  stepson  was  having
    difficulties  coping  with  separation  from  the  Appellant  and   was
    receiving counselling at school. There was no evidence before the judge
    of the Appellant's future risk of re-offending,  but  she  acknowledged
    that it was some  time  since  his  conviction  and  his  partner  gave
    evidence of his remorse and the valuable lesson he had learned.

28.  In addition, the Appellant has been able  to  instruct  solicitors  and
    his partner gave detailed and cogent evidence at the hearing, which was
    accepted and taken  at  its  highest.  The  evidence  he  gave  in  his
    statement was consistent with that of his partner and it was not  clear
    what further evidence he could  have  given  that  would  have  made  a
    difference to the outcome of the appeal.



29.  On the facts of this case the Appellant, his partner and children  have
    been able to continue their family life in Trinidad and Tobago, but his
    partner has chosen not to. The judge's conclusion that it would not  be
    unduly harsh for the children and his partner to live in  Trinidad  and
    Tobago was open to  her  on  the  evidence  before  her.   It  was  not
    suggested that there was further evidence  which  the  Appellant  could
    have given which was not before the judge. It was argued that he  could
    have been more persuasive if he could have given  live  evidence  about
    the impact on his partner and children, and the sentencing  remarks  of
    the judge. However, the Appellant's partner gave that evidence  and  it
    was accepted by the judge. We find that  the  Appellant  has  not  been
    denied the opportunity of an effective appeal.

30.  Accordingly, we find that there is no material  error  of  law  in  the
    judge's decision and we dismiss the appeal.



Notice of Decision

The appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 5 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances
Signed                                  Date: 5 March 2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
