
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07404/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 25 October 2019                   |On 15 November 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      R
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms G Patel (Counsel)
For the Respondent:    Mrs R Pettersen (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

      1. This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought  with
         the permission of a Judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  from  a
         decision of the First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which  it  made
         on 21 February 2019 following a hearing of 7  February  2019.  The
         tribunal's decision was to dismiss the claimant's appeal which  he
         had brought against a decision of the Secretary of State  for  the
         Home Department (the Secretary of State), made  on  15  May  2018,
         refusing to grant him international protection.

      2. The background circumstances may be  summarised  as  follows:  The
         claimant was born on 13 February 1979. He claims to be a  national
         of Somalia though the Secretary of State  believes  him  to  be  a
         national of Tanzania. He entered the  United  Kingdom  (UK)  on  1
         January 2003 and claimed asylum.  His  claim  was  refused  on  26
         February 2003 on non-compliance grounds. That refusal decision was
         not appealed. In due course (following either a fresh  application
         or a revisiting of the initial application) the Secretary of State
         once again considered any possible entitlement to  refugee  status
         but, on 3 May 2005, once again  refused  to  grant  asylum.  There
         followed   various   further   representations   and   submissions
         eventually culminating in the refusal  decision  of  15  May  2018
         mentioned above. At the hearing of 7 February 2019,  the  claimant
         argued before the tribunal that as a national of Somalia he  would
         be persecuted upon return because he is gay and because  he  is  a
         member of the minority Bantu clan.  He  asserted  that  the  group
         known as Al-Shabaab would seek to kill him  and  that  members  of
         that group had murdered his parents in the past. He also  provided
         some evidence of mental health difficulties.

      3. The tribunal, having heard the claimant's oral evidence,  believed
         very little of it.  Specifically, the tribunal concluded he is not
         a national of Somalia; is not a member of the Bantu clan;  is  not
         gay or bisexual;  is  not  (it  found  at  least  by  implication)
         significantly impacted by mental  health  difficulties  such  that
         there would be a real  risk  of  his  committing  suicide  if  the
         outcome of the proceedings went against him;  and  had  not  shown
         that removing him from the UK would  represent  a  breach  of  his
         rights under Article 8 of the European Convention on Human  Rights
         (ECHR).

      4. An application was made for permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper
         Tribunal. The grounds primarily, though not exclusively, sought to
         criticise the way in which the tribunal had gone about reaching  a
         conclusion with respect to the claimant's sexuality. Permission to
         appeal was granted and that  grant  was  not  limited.  Permission
         having been granted the case was listed for a hearing  before  the
         Upper Tribunal (before me) so that it could be decided whether the
         tribunal had erred in law and, if it had, what  should  flow  from
         that. Representation at that hearing was as stated above and I  am
         grateful to each representative.  The  hearing  was,  in  fact,  a
         relatively short one because although Mrs Pettersen did  not  make
         any formal concession on behalf of  the  Secretary  of  State  she
         freely acknowledged that the tribunal's reasoning had been  sparse
         such that defending its decision was a difficult task.

      5. I have concluded that the tribunal did err in law.  Its  reasoning
         as  to  the  key  issues  with  respect  to  nationality,   sexual
         orientation and clan membership is set out in  a  passage  running
         from paragraph 43 to paragraph 48 of its written reasons. It is, I
         think it is fair to say, difficult to discern from what  is  said,
         precisely why  it  was  that  the  tribunal  had  reached  adverse
         conclusions (from the claimant's perspective) with respect to  all
         of those matters. I need not  labour  the  point  because  of  Mrs
         Pettersen's realistic stance before me.

      6. In light of the above I informed the parties, at the hearing, that
         I was persuaded that the tribunal had erred  in  law  through  the
         giving of inadequate reasons with respect to a number of  its  key
         findings. I indicated that I would set aside the  decision.  There
         was then a discussion as to whether the case should be remitted or
         whether I should retain the case in the Upper Tribunal. I think it
         is fair to say that both representatives took the  view  that  the
         former course would be the most appropriate. Given that I  am  not
         preserving any of the tribunal's findings I have decided that that
         is so.

      7. So, there will be a fresh hearing of the appeal before a different
         Judge of the First-tier Tribunal. The tribunal which  rehears  the
         appeal will not be limited to a consideration of the reasons which
         have caused me to set aside the previous decision. Nor will it  be
         confined to the evidence which was previously before the tribunal.
         It will start entirely afresh  and  reach  its  own  findings  and
         conclusions on the basis of whatever evidence  is  before  it  and
         whatever arguments are put to it.

Directions for the re-hearing

A.    The Upper Tribunal having set aside the  decision  of  the  First-tier
Tribunal, there shall be a  complete  re-hearing  of  the  appeal  before  a
different First-tier Tribunal judge.  None  of  the  previous  findings  and
conclusions are to be preserved.

B.    The re-hearing shall take place at the Bradford hearing centre.

C.     All  other  directions  regarding  matters  such  as  listing,   time
estimates and interpreter requirements shall be  made  by  a  judge  of  the
First-tier Tribunal.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an  error  of
law and is set aside.

The case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a complete re-hearing.

The claimant is granted anonymity  pursuant  to  rule  14  of  the  Tribunal
Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008.  Accordingly,  no  report  of  these
proceedings shall name or otherwise identify the claimant or any  member  of
his family. This direction  applies  to  all  parties  to  the  proceedings.
Failure to comply may lead to contempt of court proceedings.


M R Hemingway
Judge of the Upper Tribunal
14 November 2019

