
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07345/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 20 April 2018                  |On 30 April 2018                    |
|                                  |                                    |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                                     U Y
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Wilcox (counsel) instructed by Buckingham Legal
                    Associates
For the Respondent:    Mr T Lindsay, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. To preserve the anonymity direction deemed necessary  by  the  First-tier
Tribunal I make an anonymity order under Rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure
(Upper Tribunal) Rules  2008,  precluding  publication  of  any  information
regarding the proceedings which would be  likely  to  lead  members  of  the
public to identify the appellant.

2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Phull promulgated on 12 October  2017,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.

Background


2. The Appellant was born on 3 March 1986 and is  a  national  of  Pakistan.
The appellant entered  the  UK  on  2  September  2010  as  a  student.  The
appellant claimed asylum on 23 January 2017.  On 21 July 2017 the  Secretary
of State refused the Appellant's protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

3. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Phull ("the Judge") dismissed  the  appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal  were  lodged  and  on  29  January  2018  Upper
Tribunal Judge Plimmer gave permission to appeal stating

      1. As contended in the grounds, there has been an arguable failure  to
      take into account evidence as to how the appellant's brother may  have
      come to know about the appellant's sexuality.


      2. Some grounds of appeal are stronger than others, but as the grounds
      challenging the credibility  findings  are  linked,  all  grounds  are
      arguable.

The Hearing

4. (a) For the appellant, Mr Wilcox moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that the thrust of the grounds of appeal was  a  challenge  to  the  Judge's
findings on credibility. He told me that the Judge's  findings  are  tainted
by a  mixture  of  speculation  and  a  failure  to  properly  consider  the
evidence. He told me that the decision demonstrated a lack of care from  the
Judge and a reversal of the burden of proof.

(b) He took me to [29] of  the  decision,  and  told  me  that  the  Judge's
conclusions are entirely unsafe and can  be  read  as  a  finding  that  the
background materials indicate  that  there  are  no  discrete,  gay  men  in
Pakistan. He then  took  me  to  [13]  and  told  me  the  Judge  relies  on
plausibility; he argued that the Judge failed to take proper account of  the
evidence. He told me that if the Judge had considered paragraph  55  of  the
appellant's witness statement she  would  have  been  unable  to  reach  the
conclusion she did.

(c) Mr Wilcox took me to [31] and [32] of the decision. He told me that  the
Judge has failed to understand the evidence. He told me that  if  the  Judge
had taken account of paragraph 35 of the appellant's witness  statement  she
would not have made the finding at [31]. He dwelt on [32]  of  the  decision
where the Judge says that there is  no  evidence  on  crucial  part  of  the
appellant's case, when in fact that evidence is summarised at  [14]  of  the
decision.

(d) Mr Wilcox moved to [33] of the decision, where the Judge finds that  the
appellant cannot explain what is depicted  in  one  crucial  photograph.  He
told me that the appellant explained in cross-examination that  the  picture
depicted him with no clothes on. Mr Wilcox said that the  findings  at  [34]
are unsustainable because one witness had come to speak  for  the  appellant
and because the appellant explains that other witnesses  were  reluctant  to
come to court because of the nature of  the  evidence  they  were  asked  to
give.

(e) Mr Wilcox moved to the final paragraphs of  the  decision  and  told  me
that in the final sentence of [36] and the first sentence of [37] the  Judge
reverses the burden of proof. He urged me to set the decision aside  and  to
remit this case to the First-tier to be determined of new.

5. (a) For the respondent, Mr Lindsay told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors of law, material or otherwise. He  told  me  that  the  Judge
carried out an assessment of credibility which is beyond  criticism  between
[29] and [37] of the decision. He placed emphasis on [30], [31] and [33]  of
the decision and told me that the Judge  reached  conclusions  supported  by
evidence and that the conclusions were reasons  well  within  the  range  of
conclusions available to the Judge.

(b) Mr Lindsay told me that the absence of an explicit  adverse  credibility
finding for the appellant's witness was a matter which is entirely  neutral,
because the Judge finds that  the  appellant's  witness'  evidence  did  not
advance the case. He told me that the Judge does  not  rely  on  speculation
that gives adequate reasons for findings. He urged me to dismiss the  appeal
and allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

6. At [33] of the decision the  Judge  is  critical  of  the  appellant  for
failing to give specific evidence about the nature and significance  of  the
photograph he sent to his former boyfriend in 2005. The Judge says

      I find he was unable to explain in cross-examination how people  would
      find out from this picture that it referred to their sexuality.

7. I have the benefit of the Judge's record  of  proceedings.  According  to
the Judge's own record of proceedings the 13th question  the  appellant  was
asked was

      What was in the pictures?

He answered

      I was in them, of sexuality, totally nude.

8. The Judge's record of proceedings indicates that the appellant  explained
what the photograph contained and why people would view it as an  expression
of sexuality. The record of proceedings completely  undermines  the  Judge's
findings at [33].

10. The Judge's findings really start at [29] of  the  decision.  The  Judge
starts his findings by saying that she does not find that the  appellant  is
a bisexual, and that she will set out her reasons. At [29] the  Judge  finds
part of the appellant's account of visiting the  same  hotel  repeatedly  as
implausible. At [32] the Judge says that she does not find  the  appellant's
account to be credible. In the final sentence of [32] the Judge  once  again
relies on plausibility.

11. In the final sentence of [36] the Judge finds that  the  appellant  does
not want to return to Pakistan, so that he can work and pay off  his  debts.
It is not clear what the evidential basis for that finding is. In the  first
sentence of [37] the Judge applied the wrong standard of proof. It would  be
necessary to rearrange the order of the works the first sentence of [37]  to
demonstrate that the correct standard of proof is applied.

12. The net effect is that the decision is untidy and unclear. [33]  of  the
decision is based on  inaccurate  recollection  of  the  evidence  that  was
given. [33] contains such a significant error of fact that it is a  material
error of law. The Judge's credibility assessment is  undermined  and  cannot
stand. At [32] the Judge bemoans a lack of evidence, but at [14]  the  Judge
rehearses the very evidence which she says does not exist. As a result,  the
decision contains material errors of law and has to be set aside.

13.  As the decision is tainted by material errors of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

14. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

15. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

16. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Birmingham  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Phull.



Decision

17. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

18. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  12  October  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  26 April 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


