
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07919/2017

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Manchester                    |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 2 May 2018                          |On 9 May 2018                      |
|                                       |                                   |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                          HUSSAIN MUHAMMAD JAHANGIR
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:         Mr M Moksud of International Immigration
Advisory Service
For the Respondent:      Mrs H Aboni, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2.  This is an appeal by the Appellant against the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge Knowles promulgated on 15  September  2017,  which  dismissed
the Appellant's appeal.

Background


3. The Appellant was  born  on  20  February  1977  and  is  a  national  of
Bangladesh. On 7 August 2017 the Secretary of State refused the  Appellant's
protection claim.


The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Knowles ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. The appellant lodged grounds of appeal, and on  22  November  2017
First-tier Tribunal Judge Chamberlain granted permission to appeal stating


      3. I have carefully considered  the  decision.  Although  the  section
      entitled "findings", is from [31] onwards, the Judge's findings on the
      events which led the appellant to claim asylum are contained  in  only
      three paragraphs, [35]  to  [37].  At  [34]  he  states  that  if  the
      appellant was attacked previously by the state, there will be  a  risk
      on return. However, his consideration of the core of the claim, and of
      this attack, consists of consideration of the documents [35],  stating
      that the appellant has been  inconsistent,  but  without  examples  or
      reasons, [36], and consideration of the time before he fled Bangladesh
      [37]. At [38] he states that he found core elements of the appellant's
      account not to be true,  but does not give more detail.

      4. It is arguable that the  decision  is  insufficiently  reasoned.  I
      extend time and grant permission.

The Hearing

5. (a) Mr Moksud moved the grounds of appeal. He told me  that  the  Judge's
decision is tainted by an inadequacy of reasoning and  that  the  Judge  did
not properly consider the background materials. He focused on [34]  to  [39]
of the decision and told me that the Judge has  not  properly  analysed  the
evidence nor has the Judge explained where he found inconsistency.  He  told
me that the Judge has not set out adequate credibility findings.

(b) Mr Moksud emphasised that the appellant has lived in  the  UK  for  more
than nine years. He told me that the  Judge's  consideration  of  article  8
ECHR grounds of appeal is limited to [42]  of  the  decision  only,  and  is
inadequate. He urged me to allow the appeal and to set the decision aside.

6. For the respondent, Mrs Aboni  told  me  that  the  Judge  had  correctly
directed himself in law and provides adequate reasons for finding  that  the
appellant was neither a credible nor a reliable witness. She  told  me  that
from [35] the Judge considers the appellant's  claim  and  rejects  it.  She
told me that the Judge considered documents submitted by the  appellant  and
found them  not  be  genuine.  She  told  me  that  that  finding  seriously
undermines the appellant's credibility. She told me  that  the  findings  in
relation to inconsistency and dishonesty are adequately set out.  Mrs  Aboni
told me that the Judge made findings well within  the  range  of  reasonable
findings available on the evidence presented. Mrs  Aboni  told  me  that  at
[42] the Judge carried out an adequate  proportionality  assessment  because
the appellant did not submit evidence driving at article 8 ECHR  grounds  of
appeal. She urged me to dismiss the appeal and allow the decision to stand.



Analysis

7. The respondent's decision was  made  on  7  August  2017.  The  appellant
lodged his notice and grounds of appeal  with  the  First-tier  Tribunal  on
17August 2017. The grounds of appeal refer to article  8  in  generic  terms
only. In reality, the focus in the grounds of appeal is on  the  appellant's
asylum claim. The appellant submitted additional grounds  of  appeal  on  11
April 2017. Those additional grounds of appeal pursue the asylum  claim  and
articles 2 and 3 ECHR. There is one paragraph about article 8 which is  also
in generic terms. The penultimate sentence of that paragraph says

      If she and her children are returned to Nigeria...

It is clear that sentence does not relate to this appellant.

8. The appellant's  evidence  came  from  his  witness  statement  dated  13
September 2012. There is nothing in that  witness  statement  which  pursues
article 8 ECHR  grounds  of  appeal.  Before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  the
appellant's representative relied on a  skeleton  argument  which  addressed
the asylum claim only.

9. At [42] of the decision the Judge records that  the  appellant  does  not
claim that he has established article 8 family life in the UK, and  that  no
evidence in relation to article 8 private life was led.

10. In Sarkar v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2014]  EWCA  Civ
195, the Court of Appeal indicated that, although Article 8 and  section  55
were mentioned in the Notice of Appeal, where no evidence had  been  adduced
or submissions made before the First-tier Tribunal to support a claim  under
Article 8 of the ECHR, it could be  treated  as  abandoned.   The  Court  of
Appeal said that even if that was wrong where there was no evidential  basis
for the First tier Tribunal to find  in  the  appellant's  favour  in  those
circumstances the Upper  Tribunal  could  not  be  said  to  have  erred  in
refusing to allow permission to appeal on that  ground.  Additionally,  when
re-making the decision following the grant of permission  to  appeal  on  an
unrelated ground, section 12(4)(a) of the Tribunals, Courts and  Enforcement
Act 2007 did not  require  the  Upper  Tribunal  to  carry  out  a  complete
rehearing of the original appeal.

11.   In BM (Iran) (2015) EWCA Civ 491 the Appellant sought  to  argue  that
the FTTJ failed  to  take  into  account  the  Respondent's  policy  against
removal to Iran in the Article 8 exercise. The Court  of  Appeal  held  that
the First-tier could not be said to have erred in law  by  failing  to  have
regard to a point that was not raised before  it.  It  was  not  an  obvious
point and there was nothing in the case law to alert the First-tier  to  it,
let alone support it. No evidential foundation had been  laid  down  for  it
and the material before the First-tier did not even contain  the  policy  on
which the argument was based

12. The Judge's article 8 consideration is  brief,  but  that  reflects  the
evidence that was placed before the Judge. The Judge's record  that  article
8 was not pursued is accurate. There is no merit in  the  second  ground  of
appeal.

13. The first ground of appeal is that the Judge's findings in  relation  to
credibility, consistency, and delay  in  claiming  asylum  are  inadequately
reasoned. At [35] the  Judge  finds  that  the  appellant  relies  on  false
documents. At [36] the Judge simply says that he finds  that  the  appellant
has been inconsistent in explaining how he knows who  attacked  him  and  he
threatened him. The Judge does not explain  why  he  finds  the  appellant's
evidence is inconsistent,  nor  does  he  compare  strands  of  evidence  to
demonstrate the inconsistency.

14. At [37] the Judge bemoans the  lack  of  evidence  to  explain  how  the
appellant was able to evade Awami League supporters between 2006  and  2008.
At [38] the Judge finds that  the  appellant  lied  to  the  UK  immigration
authorities and produced false documents. In the first sentence of [39]  the
Judge finds that the appellant has not told the truth.

15. The difficulty is that the Judge's findings of fact are  far  too  brief
and do not contain adequate  reasoning.  Perhaps  ironically,  there  is  an
inconsistency between the first sentence of [35] and the  only  sentence  of
[36] of the decision. Despite  the  fact  that  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant's account has not changed, he finds that the  appellant  gives  an
inconsistent account.

16. The Judge summarises both the appellant's position and the  respondent's
position in 15 paragraphs between [8] and [23]  of  the  decision,  but  the
Judge's findings of fact are limited to 5 short paragraphs between [35]  and
[39] of the decision. The decision contains an inadequate  analysis  of  the
evidence and inadequate reasons for rejecting the appellant's account.

17.     In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT  00641  (IAC),  it
was held that (i) It was axiomatic that a  determination  disclosed  clearly
the reasons for a  tribunal's  decision.  (ii)  If  a  tribunal  found  oral
evidence to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or  a  document  to  be
worth no weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the  determination
and for such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare  statement  that  a
witness was not believed or that a  document  was  afforded  no  weight  was
unlikely to satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

18.  As the decision is tainted by material errors of  law  I  must  set  it
aside. I am asked to remit this case to the First -tier. I consider  whether
or not I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I  cannot  do  so
because of the extent of the fact-finding exercise necessary.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

19. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is  necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-made  is  such  that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

20. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re-hearing is necessary.

21. I remit this case to the First-tier Tribunal sitting  at  Manchester  to
be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Knowles.



Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law.

 I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated  on  27  September  2017.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.


Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 8 May 2018


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


