
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07177/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 19 July 2019                      |On 28 August 2019                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HEMINGWAY


                                   Between

                                      B
                            (Anonymity DIRECTED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Clark (legal representative)
For the Respondent:    Ms E Groves (Senior Home Office Presenting Officer)
                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This is the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal, brought with  the
permission of a Judge of the First-tier Tribunal, from  a  decision  of  the
First-tier Tribunal (the tribunal) which it made on 12  February  2019  (the
date of its written reasons) following a hearing of  11  February  2019  and
which it sent to the parties on 25  March  2019.  The  tribunal  decided  to
dismiss the claimant's appeal against a decision of the Secretary of  State,
of 25 May 2018, refusing to grant her international protection.

2.    The tribunal granted the claimant anonymity. Nothing  was  said  about
that before me but I have decided, in those circumstances, to  maintain  the
status quo. Accordingly, the claimant continues to benefit from a  grant  of
anonymity.

3.    By way of background, the claimant was born on 5  December  1985.  She
says that she is a national of  Eritrea  and  that  she  was  born  in  that
country. The Secretary of State, however, believes her to be a  national  of
Ethiopia. The claimant says she has lived in various  countries  apart  from
Eritrea including Sudan and Greece, and that she travelled  through  various
other  European  countries  prior  to  entering  the  United  Kingdom   (UK)
clandestinely on 28 November 2018. It is recorded that  she  claimed  asylum
the day after that. In pursuing her claim, she said that she had  been  born
and had lived her very early years in a part of Eritrea called  Assab;  that
she is a Pentecostal Christian; and that she  would  be  persecuted  by  the
authorities  in  Eritrea  due  to  her  religion.  The  Secretary  of  State
concluded that she was not from Eritrea (so her claim to  be  at  risk  upon
return to Eritrea fell away) but  did  accept  that  she  is  a  Pentecostal
Christian.

4.     The  claimant  was  not  represented  before  the  tribunal  but  the
Secretary of State was. The tribunal noted that the claimant had  previously
had the assistance of solicitors who had withdrawn some six  days  prior  to
the hearing. But the tribunal also noted that the claimant  did  not  invite
it to adjourn and it has not subsequently been criticised for not doing  so.
It explained why it was dismissing the appeal in its written reasons  of  12
February 2019. It is apparent, from that, that it did not find the  claimant
to be credible and it did not accept that she  is  a  national  of  Eritrea.
This is what it had to say about all of that:

    "26.   I find that there are a number of  aspects  of  the  appellant's
    evidence which tend to weigh against the credibility of her account  of
    being an Eritrean national.

    27.    Firstly, the appellant's first and only language is Amharic. The
    appellant has  very  limited  knowledge  of  Tigrinya.  The  background
    materials suggest that Tigrinya is the dominant language in Eritrea.

    28.    The appellant's evidence on this Issue [sic] is  to  the  effect
    that the dominant language In Assab, where she lived  for  a  time  was
    Amharic, and that her parents spoke Amharic to her.

    29.    I do not find that to be  a  satisfactory  explanation  for  the
    appellant's  lack  of  knowledge  of  Tigrinya.  That  is  because  the
    background materials do not support her  assertion  that  Assab  is  an
    Amharic speaking region and is a matter on which it  is  reasonable  to
    take the view that her previous solicitors  would  have  been  able  to
    obtain expert evidence or identify materials in support of that  aspect
    of the claim. There is no such evidence before me.

    30.    Further, I find that the  appellant's  account  of  her  parents
    speaking to her in Amharic to be implausible when placed in the context
    of other aspects of her evidence. In particular, in oral  evidence  the
    appellant said that her  parents  spoke  to  other  family  members  in
    Tigrinya. The appellant has not put forward  a  reasonable  explanation
    showing why her parent s would speak to the appellant in Amharic but to
    other family members in Tigrinya.  Further,  the  appellant's  evidence
    tends to suggest that that [sic] the appellant's father was a supporter
    of those trying to establish and maintain a distinct Eritrean identity.
    In this context, given the importance  of  language  in  maintaining  a
    sense of cultural and racial identity, I find it not reasonably  likely
    that the appellant's parents would not have encouraged the appellant to
    use the Tigrinya language, at  least  to  an  extent  greater  that  is
    evidenced by the appellant.

    31.    Second, a further feature of the appellant's evidence that tends
    to weigh against the credibility of her account are the inconsistencies
    in the dates she gives for various events.

    32.    Thus, the appellant maintained in interview and in oral evidence
    that she had lived In [sic] Ethiopia for 14 years.  However,  she  also
    said that she went to live in Ethiopia in 1987 and returned to  Eritrea
    in 2000, which is a period of 13 years.

    33.    By way of further example the appellant maintained in  interview
    and in oral evidence that she went to Ethiopia at the age of 3 in 1987.
    However, the appellant was born on 5 December 1985 and,  therefore,  at
    best would have been 2 years of age, if not younger.

    34.    By way of further example, the appellant said in interview  that
    she had returned to Eritrea in 2000 at the age of  15  years.  However,
    she also said that she had lived In [sic] Ethiopia for  14  years  from
    1987, which would have meant that she had returned in 2001 rather  than
    2000.

    35.    By way of further example, the appellant said in interview  that
    her father had been detained and beaten by  the  authorities  in  2002.
    However, in oral evidence the appellant at first said that  her  father
    had been arrested  in  2000  and  2002.  On  further  questioning,  the
    appellant said that her father had been arrested on  two  occasions  in
    the fifth month of 2002. However, in interview that appellant said that
    her father had been arrested in July 2002. When asked in oral  evidence
    for an explanation of the difference in  the  accounts,  the  appellant
    simply repeated that the fifth month was the correct date.

    36.    In addition, the appellant  also  said  in  oral  evidence  that
    following her father's arrest she had looked after him  until  he  died
    about 3 to 4 months after his arrest. If that were the case that  would
    place the appellant's father's death as having occurred in  the  eighth
    or ninth month of 2002. However, the appellant also said  in  interview
    that her father died in June 2002.

    37.    The various discrepancies in the appellant's account were put to
    her in oral evidence. In respect of some of the questions  asked  about
    the discrepancies, the appellant  was  evasive,  did  not  address  the
    question directly and referred to other  matters,  or  simply  repeated
    what she had said earlier, seemingly as a matter of rote.

    38.    In respect of some of the discrepancies, the  appellant  claimed
    that the interpreter had erred. However, the evidence  before  me  does
    not include representations made by her previous solicitors seeking  to
    correct significant errors in the respondent's records.

    39.    A further explanation put  forward  by  the  appellant  for  the
    differences in her account is that the events occurred  so  many  years
    ago, when she was young and so she cannot be expected to precise  [sic]
    about the dates.

    40.    I do not find that to be a satisfactory explanation. That is for
    a number of reasons. I find that in oral evidence  before  me,  wherein
    she often repeated particular phrases, without giving a fuller  account
    or being able to put matters in a different way, when coupled with  her
    evasiveness as noted above, tend  to  suggest  that  the  appellant  is
    putting forward an account whereby she is rehearsing  an  account  that
    she  has  learnt  by  rote,  rather  than  an  account  of  her  actual
    experiences.

    41.    The third aspect  of  the  appellant's  account  that  tends  to
    undermine her  credibility  are  the  answers  that  she  gave  at  her
    screening interview. In particular, the appellant was asked to  explain
    briefly all the reasons why she was  seeking  asylum.  The  appellant's
    recorded response includes references to the fairness in the system  in
    the United Kingdom and difficulties in Sudan. Strikingly, no  reference
    is made to the appellant fearing persecution  in  Eritrea  due  to  her
    religion.

    42.    I find this response and lack of reference to her religion to be
    particularly striking because in oral evidence, the  appellant  claimed
    that her religion was the  fundamental  reason  why  she  was  claiming
    asylum. In oral evidence the appellant was asked about  this  omission.
    In response she said that she had sought to correct  the  record  after
    the screening interview.

    43.    However, I note that the documentary evidence before me does not
    show that such steps were taken, at least  not  until  the  substantive
    interview six months after the screening interview.

    44.    Given what I say above, I  find  that  there  are  a  number  of
    inconsistencies  in  the  appellant's  account.  I  find  that   whilst
    individually those consistencies may not be so  significant,  but  when
    they are taken cumulatively, and when placed  in  the  context  of  the
    evidence as a whole, including  matters  relating  to  the  appellant's
    language,  I  find  that  they  have  the  effect  of  undermining  the
    credibility of the appellant's account of events and her circumstances.

    45.    Accordingly,  I  find  that  the  appellant's  evidence  is  not
    reliable. I do not accept any aspect of her narrative  of  events  that
    are put in issue by the respondent. I make further findings of fact  as
    necessary below.

    46.    I find that the appellant is not a national of Eritrea. However,
    I leave undisturbed the respondent's acceptance, at paragraph 56 of the
    refusal letter, that the appellant is a Pentecostal Christian.

    47.    I have considered whether or not there  is  sufficient  evidence
    before me to determine the appellant's true nationality. I  am  of  the
    view that there  is  insufficient  evidence  before  me  to  make  that
    determination. That is because, whilst there is a ready inference to be
    drawn that the appellant is an Ethiopian national, I take into  account
    what the respondent says at question 161 of the interview record. There
    reference Is [sic] made to the respondent having records  showing  that
    the appellant was deported in 1998. I have not seen that  document  and
    am not aware of its terms or the context of its production. Whilst  the
    lack of that document has no material  effect  on  the  outcome  of  my
    decision given the extent of the evidence before me,  nevertheless,  it
    may have a  bearing  on  the  determination  of  the  appellant's  true
    nationality. In those circumstances, I am of the view that I am not  in
    a position to make a  positive  finding  as  to  the  appellant's  true
    nationality".

5.    An  application  for  permission  to  appeal  to  the  Upper  Tribunal
followed. The claimant had the valued assistance of the Bradford Centre  for
Deaf People (it has not been suggested  that  she  has  significant  hearing
difficulties herself) and Mr Clark who is a retired solicitor well-known  to
the Upper Tribunal and the First-tier  Tribunal  for  his  past  immigration
appeals work in Bradford. Mr Clark's grounds (I paraphrase  and  truncate  a
little for brevity) may be summarised as follows:

    Ground 1 -   The tribunal attached too much weight  to  what  had  been
    said by the claimant in her screening interview  bearing  in  mind  the
    purpose and usual circumstances of such interviews.

    Ground 2 -   The tribunal attached  undue  significance  to  relatively
    minor discrepancies in the claimant's account, many of which  would  be
    attributable to her being of a very  young  age  when  relevant  events
    occurred.

    Ground 3 -   The tribunal unjustly concluded that the claimant's family
    members would not have spoken to her in Tigrinya.

    Ground 4 -   The tribunal did not sufficiently consider the nationality
    aspect, simply relying upon its general adverse credibility finding for
    its conclusion as to nationality.

6.    Permission to appeal was granted on  those  grounds.  The  matter  was
then listed for a hearing before the Upper Tribunal (before me) so  that  it
could be considered whether or not the tribunal had erred  in  law  and,  if
so, what should flow from  that.  Representation  at  that  hearing  was  as
stated above and I am grateful to each representative.  In  fact,  Mr  Clark
applied to amend the grounds to add a fifth ground of appeal. Ms Groves  did
not oppose his application which  I  granted.  That  then  added  a  further
ground to the  effect  that  the  tribunal  had  erred  through  failing  to
consider what were said to be favourable answers given by  the  claimant  in
her substantive asylum interview with  respect  to  her  claim  to  be  from
Assab. I have taken full account of the written material before me  and  the
oral submissions made to me in deciding the  error  of  law  issue  in  this
appeal. I have, in fact, decided that the tribunal did not  err  in  law  so
that its decision shall stand. What follows is my explanation as to why.

7.    As to Ground 1 it is right to say, as does Mr  Clark,  that  generally
speaking caution ought to be exercised  before  taking  adverse  credibility
points against a claimant on the basis of what has been  said  or  what  has
not been said in a screening interview. The tribunal did not  remind  itself
of the need for caution and there might be a case to say that,  ideally,  it
ought to have done so. But the tribunal's point here was to the effect  that
the claimant had been asked about the basis for her  claim  for  asylum  and
she had made no mention of a fear of  religious  persecution  which  is,  in
fact, the fulcrum of her claim. The tribunal explained, at paragraph  42  of
its written reasons, why it  thought  that  omission  was  of  significance,
confirming  its  view  that  it  found  the  omission  to  be  "particularly
striking". In my judgment the tribunal was entitled to treat the  claimant's
credibility as being damaged on the basis of  her  failure  to  mention  the
centrepiece of her claim, albeit  that  that  failure  was  in  a  screening
interview rather than, for example, at a substantive  asylum  interview.  It
was not acting unlawfully in so doing.

8.    It is true that  the  claimant  was,  at  various  points,  recounting
events  which  occurred  when  she  was  very  young   and   events   which,
realistically, she might not have  any  recollection  of  at  all.  To  that
extent the point made  in  Ground  2  is  an  understandable  one.  But  the
tribunal, in assessing the claimant's credibility, went further than  simply
identifying inconsistencies. At paragraph  37  of  its  written  reasons  it
noted what it found to be evasiveness. At paragraph 40 it noted  a  tendency
to repeat "particular phrases" and an impression that  she  was  "rehearsing
an account that she has learnt by rote".  Mr  Clark  argued  before  me,  in
effect, that one person's evasiveness is  another  person's  nervousness.  I
understand why he says that. But the  tribunal  is  experienced  at  hearing
evidence from claimants and forming conclusions as to that evidence.  In  my
judgment, at paragraphs 37 and 40, that is exactly what  this  tribunal  was
doing. It was,  in  effect,  utilising  its  expertise.  I  have  concluded,
therefore, that the tribunal did not err in its  general  assessment  as  to
credibility.

9.    As to Ground 3,  in  my  judgment  this  is  really  no  more  than  a
disagreement with the tribunal's finding and the  offering  of  a  different
way of looking at the evidence. But none of that establishes  error  on  the
part of the tribunal. The tribunal  had  not  been  offered  any  background
country material demonstrating  that  Amharic  (the  language  the  claimant
speaks) was spoken in Assab as she claims. That was, it  seems  to  me,  the
principle reason for the tribunal's conclusion  that  it  was  not  credible
that she speaks Amharic and  not  Tigrinya,  yet  is  still  from  Assab  in
Eritrea. But its  other  reasoning,  perhaps  supplementary  to  that,  that
Tigrinya would be spoken at least to an extent in her household if  she  was
telling the truth about her family origins and her location as a  child,  so
that she would have grasped something  of  the  language,  was  nevertheless
open to the tribunal. So, that ground of appeal is not made out.

10.   As to Ground 4, the primary issue for the tribunal was the  claimant's
general credibility and then, of course, the truthfulness  or  otherwise  of
her account. It was a key part of her account that  she  was  from  Eritrea.
The Secretary of State had made it clear  that  that  was  disbelieved.  The
claimant was, indeed, found not to be credible and, on that  basis,  it  was
open to the tribunal to decide that she did not  have  the  nationality  she
claimed to have. But in any event, it did consider specific issues  relevant
to nationality by considering the language she spoke.  That  ground  is  not
made out.

11.   There is then the fifth ground of appeal which was added by way of  an
amendment at the hearing before me. Mr Clark helpfully provided  me  with  a
typed sheet setting out what he contended were indications by the  claimant,
in the course of her asylum interview, of knowledge of  Assab  and  Eritrea.
His argument was to the effect that the tribunal had not attached weight  to
those indications and, indeed, had not said anything about them at  all.  Ms
Groves argued in response that whilst some interview answers had been  given
which might support the proposition that the  claimant  is  from  where  she
says she is, other answers had been given which suggested the opposite.  She
also argued that the tribunal had not been required to  refer  to  each  and
every item of evidence before it in order to explain its decision.

12.   It is the amended ground which has  caused  me  the  most  concern.  I
accept Mr Clark's contention that certain of the answers  might  be  thought
to support the claimant's contentions as to where she is from. I  accept  Ms
Groves submission that certain of those answers might suggest  the  opposite
conclusion. I also accept that, in general, a tribunal is  not  required  to
refer to all aspects of or items of the evidence before it when it  explains
its decision so long as, overall, its reasoning is adequate. I do  think  it
would have been better had the tribunal said something about  what  view  it
had formed as to the answers the claimant had given in  reply  to  questions
which were clearly intended to test  her  knowledge  of  Assab  and  Eritrea
generally. But, in my judgment, in circumstances where  there  were  answers
tending to point to opposite conclusions, it was not actually  required,  as
a matter of law, to carry out that evaluation as  a  discrete  part  of  its
overall, and what was  in  my  view  relatively  wide-ranging  and  holistic
assessment as to credibility. I must confess  I  have  hesitated  over  this
point but I have concluded that the tribunal did  not  err  in  law  in  the
manner in which it is argued that it did in the amended ground of appeal.

13.   I have concluded, therefore, that the grounds are not made  out.  That
leads me to conclude that the tribunal did  not  err  in  law.  Accordingly,
this appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.



Decision

The decision of the tribunal did not involve the making of an error of  law.
Accordingly, the claimant's appeal to the Upper Tribunal is dismissed.

The First-tier Tribunal granted the  claimant  anonymity.  I  continue  that
grant pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules
2008. Accordingly,  no  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  identify  the
claimant or any member of her family. This grant  of  anonymity  applies  to
all parties to the proceedings. Failure to comply may lead  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


      Signed

      M R Hemingway
      Judge of the Upper Tribunal


      Dated 20 August 2019
