
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07466/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 17th April 2019                           |On 25th April 2019            |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MANDALIA


                                   Between

                                   [H K P]
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr. R O'Ryan, Counsel instructed by Barnes Harrild &
                    Dyer Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr. A McVeety, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. Although an anonymity direction was not made by the First-tier
      Tribunal ("FtT"), and no application is made before me, as this a
      protection claim, it is appropriate that a direction is made. Unless
      and until a Tribunal or Court directs otherwise, the appellant is
      granted anonymity. No report of these proceedings shall directly or
      indirectly identify him. This direction applies amongst others to all
      parties. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt
      of court proceedings.


   2. This is an appeal against the decision of First-tier Tribunal ("FtT")
      Judge Juss promulgated on 16th December 2016.  The underlying decision
      that was the subject of the appeal before FtT was the decision of the
      respondent dated 30th May 2018.


   3. There were two strands to the appellant's claim for international
      protection.  First, his claim to have provided practical support for
      the Kurdish opposition group, the PJAK, and second, his sur place
      political activity in the UK.  At paragraphs [6] to [14] of the
      decision, the FtT Judge sets out the evidence received by the Tribunal
      from the appellant.  At paragraph [18] of his decision, the Judge
      confirms that the has given careful consideration to all the evidence
      before him and states that appellant's evidence "... is not coherent
      and plausible for the following reasons.".  The reasons follow, at
      paragraphs [19] to [27] of the decision.


   4. The appellant advances two grounds of appeal.  First, with regard to
      the first strand of his claim, the Judge failed to take relevant
      evidence into account, and failed to give reasons that are adequate in
      law.  It is said that the Judge failed to consider a key reason
      advanced by the appellant as to why leaflets that he was distributing,
      were printed in the Farsi language.  It is said that the explanation
      offered by the appellant was one that is supported by objective
      background material.  Second, with regard to the second strand of the
      appellant's claim, the Judge failed to make any findings as to the
      extent of the appellant's sur place activities in the UK, and whether
      the appellant would be at risk upon return in light of his activities.
       It is said that it was insufficient for the Judge to simply recite
      the relevant authorities without determining the issue based upon
      adequate findings of fact.


   5. Permission to appeal was granted by FtT Judge Chohan on 18th October
      2018.  The matter comes before me to consider whether the decision of
      the FtT involved the making of a material error of law, and if so, to
      remake the decision.


   6. Before me, Mr McVeety confirmed that having had the opportunity of
      considering the decision of the FtT Judge, the Judge does not appear
      to have considered all of the evidence that was before him relating to
      the core of the appellant's claim.  He also accepts that it is
      difficult to discern any findings of fact that would be relevant to an
      assessment of the risk upon return in light of the appellant's sur
      place activities.  He concedes, rightly in my judgment, that in the
      circumstances, the decision of the FtT cannot stand.  He concedes that
      the decision of the FtT contains a material error of law and should be
      set aside.


   7. I must then consider whether to remit the case to the First-tier
      Tribunal, or to re-make the decision myself.  As the Judge failed to
      consider material evidence and did not adequately address a core part
      of the appellant's claim, the matter will need to be heard afresh with
      no findings preserved.   I have decided that it is appropriate to
      remit this appeal back to the First-tier Tribunal, having taken into
      account paragraph 7.2 of the Senior President's Practice Statement of
      25th September 2012.  In my view, in determining the appeal, the
      nature and extent of any judicial fact-finding necessary will be
      extensive.


   8. The parties will be advised of the date of the First-tier Tribunal
      hearing in due course.


Notice of Decision


   9. The appeal is allowed and the appeal is remitted the FtT for a fresh
      hearing of the appeal with no findings preserved.


  10. I make an anonymity direction.

Signed                                  Date          17th April 2019




      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia




TO THE RESPONDENT


FEE AWARD

I have allowed the appeal and remitted the matter to  the  FtT  for  hearing
afresh.  In any event, no fee is payable and there can be no fee award.


Signed                                                17th April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mandalia

