
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07348/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated        |
|On 6 November 2017                    |On 27 November 2017                   |
|                                      |                                      |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [n o]
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Bramble, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms J Victor-Mazeli


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is an appeal by the SSHD against a decision of First tier Tribunal
    Judge Malone, who in  a  decision  promulgated  on  12  September  2017
    allowed her appeal.

 2. The Respondent, to whom I shall refer as the Claimant, is a national of
    Nigeria born on [ ] 1974. The Claimant made an  application  for  entry
    clearance as a Tier 4 Migrant on 28 February 2011 and was granted entry
    clearance on 1 March 2011 valid until 14 April 2014.  She thus  entered
    the UK lawfully on 23 March 2011.  After her leave lapsed on  14  April
    2014 the Appellant has remained unlawfully and she was detected  by  UK
    Border authorities on 25 May 2017 and detained.  On  6  June  2017  the
    Claimant claimed asylum, underwent a screening interview  on  12  June,
    made further representations on 22  June,  but  failed  to  attend  her
    substantive asylum interview on  6  July  2017.   The  application  was
    refused on 18  July  2017  and  the  Appellant  appealed  against  that
    decision on 31 July 2017.

 3. The appeal was listed for  hearing  before  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Malone on 30 August 2017.  At the outset of the appeal  the  Claimant's
    representative informed the judge that the Claimant did not  intend  to
    pursue her asylum and Article 3 claims, but her appeal was based solely
    on Article 8 family and private life. In a decision promulgated  on  12
    September 2017 the judge allowed the appeal.

 4. The Respondent  on  25  September  made  an  in  time  application  for
    permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal on the following grounds.

 5. Firstly, that the thrust of the appeal was Article 8 outside the  Rules
    as Counsel effectively conceded that the Appellant  did  not  meet  the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules.

 6. Secondly, that  the  judge  had  failed  to  consider  the  appropriate
    Immigration Rules regarding adult dependent relatives.

 7. Thirdly, that in applying the case of Agyarko [2017] UKSC 11  at  [56],
    [57], [61] and [70] the judge had applied the wrong test  in  that  she
    found  at  [61]  that  the   Claimant   had   demonstrated   compelling
    circumstances justifying being granted leave to remain in the UK on the
    basis of her relationship with her sister

 8. Fourthly, that in considering the matters set out in Section 117A to  D
    of the NIAA 2002, the judge failed to  properly  apply  those  factors,
    i.e. financial independence as opposed to dependence on her sister, and
    considered irrelevant factors such as the fact that  the  Claimant  has
    not had recourse to public funds.  The judge failed to engage with  the
    fact that the Claimant's status in the UK has  always  been  precarious
    and failed to apportion any  weight  to  that,  nor  identify  why  the
    Claimant's circumstances are sufficiently strong to outweigh the public
    interest.

 9. Fifthly, in failing to identify what, if anything  about  the  Claimant
    and her sister being upset by her removal (paragraphs 59 and 61)  would
    amount to very compelling circumstances - cf Agyarko (op cit).

10. Sixthly, in erroneously comparing the Claimant's  living  standards  in
    the UK against those in Nigeria;

11. Seventhly, no arguments in relation  to  Article  3  and  the  risk  of
    destitution for a lone woman  was  put  forward  on  the  part  of  the
    Claimant, thus it was not open to the judge to make a finding that  the
    Claimant would be destitute on return to Nigeria.

12. Eighthly, the judge failed to adequately consider the evidence  to  the
    required standard of proof, namely the balance of probabilities.

13. Ninthly, the judge failed to adequately identify or explain why he  was
    willing to accept the evidence of the witness, the  Claimant's  sister,
    over the evidence of the Claimant herself at [13] of her decision where
    she held:-

         "The Appellant  gave  her  evidence  in  a  faltering  and  largely
         incoherent manner.  I am uncertain as to why that was, but I formed
         the view that she was not attempting to deceive me.  Ms.  Berlinski
         gave her evidence clearly and, in my judgment, candidly.   She  was
         an impressive witness".

    This  ground  of  appeal  further  asserts  that   there   were   clear
    contradictions between the evidence of the Claimant  and  that  of  her
    sister:-

      a) The Claimant claimed in cross-examination it was villagers who took
         control of her property in Nigeria after she left - cf [21] whereas
         her sister stated it was their uncle who forced the Claimant out of
         her house - cf [26].

      b) The Claimant claimed she had no  family  in  Nigeria,  whereas  her
         sister stated there were extended family members  in  Nigeria  [18]
         cf. [23].

      c) The Claimant stated in cross-examination that she worked as a carer
         and did not mention any  unpaid  or  voluntary  work,  whereas  her
         sister claims that the Claimant "did  more  evangelical  work  than
         paid job" - witness statement at [10].

14. Tenthly, that the judge contradicted herself having accepted  that  the
    Claimant obtained a graduate diploma level 6  in  Business  Management,
    but at the same time finding she is essentially ill-educated cf.  [58],
    and in accepting that the Claimant's sister has been providing her with
    financial support in the UK: witness statement at [24] but  was  unable
    or would be unable to continue this financial support if  the  Claimant
    returned to Nigeria,  despite  neither  witness  offering  any  or  any
    adequate explanation for  this,  and  the  judge  simply  accepted  the
    witness's evidence she would not be able  to  afford  accommodation  in
    Nigeria, absent any evidential basis or providing any reasons for  that
    conclusion.

15. Eleventhly, it  was  asserted  that  the  judge  failed  to  adequately
    consider or even understand evidence before him including  a  purported
    assertion by the SSHD's representative that the Claimant could sleep in
    a church on her return, that, as to the issue of whether or not Joseph,
    the uncle, had died, inadequate reasoning for  the  Claimant's  use  of
    what are considered to be false identities, the judge stating  at  [46]
    that he did not believe it is in her nature, and at [45] in failing  to
    provide proper or adequate reasons  for  being  unwilling  to  make  an
    adverse credibility finding against the Claimant in respect of the fact
    that she made an asylum application.

16. It was finally asserted that whilst  the  judge  is  entitled  to  make
    findings of fact based on the evidence before her, in  this  particular
    case the judge had failed to properly engage  with  the  evidence,  had
    made selective findings without adequate consideration or  explanation,
    and that was a material error of law.

17. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  O'Garro
    in a decision dated 28 September 2017 on the basis:-

         "3.  In light of the guidance given in Agyarko, as to how  to  deal
             with an Article 8 case outside the  rules,  I  find  that  the
             decision raises an arguable point of law and  indeed  all  the
             other grounds raised are arguable".

Hearing

18. Mr Bramble sought to rely upon  the  grounds  of  appeal  .   He  noted
    essentially that the case was based on the Claimant relying on a family
    life with her sister, Ms Berlinski, outside the Immigration Rules.   He
    submitted that the judge had not properly applied the decision  of  the
    Supreme Court in Agyarko at [57]:

         "The critical issue will generally be whether, giving due weight to
         the strength of the public interest in the removal of the person in
         the case before it, the article 8 claim is sufficiently  strong  to
         outweigh it. In general, in cases concerned with precarious  family
         life, a very strong or compelling claim is required to outweigh the
         public interest in immigration control".

19. In relation to Section 117B of the NIAA 2002, Mr Bramble submitted that
    the judge had given undue weight to the fact the Claimant has  not  had
    recourse to public funds and had not  engaged  correctly  with  Section
    117B(3) in relation to financial independence, nor  the  precariousness
    of the Claimant's leave in the United Kingdom.  Essentially, Mr Bramble
    submitted, the judge at [54]  of  her  decision  had  simply  paid  lip
    service and that the reasoning therein was not sufficient when  dealing
    with the matter as a whole.

20. Mr Bramble submitted  the  judge  has  not  set  out  sufficiently  the
    differences in the accounts as between the Claimant and her sister.  He
    submitted that the judge had further erred in finding that the Claimant
    met the criteria set out in 276ADE(vi) of the  Rules  where  the  judge
    found:-

         "The Appellant's future I have identified above  constitutes  'very
         significant obstacles' to her integration into  Nigeria.   She  was
         not integrated in Nigeria before she came to this country.  She had
         essentially  been  ostracised.    Her   removal   would   therefore
         unlawfully infringe her qualified protected right to enjoy  private
         life here".

    He submitted that this clearly was inadequate and unclear reasoning  so
    as to justify her conclusion in this respect.

21. It was notable that it had not been argued on behalf  of  the  Claimant
    that she would be at risk as a lone woman returning to Nigeria - see FB
    [2008] UKAIT 00090.  In relation to  [14]  of  the  grounds  of  appeal
    ultimately Mr Bramble decided not to rely on this, given it  was  based
    on information which was not in the form of a witness statement and was
    effectively evidence as to the Presenting Officer's view as to what had
    happened at the appeal hearing.

22. In her response and in the absence of a Rule 24  response,  Ms  Victor-
    Mazeli took me through the judge's decision and his findings  of  fact.
    She submitted that those findings were open to her  and  that  she  was
    entitled to make them.  She had regard to Kugathas and found that there
    was something more than normal emotional ties that existed between  the
    Claimant and her sister and that  this  was  clearly  reasoned  by  the
    judge.  She submitted that the judge was  entitled  to  find  that  the
    Claimant was not attempting to deceive her in her evidence.  The  issue
    as to whether it was the villagers or Joseph that made  her  leave  the
    home was essentially not material, given that Joseph  was  behind  this
    action and thus there was no discrepancy, and that the extended  family
    referred to by the Claimant's sister in evidence (12b) of  the  grounds
    of appeal) were not considered by her to be family.

23. In relation to the assertion at 12c) the Claimant  stated  in  evidence
    recorded at [17] that she cleans the church on a voluntary basis.

24. In relation to [55] of the judge's decision, Ms  Victor-Mazeli  invited
    me to find that there were no inconsistencies as between the Claimant's
    account and that of her sister.  These  were  different  people  giving
    evidence and different people come across differently.

25. She submitted in relation to the judge's finding at [46],  "I  am  also
    unwilling to make a finding that the Appellant has used  deception.   I
    do not believe it is in her nature".  The judge was entitled  to  reach
    this finding as it was based on the Claimant's demeanour and the manner
    in which she gave her evidence at the hearing before her.

26. At [13] to [16] the judge found that the Claimant had taken the English
    language test but had failed it, and she was entitled to take this into
    account in deciding that the  Claimant's  sister  would  be  unable  to
    continue supporting  her  financially  in  Nigeria  and  that  adequate
    reasons are provided  for  this  finding  at  [60].   Ms  Victor-Mazeli
    submitted there was no material error of law in the  judge's  decision,
    which was well-reasoned and it was clear why the judge had reached  the
    conclusions he did.

Decision

27. I find there are errors of law in the decision of  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge Malone and I have concluded that those errors  are  material  for
    the following reason.

28. It is clear from [13] of the decision, in light of the judge's finding,
    "The Appellant gave her evidence in a faltering and largely  incoherent
    manner" that she was not particularly impressed by her  evidence.   The
    judge went on to hold at [13]: "I am uncertain as to why that was,  but
    I formed the view that she was not  attempting  to  deceive  me".   The
    difficulty with this finding is that it is not possible to tell why  or
    how the judge formed the view that the Claimant was not  attempting  to
    deceive her, despite the fact that  her  evidence  was  provided  in  a
    faltering and  largely  incoherent  manner.   I  consider  the  judge's
    reasons in this respect are not entirely clear or logical.

29. It is the case that there are inconsistencies  between  the  Claimant's
    account and that of her sister, the  most  glaring  of  which  was  the
    Claimant's evidence reported at [21] that her grandmother with whom she
    lived before coming to the UK had died  on  Christmas  Day  2010.   The
    evidence of the Claimant's sister, Ms Berlinski,  recorded  at  27,  is
    that her  grandmother  died  in  2009  on  Christmas  Eve.   The  judge
    commented on this as follows at [44] holding:

         "Having  heard  the  evidence  given  by  the  Appellant  and   Ms.
         Berlinski, and having had a chance to reflect on it, I am satisfied
         that I should accept Ms.  Berlinski's  evidence  in  its  entirety.
         There  was  a  minor  inconsistency  as  to  precisely  when  their
         grandmother died, 2009 or 2010.  I am satisfied she died  in  2009,
         but was buried in 2010.  Nothing turns on this discrepancy".

30. I do not consider that the judge  had  provided  adequate  reasons  for
    essentially not taking an adverse credibility point in relation to  the
    Claimant.  The evidence of the two witnesses varied both as to the year
    and to the actual day of the date of their  grandmother's  death.   The
    Claimant was at the time living with her grandmother and therefore,  in
    my considered opinion, the judge is required to  do  more  than  simply
    accept her sister's evidence on this issue, given that the  sister  was
    at that time living in the  United  Kingdom.   The  judge  has  further
    failed to explain why nothing turns on this discrepancy.

31. At [45] the judge considered the fact that the  Claimant  had  made  an
    asylum claim and then withdrawn that claim, holding:

         "I am not prepared  to  make  an  adverse  credibility  finding  in
         respect of her saying that she was fearful  of  'my  family'.   She
         claimed that Joseph died before  she  left  Nigeria,  a  claim  Ms.
         Berlinski was unable  to  challenge.   She  simply  does  not  know
         whether he is alive or dead, as she has  ceased  all  contact  with
         him".

    I find this is not a satisfactory or sustainable  finding.   The  judge
    again provides no reasons as to why he  is  not  prepared  to  make  an
    adverse credibility finding, and for why he accepted the evidence of Ms
    Berlinski that she does not know whether Joseph is alive  or  dead,  as
    opposed to the evidence of the Claimant that  Joseph  died  before  she
    left Nigeria.  This is, in my considered view, a  crucial  point  given
    that Joseph was in essence the reason why the Appellant and her  sister
    decided that the Claimant should leave Nigeria and travel to the UK  in
    order to study because Joseph, her uncle, evicted  the  Appellant  from
    the property in which she had previously lived with her grandmother, so
    this is material not only to the history of the case, but  also  as  to
    the circumstances pertaining if the Claimant were  to  be  returned  to
    Nigeria, and the judge's finding at 58, "Were  she  to  be  removed  to
    Nigeria, I fail to see how she would be anything other than destitute".
     I find that that is not a sustainable finding.

32. At [54] and [55] the judge held as follows:-

         "54. I bear in mind that, since about  April  2013,  she  has  been
             present in  the  United  Kingdom  unlawfully.   Mr.  and  Mrs.
             Berlinski knew that the Appellant had no status.

         55.  I find that the Appellant is a very worthy  individual.   When
             she was allowed to do so, she took employment as a  carer  for
             her permitted hours.  When  her  leave  expired,  she  stopped
             working.  She has dedicated herself to  the  Catholic  Church.
             She cleans her local church three or four times a  week.   She
             is responsible for the laundry being done.  She sings  in  her
             choir  and,  on  special  occasions,  at  the   Cathedral   in
             Southwark.  She has no convictions.  She is now  aged  43  and
             has done nothing in this country but good works."

33. It would appear that the judge has erroneously found in favour  of  the
    Claimant on the basis of her work  for  the  Catholic  Church.   It  is
    simply not the case that the Claimant has done nothing in this  country
    but good works.  As a matter of  fact,  given  that  she  was  studying
    whilst she had leave to remain, and secondly, whilst the  judge  stated
    at [54] that she had bore in mind the  Claimant  had  been  in  the  UK
    unlawfully, she does not factor  that  aspect  of  the  case  into  her
    consideration of the Claimant's  case  as  a  whole.   Ultimately,  the
    points made by the judge at [55] are at best marginal to a proper legal
    assessment of either her ability to meet the Immigration Rules  or  the
    proportionality of her removal.

34. There is merit in the grounds of appeal, in particular the  point  made
    in relation to [59] that the judge had  not  identified  anything  that
    would really demonstrate a compelling circumstance justifying leave  to
    remain on the basis of family life outside the Rules,  other  than  the
    fact it would cause the Claimant and her sister upset and distress.

35. Further, in relation to [60] the judge failed to provide reasons why it
    was that she found that Mr and Mrs Berlinski would be  unable  to  fund
    the Claimant and  run  two  households,  given  that  the  Claimant  is
    entirely supported by her sister and her sister's husband in the United
    Kingdom, and therefore more was required to explain why this  financial
    support could not continue if the  Claimant  were  to  be  returned  to
    Nigeria.

36. At [63] of the decision the judge further found that the  Claimant  met
    the criteria set out in paragraph 276ADE(vi) of the Immigration  Rules,
    finding that there were very significant obstacles to  her  integration
    into Nigeria on the basis: "She was not integrated  in  Nigeria  before
    she came to this country.  She had  essentially  been  ostracised".   I
    find that this finding is also insufficiently reasoned, given that  the
    Claimant was born and grew up in Nigeria from her  birth  on  30  March
    1974 to her admittance to the UK on 23 March 2011,  so  for  almost  37
    years.  In  these  circumstances,  even  if  after  the  death  of  her
    grandmother on either Christmas Day 2010 or Christmas Eve  2009,  there
    was a period of ostracisation  by  her  uncle  Joseph,  that  does  not
    sustain a finding that the Claimant was not integrated in Nigeria prior
    to her arrival in the UK.

37. For these reasons, essentially because a lack  of  adequate  clear  and
    proper reasoning on the part of First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Malone,  I
    find material errors of law in  her  decision.   These  errors,  in  my
    considered opinion, run throughout the entirety  of  her  decision  and
    conclusions, such that none of  them  can  be  properly  preserved.   I
    therefore remit the appeal for a hearing de novo before the  First-tier
    Tribunal, not before Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Malone.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman                         Date 24.11.17

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

