
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                     Appeal Number:
PA/07593/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated |
|On 31 August 2017                      |On 6 September 2017            |
|                                       |                               |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE


                                   Between

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                           SHAKIRAT MOJISOLA AHMED
                          (NO ANONYMITY DIRECTION)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant: Ms R Petterson, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent: Ms S Rogers, Immigration Advice Centre Ltd



                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.

2. The Secretary of State for the Home Department brings this appeal but  to
avoid confusion the parties are referred to as they were in  the  First-tier
Tribunal. This is an appeal by the Secretary of State against a decision  of
First-tier Tribunal Judge Greasley, promulgated on 30  January  2017,  which
allowed the Appellant's appeal on article 3 & 8 ECHR Grounds.

Background


3. The Appellant was born on 3 January 1989 and is a  national  of  Nigeria.
The appellant initially claimed asylum on  14  April  2014.  Her  claim  was
refused on 25 July 2014. She unsuccessfully appealed that decision  and  her
appeal rights were exhausted on  14  August  2015.  On  27  June  2016,  the
appellant submitted further submissions which  led  to  a  decision  by  the
Secretary of State dated 4 July 2016  refusing  the  appellant's  protection
claim.

The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Greasley ("the Judge") allowed the appellant's  appeal  on  article  3
and 8 ECHR grounds.

5. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 1st  June  2017  Judge  Davies  gave
permission to appeal stating

      2. It is arguable that the Judge has not properly considered  all  the
      evidence when concluding the appellants could not afford the  cost  of
      healthcare and thus made an error of law.


      3. It is also arguable that the Judge did not properly  interpret  all
      the available caselaw available when concluding that the circumstances
      relating to the  child  in  need  of  medical  treatment  amounted  to
      exceptional circumstances. There is nothing in itself to indicate that
      a sufferer from sickle cell anaemia (SCA) is exceptional.


      4. It is arguable that removal of the  child  suffering  from  SCA  to
      Nigeria, where treatment  for  that  condition  is  available,  cannot
      engage Article 3 and thus the Judge made an error of law.


      5. It is arguable that the  Judge  gave  insufficient  weight  to  the
      public interest considerations he was required to take into account.


      6. The grounds and the decision do disclose an arguable error of law.

The Hearing

6. (a) Ms Petterson, for the respondent, moved the grounds  of  appeal.  She
told  me  that  the  background  to  this  case  is  that  the   appellant's
application for asylum was  refused,  she  unsuccessfully  appealed  against
that refusal and her appeal rights were exhausted  in  2015.  The  appellant
made further representations which led to the  respondent's  decision  of  4
July 2016, which is the subject matter  of  this  appeal.  At  [11]  of  the
decision it is recorded that the appellant abandoned  her  protection  claim
and  that  this  appeal  proceeded  solely  on  arguments  relating  to  the
appellant's young child's diagnosis  of  sickle  cell  anaemia,  which  were
advanced on article 3 and 8 ECHR grounds.

(b) Ms  Petterson  told  me  that  the  Judge  failed  to  engage  with  the
availability of treatment for sickle cell anaemia in Nigeria.  She  took  me
to [30] of the decision, where the Judge refers to a  letter  reproduced  at
D3 of the PF1 bundle. She told me that that letter related to  the  cost  of
bone marrow transplant & post-transplant treatment, and that the  Judge  had
misinterpreted the content of the letter and placed undue weight on it.  She
told me that the findings at [30]  of  the  decision  affected  the  Judge's
findings between [34] and [39] of  the  decision.  She  told  me  that  that
between [34] and [39] the Judge accepts an assertion  that  neither  of  the
child's parents will find employment in Nigeria. She told me that  there  is
no evidential basis for that finding, so that the Judge's  finding  proceeds
on assumption.

(c) Ms Petterson told me that the  Judge's  assessment  of  article  8  ECHR
grounds of appeal is inadequate. The assessment is found  between  [38]  and
[40] of the decision. She told me that the  Judge  does  not  properly  take
account of the public interest and has not applied section 117B of the  2002
Act. She told me that the Judge's approach to article 8 is infected  by  the
errors made in the assessment of article 3 ECHR grounds. She  told  me  that
the Judge failed to take account of the precarious nature of the family  and
private life established by the appellant.

(d) Ms Petterson urged me to set the decision aside and  substitute  my  own
decision dismissing the appeal.

7. (a) For the appellant, Miss Rogers told me that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors, material or otherwise.  She  told  me  that  this  case  has
exceptional features because the appellant's child is so young. He was  only
two years of age at the date of  hearing.  She  told  me  that  there  is  a
distinction between the treatment of children and the  treatment  of  adults
in assessing article 3 medical cases and relied on R(on the  application  of
SQ(Pakistan) and Another  v  UTIAC   2013  EWCA  Civ  1251  and  E  v  Chief
constable of the Royal Ulster Constabulary (2009) 1 AC 536.

(b) Ms Rogers told me that  the  Judge's  comprehensive  assessment  of  the
evidence in this case starts at [12] of the decision. She told me  that  the
Judge carefully applies  the  correct  caselaw  and  considers  the  medical
evidence in this case, as well as the background materials,  before  drawing
conclusions about the availability of treatment  in  Nigeria.  She  told  me
that the argument advanced is not solely about sickle cell anaemia,  but  is
about the  severe  episodes  of  treatment  which  are  urgent  and  vitally
necessary.  She  told  me  that  the  needs  of  a  two-year-old  child  are
significantly different  to  those  of  an  adult,  but  conceded  that  the
diagnosis of sickle cell anaemia, in itself, is  not  sufficient  to  engage
articles  3  and  8.  Ms  Rogers  told  me  that   there   are   exceptional
circumstances in this case which engage articles 3 and 8.

(c) Ms Rogers told me that  the  Judge  carried  out  a  full  and  complete
article 8 proportionality assessment and, at [40] of the  decision,  clearly
factors the mandatory requirements of section 117B of the 2002 Act into  his
decision. She told me that the decision does not contain errors of  law  and
urged me to allow the decision to stand.

Analysis

8. At [11] of the decision, the Judge says that the determinative  issue  in
this case is a diagnosis of sickle cell anaemia in the appellant's son,  who
was born on 16 October 2004. Between [12] and [27] the Judge summarises  the
documentary and oral evidence placed before him. Between [30] and  [32]  the
Judge considers the documentary evidence setting out the nature  and  effect
of the symptoms suffered by the appellant's  son  and  the  availability  of
medical treatment in Nigeria.  At  [34]  he  concludes  that  article  3  is
engaged because the appellant's son is only three  years  of  age  and  that
access to medical  treatment  will  be  limited  both  by  availability  and
expense. The Judge takes account of the high rates  of  childhood  mortality
reported in the American Journal of preventive medicine.

9. I have the appellant's witness statement dated 6 January 2017 which  says
the appellant's son's most recent hospital admission was in July  2016.  The
appellant says that her son has been admitted to hospital up to 7  times  in
his young life.

10. Reliance is placed  on  a  letter  from  South  Tees  Hospital  dated  4
September 2015 which confirms  a  diagnosis  of  sickle  cell  disease.  The
appellant produces a letter from a consultant haematologist dated 14  August
2015 confirming the diagnosis and saying that at that time treatment was  by
oral medication - penicillin &  folic  acid.  That  is  the  extent  of  the
medical evidence.

11. At [33] of the decision the Judge finds that the child's condition is

      "life-threatening with serious complications."

At [35] and [36] of the decision, the  Judge  considers  caselaw  and  finds
that the high threshold for article 3 medical cases set  out  in  N  v  SSHD
applies to adults, not children.

12. In GS (India); EO (Ghana); GM (India); PL (Jamaica); BA (Ghana)  and  KK
(DRC) v SSHD [2015] EWCA Civ 40  it was held  that  the  case  of  a  person
whose life would  be  drastically  shortened  by  the  progress  of  natural
disease if he was removed  to  his  home  State  did  not  fall  within  the
paradigm of Article 3. Such a case could only succeed under that Article  if
it fell within the exception articulated in D v  United  Kingdom  (1997)  24
EHRR 423. In that case the claimant was critically ill and close  to  death,
could not be guaranteed any nursing  or  medical  care  in  his  country  of
origin and had no family there willing or able to care for  him  or  provide
him with even a basic level of food, shelter or social support.

13.  In R(on the application of SQ(Pakistan) and Another v UTIAC  2013  EWCA
Civ 1251 a 16-year-old had a serious blood disorder which  required  him  to
have transfusions every week without which he would die from severe  anaemia
and associated heart failure. The  Court  of  Appeal  found  that  the  high
threshold for article 3 was not reached because he would  not  be  returning
to an early and solitary death and he had been treated in  Pakistan  before:
but accepted that there were circumstances in which the threshold  would  be
reached in relation to a child where it would not be reached in the case  of
an adult.

14. In AE (Algeria) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 653 the  Claimant's  six-year-old
daughter had spina  bifida  and  was  very  severely  disabled  with  severe
learning difficulties and extremely complex needs. The  case  concerned  the
application of Articles 3 and 8 when it was proposed to remove a  very  sick
child  to  a  home  country  where  available   healthcare   provision   was
substantially inferior,  but  where  the  evidence  did  not  point  to  the
likelihood of an early death. The arguments regarding Article 3 of the  ECHR
could not succeed any more than they could in SQ (Pakistan).

15. In Yoh-Ekale Mwanje v Belgium 2013  ECHR  10486/10,  six  of  the  seven
judges expressed the hope that the Grand Chamber would one day  revisit  the
high threshold in health cases set out in  N.  However,  that  has  not  yet
happened. In relation to a child, Article 8 might be  more  protective  than
Article 3.  The appeal was remitted for legal error but the Court of  Appeal
said that along with the best interests of the  child,  the  tribunal  would
have to consider the overstaying of  the  children  and  their  mother,  the
illegal entry and bogus asylum claims of the Claimant and  the  future  cost
and duration of treatment and care in the UK.

16. In Paposhvili v Belgium (application no 41738/10) the Grand  Chamber  of
the Court of Human Rights reiterated the  principle  that  aliens  who  were
subject to expulsion could not in principle claim any entitlement to  remain
in the territory of a Contracting State in  order  to  continue  to  benefit
from medical  or  similar  forms  of  assistance  provided  by  that  State.
Suffering which flowed from naturally occurring  illness  would  attain  the
minimum level of severity  required  by  Article  3  ECHR  only  under  very
exceptional circumstances.  However the Court considered that  the  practice
since the judgment in N v United Kingdom of only applying  Article  3  where
the person facing expulsion is close to death, has deprived aliens  who  are
seriously ill, but whose condition  is  less  critical  of  the  benefit  of
Article 3.  Other very exceptional cases which  may  raise  an  issue  under
Article 3 should be understood to be situations involving the removal  of  a
seriously ill person  in  which  substantial  grounds  had  been  shown  for
believing that he/she, although not at imminent risk of dying, would face  a
real risk, on account of the absence of appropriate treatment, or  the  lack
of access to such treatment, of  being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid  and
irreversible decline  in  his/her  state  of  health  resulting  in  intense
suffering or to a significant reduction in life expectancy.

17. The Judge's decision contains a material error of law. The  Judge  deals
with this appeal as if it is the appellant's sons article 3  appeal.  It  is
not. It is the appellant's appeal. The circumstances of the appellant's  son
are relevant to the appellant's article 8 ECHR grounds of appeal only.

18. It is at [11] of the decision that the Judge  takes  a  wrong  turn.  At
[11] of the decision the Judge  records  that  the  appellant  abandons  her
asylum  and  humanitarian  protection  claims.  What  that  leaves  is   the
appellant's article 8 ECHR grounds  of  appeal.  The  circumstances  of  the
appellant's family members, including her young son, are  relevant  to  that
appeal, but abandoning the asylum and  humanitarian  protection  grounds  of
appeal does not create an independent appeal for the  appellant's  son.  The
Judge was therefore wrong to allow the appeal on  article  3  ECHR  grounds.
When he did that, he effectively allowed an appeal for the  appellant's  son
- an appeal which was not before him.

19. At [7] of the decision, the Judge reminds himself of  Devaseelan  (2002)
UKIAT 00702. At [10] the Judge refers to the  adverse  credibility  findings
made against the appellant, which still stand. The appellant has been  found
to be an incredible and unreliable witness, yet  the  Judge  unquestioningly
accepts the appellant's evidence that she has no prospect of  employment  in
Nigeria and no family members there. The fulcrum  of  this  appeal  concerns
access to medical treatment, yet the Judge accepts that the  appellant,  who
is not yet 30 years of age, cannot find employment or support in Nigeria  on
the appellant's word alone, even though  his  starting  point  is  that  the
appellant has previously not told truth.

20. The Judge's finding at [37] that medical treatment is neither  available
nor accessible in Nigeria is not safe.

21. The Judge's article 8 assessment is contained between [38] and  [40]  of
the decision. [40] of the decision clearly  contains  a  material  error  of
law. The Judge failed to properly apply  section  117B  of  the  Nationality
Immigration and Asylum Act 2002, which says

      Article 8: public interest considerations applicable in all cases

      (1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the public
      interest.

      (2) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to enter or remain in  the  United  Kingdom  are  able  to  speak
      English, because persons who can speak English-

           (a) are less of a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

      (3) It is in the public interest, and in particular in  the  interests
      of the economic well-being of the United  Kingdom,  that  persons  who
      seek to  enter  or  remain  in  the  United  Kingdom  are  financially
      independent, because such persons-

           (a) are not a burden on taxpayers, and

           (b) are better able to integrate into society.

      (4) Little weight should be given to-

           (a) a private life, or

           (b) a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,

      that is established by a person at a time when the person  is  in  the
      United Kingdom unlawfully.

      (5) Little weight should be given to a private life established  by  a
      person at a time when the person's immigration status is precarious.

      (6) In the case of a person who is  not  liable  to  deportation,  the
      public interest does not require the person's removal where-

           (a)  the  person  has  a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
           relationship with a qualifying child, and

           (b) it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave  the
           United Kingdom.

22. The only factor in favour of the appellant which can be  taken  from  s.
117B of the 2002 Act is that she speaks  English.  She  is  not  financially
independent. She entered the UK in 2012 and her presence  in  the  UK  since
then has been precarious. None of the  appellants  children  are  qualifying
children.

23. In AM (S 117B) Malawi [2015] UKUT 260 (IAC) the Tribunal  held  that  an
appellant can obtain no positive right to a grant of leave  to  remain  from
either s117B (2) or (3), whatever the degree of his fluency in  English,  or
the  strength  of  his   financial   resources.   In   Forman   (ss   117A-C
considerations) [2015]  UKUT  00412  (IAC)  it  was  held  that  the  public
interest in firm immigration control is not  diluted  by  the  consideration
that a person pursuing a claim under Article 8 ECHR has at no  time  been  a
financial burden on the state or is self-sufficient or is likely  to  remain
so indefinitely.  The significance of these factors is that where  they  are
not present the public interest is fortified.

24. At [39] the Judge finds  that  article  8  is  engaged  because  of  the
appellant's youngest child's  medical  condition.  His  findings  there  are
infected by the error made from [11] onwards  in  the  decision.  The  Judge
treats this case is  if  it  is  the  appellant's  child's  own  independent
article 3 ECHR appeal.

25. I therefore find that the decision is tainted by material error  of  law
and must be set aside.

26. I consider whether I can substitute my own decision,  but  find  that  I
cannot. None of the Judge's findings of fact can stand. This  case  requires
an entirely new fact-finding exercise.

Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

27. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

28. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
the Judge's findings of fact cannot stand. A new  fact-finding  exercise  is
necessary, encompassing the nature, extent and  effect  of  the  appellant's
son's illness, and access to available treatment in Nigeria.

29. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at Bradford to  be
heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Greasley.

Decision

30. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted by a  material  error
of law.

31. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on  30  January  2017.  The
appellant's appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to  be  determined
of new.



Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date  4 September 2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle
