
                                    [pic]

Upper Tier Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07004/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester CJC              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 15 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                                   Between

                                     QV
                         [Anonymity direction made]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms L Bashow, instructed by Parker Rhodes Hickmotts
Solicitors
For the respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269), I make an anonymity direction. Unless the Upper  Tribunal  or
a Court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings  or  any  form  of
publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the appellant(s).

 1. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Gibbs promulgated 8.10.19, dismissing his appeal against
    the decision of the Secretary of State, dated  17.6.19  to  refuse  his
    protection claim made on 10.1.19, certifying the same under section  72
    of the 2002 Act, and to maintain the decision made on 5.10.18 to deport
    him from the UK following his conviction and  sentence  of  two  years'
    imprisonment for production of cannabis.

 2. First-tier Tribunal Judge Grant-Hutchison refused permission to  appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal. However, when the application was renewed to the
    Upper Tribunal, Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Kamara  granted  permission  on
    27.11.19.

 3. At the outset of the hearing, Ms Bashow applied for the hearing  to  be
    heard in private, on the basis of the reporting restrictions.  However,
    given that I have made an  anonymity  direction  I  saw  no  reason  to
    justify holding the hearing in private. As it happens, no  other  party
    was present during the hearing.

 4. Without advance notice, Ms Bashow also sought to amend the  grounds  of
    application to include a matter  that  had  not  been  pleaded  and  in
    respect of which no permission had been granted. She asserted that this
    was a Robinson obvious point. In summary, it was submitted that it  was
    an error for the judge to address the s72 certification issue first and
    that he should have determined first whether the appellant was a victim
    of trafficking. Ms Bashow asserted that a finding on trafficking in the
    appellant's favour would mean that the judge could not have  reached  a
    conclusion to uphold  the  certification  on  the  basis  that  he  had
    committed a serious crime and that he was a danger to the community.  I
    do not follow the logic of that argument and  as,  in  any  event,  the
    judge concluded that appellant was not  a  victim  of  trafficking  the
    issue is not material to the outcome of  the  appeal.  Further,  as  no
    application or notice had been given of the proposed amendment  and  no
    permission granted, I refused the application.

Error of Law

 5. For the reasons set out below, I found no material error of law such as
    to require the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to be set aside.

 6. In summary, the appellant's claim is that that he was trafficked out of
    Vietnam, having borrowed  from  illegal  moneylenders  to  finance  his
    clandestine journey to Russia and later to the UK, where he was  forced
    to tend plants  in  a  cannabis  production  operation  in  residential
    property. He was caught during  a  police  raid.  He  fears  return  to
    Vietnam because he cannot repay the money he borrowed. However, for the
    reasons set out in the CPIN 2.1,  this  is  not  a  Convention  reason.
    However, he also claims that on return he would face  a  real  risk  of
    unlawful killing or inhuman or degrading treatment such as  to  entitle
    him to humanitarian protection.

 7. The appellant had claimed to be the victim of trafficking but  the  NRM
    concluded that he was not a trafficking victim.

 8. The factual basis of the claim was rejected  by  the  respondent  after
    applying  paragraph  339L  of  the  Immigration  Rules.  It  was   also
    considered that there would be a sufficiency of protection available to
    him, and that it would not be unreasonable or unduly  harsh  to  expect
    him to relocate within the vast landmass and huge population of Vietnam
    to a place such as Ho Chi Minh City or Da Nang in order  to  avoid  the
    alleged moneylenders.

 9. By the operation of section 72 and  on  the  basis  of  the  rebuttable
    presumptions that he has  been  convicted  of  a  particularly  serious
    crime, namely involvement in the production of cannabis in an operation
    capable of producing significant quantities  for  commercial  use,  and
    that his continued presence in the  UK  constitutes  a  danger  to  the
    community,  the  appellant  was  excluded  from  protection  under  the
    Convention. Further, pursuant to paragraph 339D he  was  also  excluded
    from humanitarian protection, for the same reasons.

10. The factual claim to have been trafficked to the UK and to be  at  risk
    of mistreatment from moneylenders on return was also  rejected  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal, for the reasons set out in the decision.

11. Judge Gibbs concluded at [38] of the decision that  the  appellant  had
    not rebutted the presumptions under s72 and therefore  the  appeals  on
    Convention and humanitarian protection grounds were dismissed.

12. The judge then went on to consider article 3 ECHR. After taking account
    of the two expert reports, the claims to be a victim of trafficking and
    to be at risk on  return  from  moneylenders  were  rejected,  for  the
    reasons set out in the decision. Neither did the judge accept that  the
    appellant's mental health concerns were sufficient  to  meet  the  high
    threshold under article 3 ECHR.  In  brief  terms  set  out  from  [51]
    onwards, the judge concluded that the  appellant  could  not  meet  the
    requirements of paragraphs 399 or 399A of the Immigration Rules to show
    very significant obstacles to integration on return to Vietnam. Neither
    were there any compelling or compassionate  circumstances.  The  appeal
    was dismissed on all grounds.

13. The grounds of appeal argue that the First-tier Tribunal erred in:

      a) assessing credibility of the appellant's factual account  of  being
         at risk from moneylenders;

      b) A flawed approach to the country expert report by failing to engage
         with the detail of the report, the experience and qualification  of
         the expert, the credibility against the expert's opinion  and  that
         the expert was not basing her opinions on the  appellant's  account
         alone;

      c) Failing, when considering the s72 certification, to consider  large
         parts of the  sentencing  remarks,  and  failing  to  consider  the
         objective and the expert evidence holistically;

      d) Making a limited consideration of the  medico-legal  expert  report
         without any regard to the diagnosis and the detail of the report;

      e) Assessing the credibility of  the  trafficking  claim  by  focusing
         almost entirely on two issues to find the appellant  not  credible,
         without having adequate regard to the  descriptive  detail  in  the
         appellant's account of being the  victim  of  trafficking  and  his
         explanation for the delay in the full account being given; and

      f) If the above grounds are made out, making an inadequate  article  8
         assessment.

14. In granting permission, Judge Kamara considered it  arguable  that  the
    judge erred in "concluding that the country expert based  her  opinions
    solely on the appellant's account given the expert's opinion as to  the
    plausibility of that account when viewed against  country  information.
    It is further arguable that there were multiple errors in  the  judge's
    treatment of the psychiatric report."

15. The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the  judge.  It  is
    not an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much
    weight to a relevant factor, unless the exercise is irrational. Nor  is
    it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every factual issue
    of argument. Disagreement  with  a  judge's  factual  conclusions,  the
    appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of  credibility,  or  the
    evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error of law.

16. Grounds 2 and 4 assert that the judge's approach to the country  expert
    report and  the  medico-legal  report  was  fundamentally  flawed.  The
    grounds and the grant of permission  assert  that  the  country  expert
    report was discounted because the  expert  based  her  opinions  as  to
    plausibility solely on the appellant's unchallenged account. However, I
    do not agree with that characterisation of  the  judge's  reasoning.  A
    careful reading of the decision reveals that  the  judge  gave  anxious
    scrutiny to the evidence  and  in  particular  the  expert  reports  in
    comparison  to  the  appellant's  account  and  the  other  facts   and
    circumstances of the case. It is not the case that the  judge  rejected
    the expert opinion on the sole basis of having accepted the appellant's
    factual account as truthful. The judge carefully assessed  the  various
    aspects of the appellant's accounts to have borrowed from moneylenders,
    to be the victim of trafficking, and to have a genuine  fear  of  those
    moneylenders because he is unable to repay his debt. At [45] the  judge
    accepted that the account of travel from Vietnam was equally consistent
    with a person voluntarily paying his way and using agents to do so,  as
    with a person being trafficked. The judge also agreed that  the  amount
    of money the  appellant  said  he  paid  was  consistent  with  country
    background information.

17.  The  judge  also  took  the  appellant's  account  into  consideration
    alongside a number of features which the judge considered to be at odds
    or inconsistent with the moneylaundering/trafficking claim.  The  judge
    was entitled  to  take  into  account  evidence  pointing  against  the
    appellant's  account.  For  example,  the  judge  bore  in   mind   the
    appellant's account that he and his mother had previously been able  to
    borrow money for medical bills and that he could have done so again  to
    travel abroad. There was also significant doubt about the account as to
    how he came to relocate from working  in  Russia  to  the  UK.  Another
    example is that at [42] of the decision, the judge found  the  peculiar
    claimed arrangement of his alleged oppressors arranging for his 'wages'
    to be sent to his mother in Vietnam was inconsistent with the claim  to
    be the victim of trafficking. The judge was also entitled to take  into
    account that at some stages the appellant had given a positive  account
    that  he  was  not  held  or  forced  to  work  against  his  will.  Of
    significance in this regard is the fact that the appellant consistently
    and steadfastly maintained what he now claims to be a false account all
    the way through his arrest, prosecution, trial and sentencing, as  well
    as in the trafficking assessment. The judge was entitled to  point  out
    that the appellant was sentenced on what he now claims to  be  a  false
    basis that he had distanced himself from the people who brought him  to
    the UK, that he had not been mistreated, was not held prisoner and  had
    a key so that he was free to come and go whilst working in the cannabis
    production operation. Various other aspects of the account suggested to
    the judge that the appellant was not operating in a  climate  of  fear,
    including, for example, failing to follow the instructions as  to  what
    to say if caught, allegedly given to him by Mr Tang.

18. The judge was also entitled to point out that it  was  only  after  the
    decision to deport him that his account changed to claim  he  had  been
    trafficked and ill-treated. He had previously consistently  claimed  to
    have been well-looked after. At [33] and [34] the  judge  also  pointed
    out that in July 2019 the appellant failed to disclose that he had  any
    mental health issues or that he had been the victim of torture, and yet
    by that stage he had been separated from those who could  do  him  harm
    for over a year. It was in the light of those considerations and  after
    carefully considering the expert evidence that the judge concluded that
    the expert opinion that a delay in disclosure of mistreatment would  be
    normal in such  cases  could  not  be  accepted.  The  judge  found  it
    significant that not only  did  the  appellant  fail  to  disclose  his
    present account, but that he positively put forward what he now  claims
    to be a false account of being well-treated and did so consistently  to
    the Home Office, to his legal representatives,  and  before  the  Crown
    Court. The judge was entitled to point out  that  this  aspect  of  the
    appellant's case, his ability to put forward a consistent but allegedly
    false account, was  inconsistent  with  the  expert  opinion  that  his
    treatment  impacted  his  mental  health  and  thus  his   ability   to
    concentrate and focus in interview and that this feature had  not  been
    addressed by the expert. Neither were the inconsistencies addressed  in
    the expert evidence. Ms Bashow stated that this was because the  expert
    had not been asked to comment on that issue, but that is not the  fault
    of the judge; she had to take the evidence as it was.

19. In Durueke (PTA: AZ applied, proper approach) [2018] UKUT 00197  (IAC),
    the Upper Tribunal held that "permission should only be granted on  the
    basis that the judge who decided the appeal gave insufficient weight to
    a particular aspect of the case if it can properly be said  that  as  a
    consequence the judge who decided  the  appeal  has  arguably  made  an
    irrational decision." Further, "Particular care should be taken  before
    granting permission on the ground that the judge who decided the appeal
    did not  "sufficiently  consider"  or  "sufficiently  analyse"  certain
    evidence or certain aspects of a case. Such complaints often  turn  out
    to be mere disagreements with the reasoning of the  judge  who  decided
    the appeal because the implication is that the  evidence  or  point  in
    question was considered by the judge who decided the appeal but not  to
    the  extent  desired  by  the  author  of  the  grounds  or  the  judge
    considering the application for permission." I find that in large part,
    at least, the grounds pleaded in this case are disagreements.

20. Whilst the expert country evidence may suggest that  many  elements  of
    the  appellant's  factual  claim  are  consistent  with   the   country
    background information and therefore  plausible,  and  whilst  this  is
    obviously relevant to the credibility assessment, that does not require
    the judge to accept the account. The task of the judge  was  to  assess
    whether in the round the claim was credible to the  lower  standard  of
    proof. In doing so, it is clear from the decision that the  judge  took
    the expert evidence and the plausibility  of  the  appellant's  factual
    claim into account. However, the judge set out several factors that she
    concluded were inconsistent with the claim. The judge was  entitled  to
    reach a  different  view  of  the  evidence.  Nothing  in  the  grounds
    demonstrates that the judge's  approach  was  fundamentally  flawed  or
    irrational. On the evidence and for the reasons given,  the  judge  was
    entitled to reach the  ultimate  conclusion  that  the  claim  was  not
    credible. In effect, the ground is an elaborate disagreement  with  the
    conclusion reached.

21. Ms Bashow also criticised  the  judge's  reliance  on  the  appellant's
    changing account as undermining of his credibility.  It  is  point  out
    that the medico-legal report addressed delayed  disclosure  and  trauma
    may impede ability to recall events  or  answer  questions.  Ms  Bashow
    pointed out that even the CPIN accepted that delayed disclose was to be
    expected in a victim of trafficking. However, on reading  the  decision
    as a whole, I do not accept that the judge ignored or  discounted  this
    evidence. When assessing this evidence in the context of  the  evidence
    as a whole, the judge  pointed  out  that  the  appellant  had  several
    opportunities to present his claim, to the Home Office,  the  NRM,  the
    Courts, but only changed his account after the decision to  deport  him
    was made. Further,  rather  than  having  difficulties  remembering  or
    presenting a consistent account, he was in  fact  able  to  maintain  a
    consistent account on several different recounting of his case with  no
    indication of difficulty in recollection. In those  circumstances,  the
    judge was entitled to limit the weight to be given to the  medico-legal
    report in the overall assessment of the evidence. Adequate  and  cogent
    reasoning has been  provided  for  the  conclusions  reached  that  the
    appellant was not trafficked but made his own way to the UK, even if he
    borrowed money to do so, and was working for wages  rather  than  being
    forced to tend the  cannabis  production  operation.  Once  again,  the
    grounds are a mere disagreement. That assessment of credibility of  the
    account clearly took into account the expert evidence  but,  as  stated
    above, plausibility is not the same as credibility.

22. Ground 3 asserts that in assessing the seriousness of the offence,  the
    judge failed to take into account the whole of the  sentencing  remarks
    and was selective in those parts  relied  on.  However,  in  Budhathoki
    (reasons for decisions) [2014] UKUT 00341  (IAC),  the  Upper  Tribunal
    stated that, "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for  First-tier
    Tribunal judgements to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.
    This leads to judgements becoming overly long and confused and is not a
    proportionate approach to deciding cases. It is, however, necessary for
    judges to identify and  resolve  key  conflicts  in  the  evidence  and
    explain in clear and brief terms their reasons, so that the parties can
    understand why they have won or lost." It was  not  necessary  for  the
    judge to set out the whole  of  the  sentencing  remarks,  or  even  to
    summarise them. At [27] the judge  made  clear  that  she  had  made  a
    careful consideration of the sentencing remarks. The judge was entitled
    to reach the conclusion that the appellant  had  been  convicted  of  a
    serious crime and that he was a danger to the community. The  reasoning
    provided at [27] onwards is cogent and sustainable. The judge was  also
    entitled to take into account when assessing risk  that  the  appellant
    now claims that the  mitigation  made  before  sentencing  presented  a
    deliberately false account to the Crown Court, asserting  that  he  had
    distanced himself from those who brought him to the UK, that he was not
    held prisoner, and that he was well-treated and free to come and go  as
    he  pleased.   In  reality,  this  ground  is  also  no  more  than   a
    disagreement with the decision and an attempt to reargue the appeal.

23. None of the remaining grounds pleaded, most of which either overlap the
    above considerations, or stand or fall with them, are material  to  the
    outcome of the appeal and it is not necessary to address them.

24. It was for the judge to  assess  the  weight  to  be  accorded  to  the
    evidence. It is clear from the decision, for example at [12] where  the
    judge accurately summarised the basis of the appellant's case,  that  a
    holistic approach to the evidence has been taken and  cogent  reasoning
    sustainable on the evidence has been provided. In the circumstances,  I
    find no material error of law in  this  decision  and  the  appellant's
    appeal to the Upper Tribunal must fail.

Notice of Decision

25. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law such that the decision  should
    be set aside.

                    I do not set aside the decision.

                    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal stands  and  the
                    appeal remains dismissed on all grounds.






                    Signed




                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated 10 January 2020
