
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07505/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 1 May 2018                                 |On 08 May 2018                |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE Secretary of State FOR THE Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [M A]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Marwaha, instructed by Terence Ray, Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the respondent and the respondent  as
    the appellant (as they  appeared  respectively  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal).  The appellant, [MA], was born on [ ] 1969 and is  a  female
    citizen of Sudan.  The appellant appealed against the decision  of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse her protection claim dated 30  June  2017.
    The First-tier Tribunal (Judge O'Malley) in a decision  promulgated  on
    27 February 2018, allowed the appeal on asylum grounds.  The  Secretary
    of State now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. The judge did not believe the appellant's account  of  past  events  in
    Sudan.  However, at [81] he found  that,  "the  point  on  which  I  do
    conclude that the appellant meets the lower standard [of proof]  is  on
    her membership  of  the  Bergid  tribe".   The  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had given 'convincing evidence' at  her  interview  with  the
    Secretary of State's officers and he also gave weight to a letter  from
    Omar Dawelbite, Secretary General of the Darfur Union.  The  judge  has
    quoted at length from that letter at [52].  The  judge  relied  on  the
    existing country guidance case of MM  (Darfuris)  Sudan  CG  2015  UKUT
    00010 (IAC) and accordingly concluded that, as a non-Arab Darfuri,  the
    appellant was entitled to refugee status  [82].   The  judge  concluded
    that the appellant had exaggerated her claim and  had  told  "untruths"
    but, given her ethnicity and tribal membership, "her untruths [do  not]
    take her outside the protection of the [Refugee] Convention".

 3. There are two  grounds  of  appeal.   First,  the  Secretary  of  State
    challenges the decision on the basis that the judge refused  to  depart
    from  existing  country  guidance,  notwithstanding  the  existence  of
    evidence (Country Policy  and  Information  Note:  August  2017)  which
    indicated that only non-Arab Darfuris with a political profile remained
    at risk in Sudan.  The Secretary of State acknowledges that  the  judge
    declined to depart from existing country guidance but  argues  that  he
    erred in law by failing to do so.  Secondly,  the  Secretary  of  State
    asserts that the judge was  inconsistent  in  finding  the  appellant's
    account of past events in Sudan to be fabricated whilst  accepting  her
    tribal membership.  The judge should have found that the appellant  had
    never been at risk in Sudan and that she had there  lived  a  "life  of
    relative wealth and comfort".  The Secretary of State also argues  that
    there are a million Darfuris living  in  Khartoum,  a  city  having  an
    overall population of 8,000,000.

 4. Ms Marwaha, for the appellant, submitted that the CIPN of  August  2017
    did not unequivocally conclude that it was safe for  non-Arab  Darfuris
    in Sudan.  Indeed, the note provided little evidence of improvement  in
    circumstances.  Moreover, the sources upon  which  the  CPIN  had  been
    based pre-dated the decision of the Upper Tribunal in MM.  In the light
    of that fact, the judge had been entitled to continue to  rely  on  the
    existing country guidance and not to depart from it.  I agree with that
    submission  and  for  the  reason  given  by  Ms  Marwaha.   Whilst   I
    acknowledge that changing circumstances can render country guidance out
    of date, the First-tier Tribunal Judge must have cogent  reasons  based
    on evidence for departing from it.  There is nothing in the August 2017
    CPIN which would compel a judge to depart from the country guidance  of
    MM whilst I agree with Ms Marwaha that the fact that the CPIN is  based
    on  sources  pre-dating  the  promulgation  of  MM  would   have   been
    significant in influencing the judge's decision not to depart from  the
    country guidance.

 5. As regard the second ground of appeal, I find that the judge has  given
    cogent and clear reasons for finding that the appellant was a member of
    the  Bergid  tribe,  notwithstanding  the  fact  that  she  had   given
    exaggerated and untruthful evidence.  The judge was entitled  to  place
    weight on the letter from Mr Dawelbite and  on  the  extensive  answers
    (see questions 173-191) regarding her ethnicity put to the appellant at
    her asylum interview.  The judge was  not  obliged  to  disbelieve  the
    appellant's claimed ethnicity simply because he  did  not  believe  her
    account of past events.  Indeed, I am  aware  that,  in  a  great  many
    appeals, the Secretary of State accepts the nationality  and  ethnicity
    of an appellant whilst disbelieving every other aspect of  his  or  her
    claim.

 6. In the circumstances, this appeal is dismissed.

Notice of Decision

 7. This appeal is dismissed.

 8. No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                                                         Date  8   May
2018

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane







