
[pic]

UPPER Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07402/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at: Field House                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On: 6 February 2018                  |On: 9 March 2018                     |


                                   Before

                     Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer


                                   Between

                                 vanest [Z]
                       (anonymity direction NOT made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 secretary of state for the home department
                                                                  Respondent


Representation
For the Appellant:     Mr B J Bundock, counsel (instructed by Elder Rahimi
Solicitors)
For the Respondent:    Ms A Brocklesby-Weller, Senior Home Office
                    Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born on [  ]  1991.  She  appeals
      with permission  against  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
      dismissing  her  asylum  and  human  rights  claims  in   a   decision
      promulgated on 27 September 2017. Permission to appeal was limited  to
      the decision relating to the removal of a primary carer of  a  British
      child.

   2. The Judge noted that the appellant's child is a dual citizen  of  Iraq
      and Britain. The appellant arrived in the  UK  in  February  2017.  He
      found that the child's best interests are  to  remain  living  in  the
      family unit, notwithstanding his British citizenship. It would not  be
      contrary to his best interests to return with his family to Iraq [25].
      Further, it would not be unreasonable for the child to  leave  the  UK
      [26].

   3. She was not persuaded that the appellant meets  the  provisions  under
      s.117B (6) of the  2002  Act.  His  removal  would  therefore  not  be
      disproportionate  or  against  the  public  interest  in   maintaining
      effective immigration control [33].

   4. In granting permission to appeal First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Farrelly
      stated that bearing in mind the Zambrano principles, the  respondent's
      guidance on the removal of the primary carer of a British  child;  the
      case law and s.117B(6),  it  is  arguable  that  the  Judge  erred  in
      consideration of this issue.

   5. At the commencement of the hearing, Mr Bundock who did  not  represent
      the appellant  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  informed  the
      Tribunal that on 1 January 2018, the appellant's second child was born
      in the UK. She too is a British citizen.

   6. He submitted that the Judge was required  to  consider,  as  she  did,
      whether it would be reasonable to expect the appellant's British child
      to leave the UK. She failed however to consider and take into  account
      the respondent's IDI - Family Migration: - Appendix FM, s.1.0 b  dated
      August 2015. He referred to paragraph 11.2 of the Guidance.

   7. He submitted that there was a clear obligation on  the  respondent  to
      draw the IDI to the First-tier Tribunal's attention - UB (Sri Lanka) v
      SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 85 at [16-21]. He also referred to  the  decision
      of the Upper Tribunal in SF and Others (Guidance  Guidance  Post  2014
      Act) Albania [2017] UKUT 00120 (IAC).

   8. He submitted that in the circumstances the decision  should  therefore
      be set aside and re-made in accordance with  the  respondent's  policy
      and the relevant authorities.

   9. Ms Brocklesby-Weller submitted that there is  no  compulsion  for  the
      child to leave the UK.

      Assessment

  10. The First-tier Tribunal noted that the appellant is  the  wife  of  an
      unsuccessful asylum seeker who is now a British  citizen.  The  couple
      met and married in Iraq in 2012 and lived together.  They  had  a  son
      born on [ ] 2014.

  11. The family including her husband all live together in the UK and as at
      the date of hearing the appellant was expecting their second child.  I
      was informed that on [ ] 2018 their second child was born in  the  UK.
      She too is a British citizen. The birth certificate relating  to  that
      child was produced.

  12. It is not disputed that the appellant's children and her  husband  are
      British citizens.

  13. The Judge found that the child's parents have  conspired  together  to
      evade immigration control [26]. She went on to  find  that  as  it  is
      reasonable for the child to leave the UK and accordingly the appellant
      did not meet the requirements under s.117B (6) of the  2002  Act.  She
      was not satisfied that the  appellant's  removal  is  disproportionate
      when weighed against the public interest.

  14. Neither  the  appellant's  legal  representative  nor  the  presenting
      officer drew to the attention of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  the
      decision of SF and Others, supra. Nor was her attention drawn  to  the
      IDI to which I have referred.

  15. In accordance with the IDIs, referred to  in  SF,  such  a  case  must
      always be assessed on the basis  that  it  would  be  unreasonable  to
      expect the child to leave the EU with her parents and primary carer.

  16. I have had regard to the guidance as set out and identified at [7]  of
      SF. This is the August 2015 IDI Family Migration Appendix  FM  section
      1.0b.

  17.  At  paragraph  11.2.3  it  states  that  save  in   cases   involving
      criminality, the decision maker must not take a decision  in  relation
      to the parent or primary carer of a British child when "the effect  of
      that decision  is  to  force  the  British  child  to  leave  the  EU,
      regardless of the age of that child." Where a decision to  refuse  the
      application would require a parent or primary carer  to  return  to  a
      country outside the EU, the case must always be assessed on the  basis
      that it would be unreasonable to expect a British child to  leave  the
      EU with that parent or primary carer.

  18. It goes on  to  provide  that  in  such  cases  it  would  usually  be
      appropriate to grant leave to the parent or primary carer,  to  enable
      them to remain in the UK  with  the  child,  provided  that  there  is
      satisfactory  evidence  of   a   genuine   and   subsisting   parental
      relationship. It may, however, be appropriate to refuse to grant leave
      where the conduct of  the  parent  or  primary  carer  gives  rise  to
      consideration of such weight as to justify separation,  if  the  child
      could otherwise stay with another parent or alternative primary  carer
      in the UK or EU. It is finally provided that  in  considering  whether
      refusal may be appropriate the decision maker must consider the impact
      on the child of any separation.

  19. There was no suggestion that the circumstances envisaged in  the  IDIs
      apply to the appellant.

  20. I have also had regard to s.117B(6) of the 2002 Act.  This  recognises
      that in non criminal cases, it will not be proportionate  to  sever  a
      genuine and subsisting relationship between parent and the  qualifying
      child.

  21. In this case both the child and his father were British citizens.  The
      Judge did not consider the Zambrano guidelines. Nor did she assess the
      case under the applicable IDI.  It was not contended  that  there  was
      not a genuine and subsisting parental relationship.

  22. I accordingly find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal  Judge
      involved the making of an error on a point of law. I  accordingly  set
      it aside. As at the date of the appeal this appellant has given  birth
      to a second child who is a British citizen. Both  children  are  still
      very young.

  23. The effect of  the  appellant's  removal  would  likely  be  that  the
      children would be deprived of the genuine enjoyment  of  their  rights
      under Article 20 TFEU, and would be unlawful in  accordance  with  the
      principles in Zambrano.

  24. The appellant's children are British citizens and the appellant enjoys
      a genuine and subsisting relationship with them.

  25. I accordingly consider  whether  in  the  circumstances  it  would  be
      reasonable to expect either child to leave the EU with their mother.

  26. The guidance clearly demonstrates the outcome of the assessment  which
      would have been made by  the  respondent.  Accordingly,  I  take  such
      guidance  into  account  and  apply   it   in   assessing   the   same
      considerations in this appeal: SF at [12].

  27. Having regard to the evidence, I find that it would be unreasonable to
      expect the children to leave the UK.

  28. I accordingly substitute a decision allowing the appellant's appeal.


      Notice of Decision


      Having set aside the decision of the First-tier Tribunal, I substitute
      for it a decision allowing the appellant's appeal. The period of leave
      is to be determined by the respondent.


      Anonymity direction not made.






      Signed                             Dated: 22 February 2018


      Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Mailer









