
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07131/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5 July 2019                       |On 18 July 2019                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANBURY


                                   Between

                                 miss T J M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Draycott of counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr N Bramble, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Introduction

  1. The appellant is a Zimbabwean national.  This is an appeal against the
       decision of First-tier Tribunal (FTT) Judge Lodge on 2 February  2019
       to dismiss her appeal on asylum and human rights grounds.

  2. Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Nightingale  gave  the  appellant
       permission to appeal on 21 May 2019, noting two  particular  failings
       on the part of the judge, namely:

        1) a  failure  to  adjourn  the  appeal  in  order  for  directions
           previously made to be complied with by the respondent;

        2) a failure to have regard to findings that had  been  made  in  a
           decision of Judge Pooler in  2014  when  he  had  dismissed  the
           appellant's appeal against a decision of the  respondent  on  16
           April 2010 to refuse an application for asylum at that time.

  3. The judge may have made factual errors with regard to  the  background
       evidence and applicable case  law.   The  judge  also  arguably  made
       errors of fact in relation to the appellant's siblings and  who  had,
       or had not, visited Zimbabwe given  that  her  siblings  had  British
       citizenship.  The judge  also  considered  that  there  had  been  an
       arguable error in relation to the production of documents which  were
       ordered to be  provided  by  the  respondent.  These  documents  were
       described by the judge as only of "historical interest".  In fact, it
       was arguable that the documents  continued  to  be  highly  material,
       because the appellant had been involved with an  organisation  called
       Zimbabwe Vigil and with the  MDC.  Had  those  documents  been  fully
       considered by the judge, those documents and that background  was  of
       more than historic interest. In fact, it was arguably the  case,  and
       suggested by the appellant, that she was of  continuing  interest  to
       the Zimbabwean authorities.  Permission to appeal was  given  on  all
       grounds by Judge Nightingale.

Background

  4. The background to the current appeal is that the appellant first  came
       to the UK on 20 December 2003 and claimed asylum as long ago as 2010.
        Her asylum claim was refused  on  16  April  2010.   The  subsequent
       appeal before Judge Pooler against that decision was refused and  her
       appeal  rights  became  exhausted  in  2016,  but  she  made  a   new
       application which resulted in a refusal on 8 May 2018  and  that  was
       appealed to the FTT but dismissed by Judge Lodge, following a hearing
       in Birmingham in January 2019.

The hearing

  5.  Before  the  Upper  Tribunal  I  heard  oral  submissions   by   both
       representatives.  Mr Bramble began the hearing by acknowledging  that
       there were material errors in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal
       and his initial view was that the matter needed to be remitted to the
       First-tier Tribunal for a fresh hearing, however he  did  not  accept
       that all the grounds of appeal were made out.   He  identified  those
       grounds which were, effectively, conceded by the  respondent  and  of
       particular concern in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal was the
       extent to which the appellant had been a youth  committee  member  in
       Zimbabwe.  There were also questions about work she  had  done  on  a
       book stall and her sur place activities were "definitely of concern".
        Put in context the appellant may be of interest if  she  returns  to
       Harare Airport.

  6. The appellant's representative, Mr  Draycott,  acknowledged  that  the
       respondent  had  accepted  certain  of  the  findings  were  arguably
       erroneous.  He said that  the  only  way  this  matter  could  safely
       proceed would be to set aside  the  entire  decision  and  remit  the
       matter for a de novo hearing before the  First-tier  Tribunal,  there
       being a clear error of law.

  7. I directed over the lunch adjournment that the parties should consider
       whether it was necessary to set aside the entire decision of the  FTT
       and direct a de novo hearing in that Tribunal or whether in fact  any
       part could be preserved, and fresh findings made, if necessary, as to
       any contentious issues.  I heard further oral submissions  after  the
       luncheon adjournment but was not persuaded that the  requirements  of
       the  Presidential  Practice  Statement  of  25  September  2012  (the
       Practice Statement) for remitting the case to the FTT  were  met  and
       for that reason I decided to find that the decision of that  Tribunal
       contained a material error of law which had to be set aside,  indeed,
       both sides agreed it was material. However, I reserved my decision as
       to ultimate disposal. I indicated I would do so within fourteen  days
       of the hearing.  Mr Draycott invited me to  give  him  permission  to
       make further written submissions disposal, but I  directed  that  any
       such submissions should be received no later 4 PM  on  Wednesday,  10
       July 2019. In fact, a facsimile transmission was received by the  IAC
       at 17.27 on that day but I will waive any breach of the timetable set
       and I will consider those submissions below.

  8. There is one area  of  particular  contention  which  relates  to  the
       conduct of the hearing on the last occasion, but that appears  to  be
       very much contested and without referring the matter to the  judge  I
       am not in a position to know whether that could be made out  or  not.
       As Mr Bramble submitted, in order to decide that issue it may require
       oral evidence from those present at the  hearing  which  would  delay
       matters and increase costs. It seems to me to be  peripheral  in  the
       sense that if there is going to be a  further  hearing  that  hearing
       will determine the key issues in the appeal afresh in  any  event.  I
       was therefore not persuaded by Mr  Draycott  to  separately  consider
       this issue further. The appellant will in  due  course  be  given  an
       opportunity to place all relevant material before the Tribunal.

Disposal

  9. The greater part of the hearing was taken up with  argument  over  the
       correct means of disposal of the appeal. I will now consider  whether
       it is necessary to remit the matter to the FTT or to direct a de novo
       hearing in the Upper Tribunal.

  10.    I refer to the Practice  Statement  of  25  September  2012  which
       provides that:

           "7.2   The Upper Tribunal is likely on  each  such  occasion  to
           proceed to remake the decision, instead of remitting the case to
           the First-tier Tribunal, unless the Upper Tribunal is  satisfied
           that:  (a)the effect of the error has been to  deprive  a  party
           before the First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
           opportunity for that party's case to be put to and considered by
           the First-tier Tribunal; or   (b)the nature  or  extent  of  any
           judicial fact finding  which  is  necessary  in  order  for  the
           decision in the appeal to be remade is such that, having  regard
           to the overriding objective in rule  2,  it  is  appropriate  to
           remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

           7.3     Remaking  rather  than   remitting   will   nevertheless
           constitute the normal approach to determining appeals  where  an
           error of law is found, even if  some  further  fact  finding  is
           necessary."

  11.    The issues in  relation  to  which  the  respondent  conceded  the
       material error was made out  appeared  reasonably  distinct  and  the
       endless cycle of remitting matters to the FTT only for them to return
       for re-hearings, at significant cost to the parties, and cost to  the
       public purse, as well as delaying the  ultimate  outcome,  is  highly
       undesirable. This is reflected in the  Practice  Statement  where  it
       states in paragraph 7.3, to which I have referred, that remaking  the
       decision in the Upper appeal will  constitute  the  "normal  approach
       determining appeals where an error of law  is  found,  even  if  some
       further fact finding is necessary".

  12.    The distinct issues I refer to are:

        1) To fully consider the decision of Judge Pooler and consider  how
           much it impacts on the overall outcome of the case;

        2) To examine the documents that  the  respondent  was  ordered  to
           produce.

  13.    Mr Draycott submitted that his client would be disadvantaged in  a
       subsequent appeal if the matter is to be left in the  Upper  Tribunal
       as she would then need to satisfy the "second appeals" test CPR 52.7.
       However, that is not a proper reason for remitting the matter to  the
       FTT.

  14.    He also submitted that there were procedural irregularities in the
       FTT which prevented his client having  a  fair  hearing.  That  would
       represent a more cogent reason for remitting to the FTT. However,  in
       truth, what he meant was that there  were  documents  that  were  not
       considered. It is not a case of setting aside the entire decision and
       remitting the but actually considering those documents, in my view.

  15.    I am not persuaded that there was anything in the decision of  the
       FTT  which  constituted  an  unfair  hearing.   However,  of  greater
       substance is the assertion that it will be difficult at an  adjourned
       hearing before the Upper Tribunal to identify clearly distinct issues
       which do not impact on the overall assessment of credibility  of  the
       appellant's claim. There is particular force in the submission in the
       final paragraph of  page  2  of  the  written  submissions  that  the
       starting  position  may  include  consideration  of  the  appellant's
       mother's and sister's decisions in the FTT. For present purposes,  it
       is impossible to say how much substance there is in  that  submission
       but there is a risk that the adjourned hearing in the Upper  Tribunal
       will consider it hampered by some of the earlier  findings  and  that
       further delay and expense would be caused by  the  need  to  re-visit
       these matters possibly by adjourning the hearing. There is also  some
       force in the  submission  that  in  adjourned  hearing  will  require
       lengthy oral evidence from the appellant and other witnesses that  is
       perhaps less  suited  to  an  appellate  tribunal  and  a  first-tier
       tribunal. There is little substance in the submission that the  venue
       is of crucial importance, given the excellent  rail  service  between
       London and Birmingham and the fact that the Upper Tribunal  does  sit
       in Birmingham.

  16.    Therefore, although finely balanced I have in the end  decided  it
       is appropriate to remit the matter that the FTT for a de novo hearing
       before a new judge setting aside all the findings. For those  reasons
       it will not be necessary to reach detailed  conclusions  on  all  the
       grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal - suffice it to say  that
       those grounds conceded by the respondent are  sufficient  to  justify
       the setting aside of decision as it contains a material error of law.

Directions

  17.    Accordingly, I have decided to make the following directions:

        1) The Tribunal finds a material error of law so that the  decision
           of the FTT must be set aside;

        2) None of the findings of fact of are to be preserved;

        3) I direct a de novo hearing before any  judge  other  than  Judge
           Lodge in the FTT;

        4) That hearing is preferably to take place in the Birmingham IAC;

        5) All further directions are  to  be  issued  by  Birmingham  IAC,
           unless otherwise advised;

        6) The respondent is directed to produce the documents  ordered  in
           October 2018 by the FTT. Those documents are to be  examined  in
           detail at the new hearing and submissions made on them.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 12 July 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Hanbury
