

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number:  PA/07079/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice   |Decision and Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 17 December 2018                    |On 15 January 2019                |
|                                             |                            |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEKI?


                                   Between

                                    R A O
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms I Sabic of Counsel, instructed by Sutovic and
                    Hartigan Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr D Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

      1. The appellant challenges the determination of  First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Sullivan promulgated on 10 October 2018 dismissing his appeal
         against the respondent's decision of 3 April  2018  to  refuse  his
         claim for protection following the making of a deportation order on
         13 August 2015 (reconsidered and maintained on 22 December 2017).


      2. The appellant is a national of Iraq, born on [~] 1982.  He  arrived
         illegally in November 2009 and a subsequent asylum  application  on
         the basis that he feared terrorists in Iran  because  of  his  past
         service there as a member of the Iraqi National Guard  was  refused
         on 18 December 2009. The appeal against the decision was  dismissed
         in March 2010.


      3. On 21 December  2011  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  rape  and
         received a ten year prison  sentence.  He  put  forward  a  further
         protection claim and that was considered but  refused  on  3  April
         2018.  His appeal was heard at Harmondsworth on 8 October 2018.  He
         argued that he would be at risk on return as he was  a  Sunni  Kurd
         and a former policeman. No  article  8  claim  was  pursued.  Judge
         Sullivan did  not  accept  the  claim  and  dismissed  the  appeal.
         Permission to appeal was sought and granted by First-tier  Tribunal
         Judge Gibb on 1 November 2018.


      4. I have not had sight of a Rule 24 response from  the  Secretary  of
         State.


      5. The matter then came before me on 17 December 2018.


         The Hearing


      6. For the appellant, Ms Sabic submitted that the judge had found that
         the appellant came from the KRI. The issue then arose as  to  where
         he would be returned to. She relied on  her  skeleton  argument  in
         which she focuses on two grounds. The first is  that  there  was  a
         lack of findings on the contact with  and  availability  of  family
         members in Iraq who would be able  to  assist  the  appellant.  She
         argued that despite the finding that the appellant  was  completely
         lacking in credibility, the judge was required to make findings  on
         family support. It is maintained that the findings that  were  made
         are inadequate.

      7. Secondly, Ms Sabic argued that if it were the case that  the  judge
         had adequately found that the appellant had family he would be able
         to contact in Iraq, she had failed to follow country  guidance.  It
         was accepted that by the date of the hearing before the  First-tier
         Tribunal the position as to international flights to  the  IKR  had
         altered from the position at the time AAH [2018] UKUT 212 had  been
         promulgated. In the absence of a voluntary return to the  IKR,  the
         appellant would be removed to Baghdad. As the appellant  maintained
         that he was from Mosul, he would not agree to a return to the  IKR.
         It had not been shown that the appellant would be able to obtain  a
         CSID or any other form of identification if returned  to  Iraq.  If
         this ground was upheld, then the issue  of  relocation  to  Baghdad
         needed to be considered.


      8. In response, Mr Clarke submitted that the grounds had not been made
         out and the determination showed that the appellant had  failed  to
         discharge the low burden upon him.  Both  Judge  Sullivan  and  the
         judge dismissing the earlier appeal had  made  adverse  credibility
         findings. Judge Sullivan had noted that a relative of the appellant
         had recently visited the UK;  the  appellant  could  have  obtained
         assistance from him. A friend had also visited (at 32).  The  judge
         found that the appellant had withheld information about his  family
         (at 31a) and she rejected his claim that his father  was  dead  (at
         31b). Other  matters  were  also  found  to  be  unbelievable.  The
         previous judge had also found that the appellant was from the  IKR.
         Judge Sullivan had no reason to depart from that finding. She found
         that he did have family in Iraq and did not accept that he would be
         unable to obtain a CSID card. Her finding that he  had  family  who
         would be able to assist him is clearly made  and  sustainable.  The
         appellant's former position as  a  policeman  would  also  make  it
         simple, one would imagine, to obtain identification.


      9. With respect to whether the appellant chose to return to the IKR or
         preferred to be forcibly removed to Baghdad,  the  wrong  test  had
         been argued. The test was whether the appellant would be at risk in
         his home area. If  the  appellant  was  prepared  to  obstruct  his
         removal to a safe area, that could not be held to  be  relevant  to
         the assessment otherwise  it  would  encourage  all  appellants  to
         follow that tactic. I was referred to CPIN on CSID cards and  asked
         to find that the judge's findings had been open to her.


     10. Ms Sabic replied.  She  submitted  that  it  was  crucial  for  the
         Tribunal to consider where the appellant would be returned  to.  He
         would only be returnable to a safe area if  he  chose  a  voluntary
         return. Further, it was not  open  to  the  judge  to  depart  from
         country guidance as regards flights and return.  Such  a  departure
         could only be undertaken by the Upper Tribunal.


     11. At the conclusion of the hearing I reserved my determination  which
         I now give with reasons.


         Findings and Conclusions


     12. I have had careful regard to the submissions and all  the  evidence
         before me. On the first point I am satisfied that  the  judge  made
         adequate and sustainable findings.  She  rejected  the  appellant's
         account of having lost touch with his family and/or of  his  family
         having left Iraq. She was entitled to conclude that,  having  found
         the appellant's claim to be a fabrication, he could not be believed
         with respect to his claim about his family. It was  therefore  open
         to her to find that the appellant would be able to turn to them for
         assistance in obtaining identity documents if he  did  not  already
         have them.


     13. With regard to the issue  of  return,  the  judge  found  that  the
         appellant was from the IKR as did the previous Tribunal judge.  She
         found that it would be safe for her to return there.  The  evidence
         before her were that there were international flights to that  area
         and so she was entitled to find that he could be returned there.  I
         have had regard to the submission about voluntary returns but as Mr
         Mills submitted, the test is whether he would be safe in  his  home
         area. I also find merit in his submission that if  appellants  were
         permitted to refuse return to safe  areas  in  favour  of  possibly
         unsafe areas, then that would make a mockery of the asylum system.


     14. In conclusion, therefore,  the  judge  considered  the  appellant's
         claim for protection but found that it had not been made out.


         Decision


     15. The First-tier Tribunal Judge did not make any errors  of  law  and
         the decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


         Anonymity


     16. I continue the anonymity order made by the First-tier Tribunal.


    Signed





       Upper Tribunal Judge

       Date: 4 January 2019






