
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07779/2019

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 21 February 2020                           |On 19 March 2020              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE

                                   Between

                                     HA
                                                                   Appellant
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr Greer, instructed by Parker, Rhodes Hickmotts
solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 1992 and is a male  citizen  of  Iraq.  By  a
    decision dated 1 August  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for  international  protection.  The  appellant
    appealed the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on  3
    October 2019, dismissed the appeal. The  appellant  now  appeals,  with
    permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. I find that the decision of the First-tier Tribunal is flawed by  legal
    error and should be set aside. My reasons for reaching that  conclusion
    are as follows. First, I find that the judge has erred in his treatment
    of  the  appellant's  asylum-seeking  history  (he  travelled  overland
    through Greece  Germany  and  France  and  his  asylum  claim  made  in
    Switzerland was rejected) and in the application of section  8  of  the
    2004 Act. At [14], the  judge  states  that,  'I  do  not  accept  that
    someone, who been forced to leave their homeland at short notice, would
    not seek to obtain asylum at the first available opportunity but coming
    any event, the appellant did not make his way to the UK and  travel  to
    Switzerland instead before returning to France. His  asylum  claim  had
    been rejected in Switzerland but he had not been  returned  to  Iraq  I
    cannot see why he did not then seek asylum in France.'

 3. Section 8(1) provides that:

         In determining whether to believe a statement made by or on  behalf
         of a person who makes an asylum claim or a human  rights  claim,  a
         deciding authority shall take account, as damaging  the  claimant's
         credibility, of any behaviour to which this section applies.

    Section 8(4) provides that;

          This section also applies to  failure  by  the  claimant  to  take
         advantage of a reasonable opportunity to make an  asylum  claim  or
         human rights claim while in a safe country.

    As the judge records [14], the appellant did make  an  application  for
    asylum in Switzerland; the judge was seemingly puzzled only by the fact
    that the appellant, his asylum  application  having  been  rejected  in
    Switzerland, did not then apply for asylum in France. Section 8(4) does
    not apply, therefore, in terms to the circumstances in this appellant's
    case; he was in a safe country (Switzerland) and duly  made  an  asylum
    claim. It  was  immaterial  whether  the  appellant  then  subsequently
    claimed in France or in the United Kingdom. Moreover, I find  that  the
    passage from [14] which I quoted above indicates an opinion so sweeping
    and generalised as to constitute a unsafe basis for the application  of
    the statutory provision and assessment of  credibility  generally.  The
    judge's remark is not confined to the circumstances of  the  appellant;
    rather, he appears  to  believe  that  anyone  forced  to  leave  their
    homeland by persecution would, if he/she were a genuine asylum  seeker,
    seek refuge in the first available country. It is trite law that asylum
    seekers may have many different reasons  for  travelling  through  safe
    countries before eventually making a claim for asylum.  Indeed,  it  is
    difficult to see how any asylum seeker  in  the  United  Kingdom  might
    succeed  in  a  claim  given  that  all  neighbouring   countries   are
    signatories of the Refugee Convention.

 4. Secondly, the judge has attached little weight to  the  inconsistencies
    identified by the respondent in the  appellant's  account  [12].  Other
    than finding 'inconceivable' the appellant's account of a  relationship
    with a woman which her family considered unacceptable,  the  judge  has
    given no reason, other than his application of section 8, for rejecting
    the appellant's account. This is not a case where the judge  has  given
    numerous reasons for rejecting the appellant's credibility and an error
    in the application of section 8  may,  as  a  consequence,  carry  less
    material weight. In this decision,  there  is  the  judge's  section  8
    analysis and little else. Consequently, errors in  that  analysis  loom
    larger.

 5. Thirdly, I find that the judge's rejection of the appellants account of
    his relationship with the woman B is unsatisfactory. The  judge  states
    that he finds that it is inconceivable that, 'in  the  culture  of  the
    appellant describes', the appellant and his girlfriend  would  honestly
    believe that 'their  family  would  accept  their  sexual  relationship
    conducted outside  of  marriage  and  consent  to  their  marriage.'  I
    consider that any reader of the decision would be left puzzled by  this
    statement.  The 'culture the appellant describes' is not particularised
    at all whilst the judge has failed to set out in detail the appellant's
    account of the relationship. In his asylum interview, [Q95 et seq], the
    appellant explains that he and his  girlfriend  had  decided  to  sleep
    together so that the families would have no  option  but  to  let  them
    remain relationship and to marry.  The  Secretary  of  State  found  it
    difficult to accept that the appellant and his girlfriend had  proposed
    marriage  for  a  second  time  notwithstanding  that  members  of  his
    girlfriend's family had threatened to kill the appellant. That  may  be
    an reasonable reaction to the appellant's account  but  the  judge,  by
    conflating his treatment  of  that  account,  has  failed  properly  to
    express the argument. Instead, the judge suggests  that  the  appellant
    and his partner would never rationally have entered a  relationship  at
    all without obtaining the prior consent of their families. I find  that
    the judge's analysis lacks precision  and  has  failed  to  address  in
    proper detail arguable credibility issues arising from the  appellant's
    evidence. Again, given that his findings  at  [15]  together  with  the
    section 8 analysis constitutes the entirety of the  judge's  assessment
    of the evidence, it was important that he  got  those  findings  right;
    unfortunately, I find that he did not.

 6. For the reasons I have given above, I set aside  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There will need to be a new fact-finding  exercise
    de novo. That exercise is better conducted in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to which this appeal is now returned for that Tribunal  to  remake  the
    decision following a hearing. Both parties may  adduce  fresh  evidence
    provided  copies  of  any  documentary  evidence   (including   witness
    statements) are sent to the First-tier Tribunal and to the other  party
    no later than 10 working days prior to the next Tribunal hearing.

    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  is  set  aside.  None  of  the
    findings of fact shall stand. The appeal is returned to the  First-tier
    Tribunal for that Tribunal to remake the decision.


Signed                              Date 17 March 2020

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.








































