
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07593/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 4th April 2019                |On 4th June 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     AND

                                     SA
                         (Anonymity direction made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Diwncyz, Senior Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms S. Rogers, legal representative on behalf of the
appellant


                            DECISION AND REASONS


    Direction Regarding Anonymity -  Rule  14  of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
    Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  Appellant
    is granted anonymity.  No report of these proceedings shall directly or
    indirectly identify her or any member of her  family.   This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.  Failure to comply
    with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision of
    First-tier Tribunal (Judge Cox) ("FtTJ") promulgated on the 7th
    November 2018 allowing her appeal against the decision to refuse her
    human rights claim. Permission to appeal was granted on the 28th
    November 2018.


 2. Whilst the appellant is the Secretary of State, for ease of reference I
    shall refer to the parties as they were before the FtTJ.


Background:


 3. There is a long litigation history to the appeal.  The appellant is a
    citizen of Nigeria. She claims to have entered the UK on the 19th March
    2012 with entry clearance as a visitor with a visa valid until 27th
    July 2012. In or about 2012, the appellant met her partner in the UK.
    He was also a national of Nigeria.  He had applied for asylum, but his
    appeal had been dismissed. Her first child, S, was born in January
    2013.


 4. On 14 April 2014 the appellant claimed asylum. She was considered a
    potential victim of trafficking and it was later accepted that there
    were reasonable grounds that she may be a potential victim of
    trafficking. However, on 25 July 2014 a conclusive decision was made
    that she was not a victim of trafficking. The claim for asylum was
    refused on 25 July 2014. Her second child A was born in October 2014
    and was diagnosed in November 2014 as having the medical condition of
    Sickle Cell Disorder ("SCD").

 5. Her appeal against that decision was dismissed on 5 May 2015 with the
    judge making a number of adverse credibility findings based on
    documentary evidence provided from the appellant and the oral evidence
    given.  Following refusal of permission to appeal by the First tier and
    the Upper Tribunal, she became appeal rights exhausted on 14 August
    2015. She remained in the UK and in December 2015 her third child was
    born.

 6. The appellant submitted further submissions to the Secretary of State
    on 27 June 2016. The basis of the submissions related firstly to a fear
    of return to Nigeria due to trafficking and secondly, as a result of
    her son being diagnosed with sickle cell anaemia whilst in the United
    Kingdom and the potential threat to his life and complications from the
    condition if she were to be returned to Nigeria.

 7. On 4 July 2016 the respondent served a notice of immigration decision,
    together with the detailed reasons for refusal letter refusing her
    claim for international protection and on human rights grounds. An
    appeal was lodged, and the appeal came before the FtT on 16 January
    2017.

The first decision of the FtT

 8. In a decision promulgated on 19 January 2017, the FtT allowed the
    appeal and Articles 3 and 8 of the ECHR. It was recorded at paragraph
    11 of the decision that the appellant had abandoned her asylum and
    humanitarian protection claim and solely sought to rely upon the
    diagnosis and medical condition of her son.

 9. The reasons given by the judge for that decision can be summarised as
    follows:

          1. The appellant's son, A, born in 2014 had been  diagnosed  with
             sickle cell disease. The judge found that his removal from the
             United Kingdom would amount to a breach of Article  3  of  the
             ECHR.


          2. When considering the medical evidence, the  judge  noted  that
             sickle-cell anaemia was a disease   the  child  acquired  from
             both parents and that the treatment and care of the disease in
             Nigeria was "on the high side" for poor people and that as  at
             August 2015, he was taking medication to ensure he could  make
             red blood cells appropriately. The judge found that  he  would
             be at increased risk of infection.  Furthermore,  he  observed
             that sickle-cell  disease  caused  children  to  have  painful
             crises (painful joints, swollen fingers and toes) which  would
             require hospital admission. In May  2015  A  was  admitted  to
             hospital.


          3. The judge placed  weight  on  an  Article  from  the  American
             Journal of preventive  medicine  dated  December  2011,  which
             noted high rates of child mortality being between 50  and  90%
             amongst African children.


          4. The judge  accepted  that  A  was  being  treated  by  medical
             professionals for his  condition  which  was  life-threatening
             with serious complications. The judge found  that  as  he  was
             taking medication to assist his red blood cell production,  he
             remained at an increased risk of infection and that this would
             be more acute in Nigeria as he would  have  no  tolerance  for
             conditions when living there (see [33]). The medical  evidence
             had been unchallenged.


          5. The judge found that A would have limited  access  to  medical
             treatment not only due to cost but also  to  availability  and
             that there would be an increased mortality rate  significantly
             above that in the United Kingdom (see [34]).


          6. The judge applied the decision of R(on the application  of  SQ
             (Pakistan) the Upper Tribunal[2013] EWCA Civ 1251 stating that
             the Article 3 high test of exceptionality  did  not  apply  in
             cases  involving  children  and  that  the  vulnerability   of
             children was also relevant to the scope of the  obligation  of
             the state to protect them from such treatment (see [35]).


          7. The judge also  referred  to  the  decision  of  Paposhvili  v
             Belgium (application number 41738 of 2010).


          8. The judge concluded that on the available evidence that he was
             not satisfied the relevant and appropriate treatment would  be
             available in Nigeria and  that  even  if  such  treatment  and
             medication was available, that it would be inaccessible  to  A
             therefore the appeal must succeed in relation to Article 3.


          9. As to Article 8, the judge reached  the  conclusion  that  the
             best interests of A were to remain in the  United  Kingdom.  A
             lived with his mother and her partner (whose claim for  asylum
             was refused in 2014) and  two  other  siblings.  Thus  it  was
             accepted that private and family life had been established and
             that if the appellant and A (and other  family  members)  were
             required to leave the United Kingdom it would  interfere  with
             their  private  and  family  life  but  that   it   would   be
             disproportionate to remove the  family  given  the  length  of
             residence and  medical treatment. Whilst the judge found  that
             the  appellant  had  made  an  asylum  claim  which  had  been
             "evidentially unreliable" and in which she was found  to  have
             "fabricated evidence",  the  interests  of  A  should  not  be
             prejudiced by the adverse and precarious  immigration  history
             of A's mother (the appellant) or his father, whose  own  claim
             was rejected having been certified as clearly  unfounded  (see
             [39]).


         10. The judge did  not  find  that  any  of  the  public  interest
             considerations at S117B suggested that the decision to  remove
             the appellant, her partner and  children  the  United  Kingdom
             would be lawful and proportionate (see [40]).

10. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and
    FtTJ Davies granted permission on 1 June 2017.


11. The thrust of the grounds challenged the assessment made of the
    evidence.

       . In particular, the finding made that there would be limited access
         to medical treatment due to availability and cost in Nigeria. The
         respondent referred to the letter from Nigeria which was the only
         evidence that the appellant and her partner could not afford the
         treatment and that there was no evidence that the cost of treatment
         would be prohibitive.


       . Furthermore, the evidence confirmed that treatment was available in
         Nigeria. The grounds also challenged the judge's reliance on the
         decision in Paposhvili, which was stated not to be binding on the
         UK courts and that the judge had failed to apply binding authority
         in the form of N v SSHD [2005] UK HL (subsequently affirmed by the
         ECHR in N v UK[2008] 47 EH RR)  and affirmed by the Court of Appeal
         in GS (India) and others v The Secretary of State the Home
         Department [2015] EWCA Civ 40.


       . In respect of the decision of Paposhvili, it was submitted that the
         decision did not turn on the observations made by the court in
         section of the judgement of paragraphs 172 - 193, the turned on the
         fact that the Belgian authorities had failed to carry out "any
         assessment of the risk facing the applicant in the light of the
         information concerning his state of health and the existence of
         appropriate treatment in Georgia" (205).


       . As to Article 8, the judge allowed the appeal on the basis of the
         appellant's and her children's private and family life due to life-
         saving treatment A was being provided and due to the length of
         residence of her and the children (see paragraphs 38-39). It was
         submitted that the judge was in error by relying on illness and
         treatment in isolation to succeed under Article 8 (applying the
         decision in GS (India) at paragraph 86). As this only left her
         length of residence, the particular factual matrix of her having
         entered in 2012, the children being born in 2014, 2015 and 2013,
         and her partner and father the children was also resident in the UK
         following his asylum claim being certified as clearly unfounded,
         did not outweigh the interests of immigration control. The judge in
         this context and failed to apply the provisions of section 117B.

12. The appeal came before Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle on 31 August
    2017. In a decision promulgated on 6 September 2017, Deputy Upper
    Tribunal Judge Doyle found a material error of law and remitted the
    appeal to be reheard by the FtT with no factual findings being
    preserved.


13. The reasons given for finding an error of law are set out at paragraph
    17 onwards. The Deputy Judge found that the FtTJ erred in law by
    dealing with the appeal as if it was the appellant's son's Article 3
    appeal and that the circumstances of her son were only relevant to the
    appellant's Article 8 appeal. He therefore found that the judge was
    wrong to allow the appeal on Article 3 grounds when that was an appeal
    which was not before him. The Deputy Judge also found that the FtTJ had
    failed to take into account the adverse credibility findings made in
    the previous FtT decision where the appellant was found to be an
    incredible and unreliable witness. Against that background, the judge
    was in error by unquestionably accepting her evidence that she had no
    prospects of employment in Nigeria and no family members there. In
    addition, the judge's finding that medical treatment was not available
    or accessible was not safe and that the Article 8 assessment was in
    error by failing to properly apply section 117B public interest
    considerations.

The second decision of the FtT

14. The appeal was then listed a second time before the FtT on 4 October
    2018.


15. In a decision promulgated on 7 November 2018 the FtTJ dismissed the
    appeal on Article 3 grounds but allowed the appeal on Article 8. It
    also appears to be the position that whilst the appellant in the last
    proceedings had not sought to rely upon her asylum claim (based on risk
    of harm from a family relative whom she claimed had trafficked her to
    the UK) had provided further material to support her claim on this
    basis.


16. As to her asylum claim, the judge applied the decision of Devaseelan
    citing the earlier findings of fact made as his starting point. He
    noted that the earlier decision had found that no reliance could be
    placed upon the death certificates" and that there were "discrepancies
    and contradictions within the appellant's account and also that many
    aspects of her account were "implausible". The judge had not accepted
    that her mother and sisters were killed in a road traffic accident nor
    that her aunt had arranged her to come to the UK for the purposes of
    being trafficked. Her claim to be at risk of harm from her aunt and
    associates was rejected. The judge considered the further death
    certificates and an affidavit but observed that the appellant's
    advocate did not seek to go behind the judge's findings and that this
    was an "appropriate concession". The judge therefore concluded that the
    further evidence was not "cogent or credible and I find that I have no
    reason to go behind the judge's findings." He therefore found that she
    was not at risk of serious harm or ill-treatment on return to Nigeria
    and dismissed the asylum appeal.


17. As to Article 3 (based on A's medical condition) the judge noted the
    submission made on behalf of the appellant that if the appellant
    witnessed her son suffering intense pain it would breach her Article 3
    rights. The judge concluded that as A was her dependent, there was an
    issue as to whether his removal would be in breach of Article 3 on
    medical grounds.


18. The medical evidence relating to A was unchallenged and reliance was
    placed on the most recent report (p.61 dated 18/9/18). The judge
    summarised the medical evidence at paragraphs 41 - 44.


19. It was accepted that A suffered from sickle-cell anaemia and that he
    ahd  been hospitalised on approximately five or six occasions, most
    recently January 2018. It was further accepted that A's current daily
    medication was 300 mg of hydroxy carbamide, penicillin and Folic acid.
    Hydroxycarbamide is a type of chemotherapy which is given in low doses
    to try to encourage the body to make less of the sickle red cells and
    to make more of the normal red cells. The evidence stated that A
    required regular blood test to check his full blood count and liver
    function as the hydroxy carbamide could upset the liver. The report
    also stated that A was at an increased risk of infection because of his
    sickle-cell disease and this was because the spleen did not work in
    children who have SCD. Penicillin is taken daily to try and prevent
    infections and Foley acid is taken to ensure that the child's body can
    make enough blood cells. It was also accepted by the presenting officer
    that the background material demonstrated that in Nigeria A would also
    need to take a malaria prophylaxis (p79).

20. No challenge was made by the presenting officer to the appellant's
    evidence that on occasions she had to call an ambulance because a son
    was in so much pain. The most recent incident occurring two months ago
    when the appellant called an ambulance for her son and he was given
    oxygen and pain relief.

21. The following submissions were made on behalf of the appellant:

      i) The withdrawal of treatment significantly increased the risk that
         the appellant would have a crisis episode, and this would give rise
         to a breach of the amended N test.


     ii) A would be exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline
         based on the variable availability of A's medication in Nigeria,
         that the standard of care in Nigeria is generally poor ( an example
         of a person with SCD had to drink saline water lime as no IV tube
         was available; p118), Nigeria did not have an ambulance service and
         thus if he had an episode or crisis than the appellant or partner
         would have to find a way of transporting the child to hospital as a
         matter of urgency and that the cost was prohibitive and that non-
         compliance with the treatment or medication was a serious problem (
         at [45-46]).


    iii) The background material demonstrated that the treatment SCD was
         expensive; such a person would require daily treatment;
         complications can occur which are likely to significantly increase
         the cost of treatment (p79) with the average cost of care per
         hospitalisation per subject Nigeria was a hundred $30 in 2012. The
         cost of drugs that gone up since the recession and reliance was
         placed on a small study undertaken on the financial burden of SCD
         on families in Nigeria in 2014 (pages 93-106) the costs varied
         considerably depending on the nature of the SCD but the study
         suggested that over 20% of the families to spend more than 10% of
         family income on health expenditure and the percentage of income
         increased significantly if the child became ill during the period
         of the study.

22. The FtTJ made the following findings of fact in relation to the Article
    3 claim:

      i) both the appellant and her partner had family in Nigeria to turn to
         for support. In this context the judge took into account the
         earlier findings of fact made which had rejected the appellant's
         evidence that she had no family members. It had been found that the
         appellant had not been truthful about a family circumstances in
         Nigeria. The judge observed that the further documentation that she
         had submitted with the fresh application was flawed and whilst he
         had heard oral evidence of the appellant and her partner, given the
         judge's observations about their credibility, the judge found he
         could attach " little weight to the evidence" and therefore adopted
         the earlier judges findings.


     ii) As to employment, the FtTJ's starting point was the earlier finding
         which rejected the appellants account that both she and her partner
         would be unemployed. The judge considered the more recent evidence
         that the unemployment rate in Nigeria had risen and stood at
         approximately 14.2% of the working population and accepted that
         this was "relatively high" and that the statistic suggested that
         "it is higher still for those aged between 25 and 34". However, the
         judge placed weight on the submission made on behalf of the
         respondent that that meant 85% of the population are in employment
         and that both the appellant and her partner had been educated and
         that her partner had work experience. The judge rejected the
         evidence of the appellant's partner that after his education for a
         period of eight years that he had "done nothing". The judge found
         that that was not credible and that it was possible that he did not
         find permanent employment but that he undertook work during the
         eight-year period in Nigeria and that his failure to be honest
         about simple history damaged the appellant's case. He therefore
         concluded that both would be employed Nigeria but that it was
         likely that their employment would be of a casual nature and may
         not provide financial stability for the family. As such, they would
         be occasions when they would seek support from family or friends
         (ss [49-50].


    iii) The judge accepted that the medical treatment would be costly and
         likely to be a significant expenditure for the family.


     iv) The judge accepted that A had never lived or been to Nigeria. He
         considered the submission that the country conditions, both
         environmentally and socially would be likely to increase the risk
         of infection or an episode. He recorded the background material at
         [53] as follows:


             "a striking feature of the background material is that  it  is
             estimated that only 5% of the children  with  SCD  in  Nigeria
             will live past the age of 10, whilst the UK and the  USA  over
             96% of the children will live beyond the age of 10 (page  76).
             In my view, this is a staggering difference, especially as  it
             is estimated that 2% of all births in Nigeria  are  likely  to
             suffer  from  SCD.  Further,  the  material  demonstrates  the
             mortality rate of SCD is higher than HIV/AIDS."


      v) The judge did not accept the treatment would be likely to be
         withdrawn on returned to Nigeria nor was he satisfied that a would
         not be able to access any treatment but did accept that there would
         be occasions where non-compliance would become an issue (see [54]0.


     vi) The judge also accepted that the likelihood of A having an episode
         is likely to increase which is likely to give rise at the very
         least to him suffering a high level of pain and may give rise to
         more serious complications. However, it could not be established
         when this is likely to occur-A had been hospitalised five or six
         times between May 2015 and January 2018, but hydroxyurea reduces
         the frequency of painful crises (page 66) which was supported by
         the fact that he had not been hospitalised since January 2018.


    vii) It had not been demonstrated that there was a substantial risk of A
         being exposed to a serious, rapid and irreversible decline in his
         state of health resulting in intense suffering or death if the
         family would be returned to Nigeria stop whilst the judge
         considered the special vulnerability of children, he was not
         satisfied that there would be a "substantial risk of the
         appellant's sons health deteriorating in the immediate future" (see
         [57]).


   viii) As the circumstances of A could not give rise to breach Article 3,
         he rejected the submission that a could succeed on the basis that
         watching her son suffer would give rise to breach Article 3. He
         dismissed the appeal on Article 3 grounds.

23. As to Article 8, it was recorded that the presenting officer conceded
    that the appellant may have established a private life in the UK based
    on a length of residence of over six years and that her eldest son was
    now aged five and younger son was receiving healthcare (see [63]).
    Applying the five-stage test in Razgar, he found them to be satisfied
    and therefore was required to consider the issue of proportionality
    (see [66-67].


24. The judge took as his starting point whether the appellant could meet
    the Immigration Rules (applying Hesham Ali v SSHD [201] UKSC paras 39-
    43) but found that neither the appellant or her partner was lawfully in
    the UK and did not meet the definition of partner in Appendix FM. The
    appellants children (including A) were not British citizens and had not
    been resident in the UK for more than seven years. They could not meet
    the requirements under Appendix FM nor under paragraph 276ADE (1) (i)-
    (v) as to private life.


25. However, the judge recorded that both advocates agreed that the only
    relevant requirement under consideration was paragraph 276ADE (vi)
    under which the applicant:
    "is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for less
    than 20 years (discounting any. Imprisonment) but there would be very
    significant obstacles to the applicant's integration into the country
    to which he would have to go if required to leave the UK".

26. The submission made in behalf of the appellant was that she was relying
    on her son's medical condition to demonstrate that there would be very
    significant obstacles to her (my emphasis) integration into Nigeria
    (see [70]).


27. On this issue the judge considered that whilst paragraph 276 ADE (1)
    (vi) did not explicitly state that the public interest is a relevant
    consideration, the Court of Appeal confirmed that the public interest
    is a relevant consideration when considering similar provisions of
    276ADE (1) as confirmed in AM (Pakistan) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 180.
    The judge therefore applied the same reasoning to his consideration of
    paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) and the public interest was a relevant
    factor.


28. The judge then considered the decision of Akhalu (health claim: ECHR
    Article 8)[2013] UKUT 00400 and directed himself that in accordance
    with that decision he must "weigh the appellant (and A's interests)
    against the public interest in ensuring that the limited resources of
    the U.K.'s health service are used to benefit those entitled to it".
    Secondly, in assessing the weight to attach the public interest, he
    noted that the appellant purported to enter the UK as a visitor and has
    remained unlawfully in the UK ever since. She had been a failed asylum
    seeker. Her partner's immigration history was equally poor and thus
    little weight would be attached to the private life the appellant may
    have established in the UK (see S117B (4)). He made the observation
    that "if the issue before me was the appellant's health (assuming at
    the moment that she was suffering from SCD), then I would have had no
    hesitation in dismissing the appeal" (see [74]). However, he concluded
    that the "key factor" in the present case was the appellant's son, A,
    and that whilst his best interests were not paramount, they were a
    primary consideration and he cannot be "blamed for the sins of his
    parents". The judge noted the background material that if he lived in
    Nigeria there would be a high degree of likelihood that he would not
    live beyond the age of 10, and that whilst the appellant and a partner
    may find employment, it would be casual in nature and in light of the
    cost of treatment and the inconsistent availability of treatment in
    Nigeria there was a real risk of "non-compliance" especially
    hydroxyurea.  The judge concluded "in my view this is highly material,
    as the drug significantly reduces the risk of an episode or crises".


29. He therefore concluded at [76]:

         "In my view this is a significant factor in the appellant's  favour
         and go to the heart of the child's physical moral  integrity  under
         Article 8. It also follows that the child is removed from the UK is
         not in his best interests. "

30. The judge then considered the decision in SQ (Pakistan) and AE
    (Algeria) and observe that in both cases the Court of Appeal remitted
    the appeal to the Upper Tribunal for a rehearing on Article 8 grounds
    but that both cases made it clear that it would be "very unusual for a
    case that had not succeeded in Article 3 grounds to succeed on Article
    8 grounds" (at [77]).


31. The judge then gave his final conclusion as follows:

         "78. I have set out above the reasons why are  not  satisfied  that
         there are substantial grounds for believing that the appellant  son
         would face a real  risk  of  being  exposed  to  a  serious,  rapid
         irreversible decline in his state of health  resulting  in  intense
         suffering or death. Nevertheless, I am  satisfied  that  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that the appellant son would face
         a real risk of being exposed to a significant reduction in his life
         expectancy. On balance, I am  satisfied  that  this  outweighs  the
         weighty public interest in the appellant and her  family's  removal
         from the UK.


         79.  Accordingly, I find that there are  significant  obstacles  to
         the appellant's integration into Nigeria and find  that  she  meets
         the requirements of paragraph 276 ADE of the rules."

32. At paragraph [80] the judge then gave consideration to S117B (1) which
    stated that the maintenance of effective immigration control is in the
    public interest. The judge purported to apply that to the conclusion
    that he had reached that the appellant could satisfy paragraph 276ADE
    (1) (vi) to show that there were significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration into Nigeria.


33. The judge stated "in my view effective immigration control includes
    recognising that those individuals who meet the requirements of the
    rules ought to be allowed to enter the UK. Especially as the rules are
    statements of the practice to be followed, which are proved by
    Parliament, and based on the secretary of state policy is to how
    individual rights and Article 8 should be balanced against the
    competing public interests" (paragraph 46 of R(Agyarko)".

34. And at [81] finally concluded;
    "81. On balance, I am satisfied that the proposed interference with the
    appellant and her sons' private life is unnecessary and
    disproportionate. Their rights outweigh the respondent's legitimate
    interest in ensuring economic and social order, whilst maintaining a
    coherent system of immigration control. I attach significant weight to
    my finding that the appellant meets the requirements of 276ADE."

35. He therefore allowed the appeal on human rights grounds.


The appeal before the Upper Tribunal:

36. The Secretary of State sought permission to appeal that decision and
    on 28th November 2018, First-tier Tribunal Judge Hodgkinson granted
    permission.

37. Thus, the appeal came before the Upper Tribunal. I heard submissions
    from each of the advocates; Mr Diwncyz relied on the grounds submitted
    on behalf of the Secretary of State which he stated dealt with all
    matters arising. He did not seek to make any further oral submissions.
    Ms Rogers had not provided any Rule 24 response but made oral
    submissions which I shall incorporate and refer to in my analysis and
    conclusions.


Discussion


38. There is no challenge made in the respondent grounds against the
    judge's assessment of the Article 3 claim. Neither is there any counter
    challenge brought on behalf of the appellant against the dismissal of
    the appeal on Article 3 grounds. However, whilst neither party
    challenges the Article 3 assessment, it is important to take into
    account the judge's reasoning and rejection of the Article 3 claim as
    it is relevant to the Article 8 assessment.


39. The article 3 claim was based solely on the appellant son's medical
    condition and on the premise that as he was her dependent, the judge
    considered that he was duty-bound to consider whether his removal was
    in breach of Articles 3 or 8 (see [36]).

40. I have summarised the judge's findings of fact and assessment of the
    Article 3 issues earlier in this decision.

41. The grounds advanced on behalf of the Secretary of State challenge the
    assessment made on Article 8. They state that the judge failed to apply
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in GS (India) citing paragraph 111
    of the decision, that the disparity medical treatment or the child's
    medical condition "cannot be relied on at all as a factor that sways
    the proportionality exercise in favour of the appellant," and that the
    judge's "key assessment" at [78] where he found that there were
    substantial grounds for believing that the appellant's son would face a
    real risk of being exposed to a significant reduction in his life
    expectancy, and that this outweighed the "weighty public interest in
    the appellant and the family's removal from the UK" demonstrated that
    the judge allowed the appeal solely on the basis of the disparity in
    healthcare/treatment available to the appellant's son on return to
    Nigeria.


42. Furthermore, it was submitted that the sole basis where  the conclusion
    was reached that "there were very significant obstacles to integration"
    under paragraph 276 ADE (vi) focused solely on the disparity in
    healthcare/treatment available to the appellant' son  on return and
    that this was a legal error as it ran contrary to the approach set out
    in AS v SSHD [2017]EWCA Civ 1284 which made reference to a "holistic
    assessment of the appellant circumstances upon return". The grounds go
    on to state that as the focus was solely on the medical treatment
    available to the appellant's son, the judge erred in law by failing to
    take into account the "no obligation to treat" principle outlined in GS
    (India).

43. Ms Rogers on behalf of the appellant submitted that there was no error
    in the judge's approach and that his assessment went beyond the medical
    issues. In her submissions she identified those additional factors at
    [43] that there was evidence that he was required to take the
    medication and at [52] that the appellant's son had never been to
    Nigeria and this was not only relevant to his private life established
    in the UK but also relevant his condition in the country of return both
    environmentally and socially which would be likely to increase the risk
    of infection or an episode. Thus, she submitted that those elements
    took the case beyond Article 3. More significantly, she argued, the
    appellant was a child, and this was a further consideration which would
    have a clear impact on the proportionality balance. At paragraph 75 -
    76, the judge found that the appellant's son's best interests would be
    best served by remaining in the UK.

44. She accepted in her submissions that the appellant's son's health was a
    central issue but submitted that it was not the judge's sole focus and
    that the case went beyond his medical condition.

45. She further submitted that the decision in GS (India) did not involve a
    child and that the decision in SQ (Pakistan) confirmed that the
    threshold to meet for an adult is different to that of a child and that
    this could form part of the proportionality exercise. She therefore
    submitted the judge did not make any error of law in his assessment of
    the Article 8 issues.

46. As to the decision in SL (St Lucia) she submitted that the judge did
    find that there was an additional element, and this was on the basis
    that her son's medical condition was a significant factor and expressly
    considered his life expectancy. The judge took into account the poor
    immigration history of both the appellant and partner but found that
    the child's best interests outweighed those considerations.

47. When asked to identify the "additional elements" she stated that the
    appellant was a child who was born in the UK and that social and
    environmental factors would be relevant notwithstanding the finding of
    fact that treatment would be available in Nigeria and the assessment of
    his best interests.

48. Have carefully considered those submissions in the light of the grounds
    of challenge, the decision of the FtTJ and the evidence that was before
    the Tribunal.

49. The challenge is to the Article 8 assessment. The issue for the judge
    was whether the decision made to remove the appellant (and by
    implication her family members including her children) was unlawful
    under Section 6 of the Human Rights Act. In reaching a conclusion on
    that issue, he was required to take into account the findings of fact
    that he had made on the Article 3 assessment and was required to
    consider whether the appellant, her partner or any of the children
    could meet the Immigration Rules.

50. The judge began his assessment by adopting the well-known five stage
    test in Razgar and it is common ground between the parties that the
    appellant (and children) had established a private life in view of
    their length of residence since 2012 and principally on the basis of
    the appellant's son receiving medical treatment. The judge noted that
    there was a low threshold and the consequences of removal engaged
    Article 8, the decision was in accordance with the law therefore the
    issue was that of proportionality.

51. In my judgement the FtTJ correctly identified the test at [67] as to
    whether a fair balance should be struck between the competing public
    and individual interests involved (see R (Agyarko [2017] UKSC 60). The
    judge also made a self-direction at [68] that the starting point of the
    proportionality balance is whether the appellant met the Immigration
    Rules. At [69] the judge set out why neither the appellant or her
    partner could meet the requirements of the rules; they were not
    lawfully in the UK and could not meet the definition of "partner" under
    Appendix FM. Furthermore, the appellant's children could not meet the
    rules as they were not British citizens and had not been resident in
    the UK for more than seven years. That is plainly correct and reflects
    the Secretary of State's consideration of the Immigration Rules within
    the decision letter.

52. However, it was argued before the FtTJ that the appellant could meet
    the requirements of Paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi) under which the
    applicant:

         "Is aged 18 years or above, has lived continuously in the UK for
         less than 20 years (discounting any period of imprisonment) but
         there would be very significant obstacles to the applicants
         integration into the country to which he would have to go if
         required to leave the UK".

53. The judge therefore considered that paragraph in the context of the
    appellant (who was over 18 years of age) and whether there would be
    very significant obstacles to her integration but did so on the basis
    of her sons' medical condition.


54. I am satisfied that the judge was in error in finding, as he did, that
    paragraph 276ADE was satisfied on the evidence before the FtT.


55. At [79] the judge found that there were "significant obstacles to the
    appellant's integration into Nigeria and she meets the requirements of
    paragraph 276 ADE of the rules" and the reasoning underlying that
    conclusion was that whilst he was not satisfied that the appellant son
    would face a real risk of being exposed to a serious, rapid and
    irreversible decline in his state of health resulting in intense
    suffering or death, he was satisfied that there were substantial
    grounds for believing that her son would face a real risk of being
    exposed to a significant reduction in his life expectancy. The judge
    had earlier taken the view that the public interest was a relevant
    consideration when considering whether paragraph 276 ADE was met. The
    approach taken demonstrates an error of law as there is no requirement
    that the public interest should be taken into account in any assessment
    under paragraph 276ADE, however, that is not material to the outcome.


56. In my judgement, the FtTJ failed to properly take into account the
    earlier findings of fact made when making the Article 3 assessment and
    considering those holistically when reaching a conclusion on the
    issues.

57. The judge had made findings of fact, which have not been challenged by
    the appellant) that the appellant and a partner had retained family
    ties Nigeria; both had close family members in Nigeria who would be
    able to support and provide assistance to them. The judge had expressly
    rejected the adults claims that they would not be able to find
    employment. In this context, the decision letter had made reference to
    the appellants qualifications obtained in the UK and that they would be
    of assistance in re-establishing life in Nigeria.


58. In relation to the medical condition of the appellant's son, the judge
    reached a finding that there was medical treatment not only available
    in Nigeria but also that the appellant would be able to access that
    treatment (see [54]), although whilst he did find that there may be
    occasions when non-compliance was an issue, that the appellant could
    not establish when this was likely to occur. The judge made reference
    to the evidence that her son had been hospitalised five or six times
    between May 2015 and January 2018 but that any crises had been reduced
    because he had been receiving hydroxyurea (see [56]).

59.  Neither advocate made reference to the case law relevant to the issues
    of integration and "very significant obstacles" save that Mr Diwncyz
    relied upon the grounds which cited the decision in AS V SSHD [2017]
    EWCA Civ 1284.


60. In the decision of SSHD v Kamara [2016] EWCA Civ 813,  Lord Justice
    Sales in considering a foreign criminal's "integration" into the
    country where he is to be deported, stated at [14] that the idea
    "integration" calls for a broad evaluative judgment to be made as to
    whether the individual will be enough of an insider in terms of
    understanding how life in the society in that other country is carried
    on and a capacity to participate in it, so as to have a reasonable
    opportunity to be accepted there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day
    basis in that society and to build up within a reasonable time a
    variety of human relationships to give substance to the individual's
    private or family life.

61. The decision relied on in the respondent's grounds, AS v Secretary of
    State the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 1284 at paragraphs 58 and 59
    where, giving the lead judgment, Lord Justice Moylan held:

         "58. I do not consider  that  Mr  Buley's  categorisation  of  some
         factors as "generic" is helpful. Consideration  of  the  issues  of
         obstacles to integration requires  consideration  of  all  relevant
         factors some of which might be described as generic. What Mr  Buley
         identified as "generic" factors, as referred to above, can  clearly
         be relevant to the issue of  whether  there  are  very  significant
         obstacles  to  integration.  They  can  form  part  of  the  "broad
         evaluative  judgment"  as  is  specifically  demonstrated  by   the
         reference in Kamara to "good health" and "capable of working".


         59.  I also reject Mr Buley's submission  that,  following  Kamara,
         whether someone is "enough of an insider" is to  be  determined  by
         reference to their ties or links to the country. This  is  to  turn
         what Sales LJ said in Kamara into just the sort of gloss  which  he
         expressly warned against. It is  clear,  to  repeat,  that  generic
         factors  can  be  of  significance  and  can  clearly  support  the
         conclusion that the person  will  not  encounter  very  significant
         obstacles to integration."

62. In Treebhawon [2017] UKUT 00013 (IAC) the Tribunal found that mere
    hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles, mere upheaval and mere
    inconvenience, even where multiplied, are unlikely to satisfy the test
    of very significant obstacles.

63.  That decision was the subject of further discussion in the decision of
    Parveen v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ as follows:

          1. Since the grant of permission this Court has had  occasion  to
             consider the meaning of the phrase "very significant obstacles
             to integration", not in fact in paragraph 276ADE (1) (vi)  but
             as it appears in paragraph 399A of the Immigration  Rules  and
             in section 117C (4) of the Nationality Immigration and  Asylum
             Act  2002,  which  relate  to  the  deportation   of   foreign
             criminals. In  Kamara  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2016] EWCA Civ 813, [2016] 4  WLR  152,  Sales  LJ
             said, at para. 14 of his judgment:


                  "In  my  view,  the  concept  of  a   foreign   criminal's
                  'integration' into the country to  which  it  is  proposed
                  that he be deported ... is a broad one. It is not confined
                  to the mere ability to find a job or to sustain life while
                  living in the other country.  It  is  not  appropriate  to
                  treat the statutory language as subject to some gloss  and
                  it will usually be sufficient  for  a  court  or  tribunal
                  simply to direct itself in the terms that  Parliament  has
                  chosen to use. The idea of 'integration' calls for a broad
                  evaluative  judgment  to  be  made  as  to   whether   the
                  individual will be  enough  of  an  insider  in  terms  of
                  understanding how  life  in  the  society  in  that  other
                  country is carried on and a capacity to participate in it,
                  so as to have a  reasonable  opportunity  to  be  accepted
                  there, to be able to operate on a day-to-day basis in that
                  society and to build up within a reasonable time a variety
                  of  human  relationships  to   give   substance   to   the
                  individual's private or family life."


          1. That passage focuses more on the concept of  integration  than
             on what is meant by "very significant obstacles".  The  latter
             point was recently addressed by the Upper Tribunal  (McCloskey
             J and UTJ Francis) in Treebhawon v Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department [2017] UKUT 13  (IAC).  At  para.  37  of  its
             judgment the UT said:


                  "The other limb of the test, 'very significant obstacles',
                  erects a self-evidently elevated threshold, such that mere
                  hardship, mere difficulty, mere hurdles and mere  upheaval
                  or inconvenience, even where multiplied, will generally be
                  insufficient in this context."


             I have to say that I do not find that a very useful  gloss  on
             the words of the rule. It is fair enough to observe  that  the
             words "very significant" connote an "elevated" threshold,  and
             I have no difficulty with the observation that the  test  will
             not be met by "mere inconvenience or upheaval". But I  am  not
             sure  that  saying  that  "mere"  hardship  or  difficulty  or
             hurdles, even if multiplied, will not "generally" suffice adds
             anything of substance. The task of the Secretary of State,  or
             the Tribunal, in any  given  case  is  simply  to  assess  the
             obstacles to integration relied on, whether  characterised  as
             hardship or difficulty or anything else, and to decide whether
             they regard them as "very significant".

64. When applied to the factual circumstances of this appeal, the judge
    plainly did not carry out a holistic assessment because had he done so,
    and on the basis of the findings of fact made he would not have reached
    the conclusion that there were very significant obstacles to the
    appellant integration given her prior length of residence, the
    retention of linguistic and cultural ties, which were not in issue,
    that she had remaining close family members in Nigeria, that she had
    previously been educated there as had her partner and that she could re-
    establish life there by undertaking employment.


65. In the light of those findings of fact which were not taken into
    account by the judge, I do not accept the submission that the finding
    it [78] which made reference to the appellant's sons life expectancy
    could by itself meet the test of whether there were "very significant
    obstacles" to the appellant's integration given that the judge had also
    expressly found that there was treatment available to the appellant's
    son, and the same medication that he was taking United Kingdom would be
    available and that he would be able to access that treatment.


66. I am therefore satisfied that the Secretary of State has demonstrated
    that the judge fell into error in reaching that conclusion.


67. However, it is submitted on behalf of the appellant by Miss Rogers that
    the error was not material to the outcome. I do not accept that
    submission. When reaching his conclusion on proportionality, the FtTJ
    at [80] made reference to "those individuals who meet the requirements
    of the rules ought to be allowed to enter the UK (or in this case
    remain in the UK) and at [81] concluded that in considering the balance
    of proportionality that the judge stated that he  "attached significant
    weight" to his finding that the appellant meets the requirements of 276
    ADE." Therefore, as he attached significant weight to this in the
    proportionality balance, which the appellant cannot meet on the
    evidence that was before the judge, his overall assessment of
    proportionality was flawed.


68. I therefore set aside the decision.

The re-making of the decision:

69.  Ms Rogers on behalf of the  appellant  did  not  seek  to  submit  any
    further  evidence  on  behalf  of  the   appellant   given   that   the
    circumstances had  not  changed  for  the  appellant,  her  partner  or
    importantly her son and his medical condition. She  confirmed  that  he
    was receiving the same care as set out in the report at page 61-62  and
    that there had been no further admission to hospital (the last  one  in
    January 2018 as referred to by the FtTJ). Mr Diwnycz on behalf  of  the
    respondent agreed with Ms Rogers that it  was  not  necessary  for  any
    further evidence to be provided and that the Tribunal had before it all
    the relevant evidence to re-make the decision.


70. I therefore heard submission from the advocates. Mr Diwncyz  relied  on
    the decision letter which made reference to the  medical  condition  of
    the appellant son and the country background material  which  supported
    the  respondent  submission  (and  the  judge's  finding)  as  to   the
    availability of medical treatment in Nigeria for sufferers of  SCD.  In
    the light of the findings of fact made, he submitted that  even  taking
    into account that the appellant's son is a minor child that it had  not
    been demonstrated that they were any compelling circumstances  or  that
    it would be unjustifiably harsh for the family to return to Nigeria.

71. Ms Rogers on behalf of the appellant relied upon the evidence that  had
    been provided before the FtTJ  as  outlined  in  his  determination  at
    paragraph 8 and the bundle of documentation which contained the updated
    medical report and background material.

72. She submitted that whilst  there  was  no  challenge  to  the  decision
    reached on Article 3 grounds,  that  the  additional  factor  that  was
    relevant in the Article 8 assessment was that the appellant's son was a
    child and that the decisions in SL(St Lucia) and GJ  (India)  were  not
    considering the circumstances of a child.

73. As to whether there were "very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    integration, she sought to rely on her previous submissions. Whilst the
    judge found that they could obtain employment,  this  was  like  to  be
    casual work and the demands from the financial cost  of  the  treatment
    would be likely to impact on the family and the other two children. She
    further submitted that there was no ambulance service and therefore  if
    he needed immediate treatment, he would not be likely to access it  and
    the evidence that related to the percentage of life  expectancy  was  a
    relevant consideration in the proportionality balance.

74. She submitted that when looking at the proportionately balance  in  the
    round, it all centred upon the position of  the  appellants  son  as  a
    child and that whilst he was of a young  age  and  that  it  could  not
    impact on him in the same way as it would as a child of  11  or  12  it
    could possibly be said it was more acute  given  his  age  as  a  young
    child.  She  therefore  submitted   that   notwithstanding   the   poor
    immigration history of the adult family members, as found by the judge,
    the best interests  of  the  child  outweighed  those  public  interest
    considerations and that it would be disproportionate for the removal of
    the appellant and her family members in the light of her son's  medical
    condition.

Article 3

75. In N [2005] UKHL 31  the  court  considered  the  issue  of  Article  3
    specifically in relation to a sufferer of HIV and AIDS.  The  House  of
    Lords established that the threshold in Article 3 cases is high. In  GS
    (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 the court held that a person whose life will
    be drastically shortened by the progress of natural disease if  removed
    to his home state did not fall within the paradigm  of  Article  3.  As
    discussed in the error of law decision the case of Paposhvili v Belgium
    [2017] Imm AR  867  was  considered  by  the  First-tier  Tribunal.  Mr
    Paposhvili's claim was dismissed by the European Court of Human  Rights
    by a majority by reference to the test in N v United Kingdom [2008]  47
    EHRR 39 under which the category of  exceptional  situations  in  which
    Article  3  would  prevent  removal  to  another  country  with  lesser
    standards of healthcare  was  confined  to  "deathbed  cases".  On  the
    evidence at the time Mr Paposhvili was stable and was not  at  imminent
    risk of dying and the court considered that although there were  limits
    on treatment available in the country to which he would be returned the
    appellant was not without resources which might help.

76. The Court of Appeal in SL (St Lucia) v Secretary of State for the  Home
    Department [2018] EWCA Civ 1894 considered the  subsequent  progression
    of the jurisprudence as follows:

         "21. The application was referred to the Grand Chamber. The  effect
             of its judgment was considered by this court in AM  (Zimbabwe)
             v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2018]  EWCA  Civ
             64. First, of course, the court emphasised that  the  position
             in domestic law was authoritatively settled in favour  of  the
             criteria in N.  In  N  v  Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
             Department [2005] UKHL 31; 2005 2 AC 296, the House  of  Lords
             case which was endorsed by the European  Court.  But,  in  any
             event, in AM (Zimbabwe) Sales LJ (with whom Patten  LJ  and  I
             agreed) considered  that,  in  substantive  terms,  Paposhvili
             'only  intended  to  make  a  very  modest  extension  of  the
             protection under Article 3 in medical cases'" (see  [39]).  He
             said (at [28]);

                  'So far as the ECtHR and  the  [ECHR]  are  concerned  the
                  protection of Article 3 against removal in  medical  cases
                  is now not confined  to  deathbed  cases  where  death  is
                  already imminent when the applicant  is  in  the  removing
                  country. It extends to cases where '  substantial  grounds
                  have  been  shown  for  believing  that  [the  applicant],
                  although not at imminent risk of dying, would face a  real
                  risk on account of the absence of appropriate treatment in
                  the receiving country or lack of access to such treatment,
                  of being exposed to  a  serious,  rapid  and  irreversible
                  decline in his or her state of health resulting in intense
                  suffering  or  to  a   significant   reduction   in   life
                  expectancy' (paragraph 183). This means  cases  where  the
                  applicant  faces  a  real  risk  of  rapidly  experiencing
                  intense suffering (i.e. to the Article 3 standard) in  the
                  receiving state because of  their  illness  and  the  non-
                  availability there of treatment which is available to them
                  in the removing state or faces a real risk of death within
                  a short time in the receiving state for the  same  reason.
                  In other words, the boundary of Article 3  protection  has
                  been shifted from being defined by imminence of  death  in
                  the remaining state (even  with  the  treatment  available
                  there) to being defined  by  the  imminence  (i.e.  likely
                  'rapid' experience) of intense suffering or death  in  the
                  receiving state, which may only occur because of the  non-
                  availability in that stage  of  the  treatment  which  had
                  previously been available in the removing state".

77. There has therefore been only a 'modest extension' to  the  test,  from
    imminence of death in the removing state even  with  treatment  to  the
    imminence  of  intense  suffering  or  death  in  the  receiving  state
    occurring because of the lack of treatment previously available in  the
    removing state.

78. The FtTJ did not find that the appellant's son's circumstances (medical
    condition) gave rise to a breach of Article 3 for the  reasons  he  set
    out at [54]-[59]. There has been no challenge  to  that  assessment  by
    either party  and  the  findings  made  by  the  judge  and  summarised
    previously remain preserved.

79. In essence, the issue therefore relates to Article 8. The basis of  the
    Article 8 claim is that that there are very  significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration to  Nigeria  based  on  her  son's  medical
    condition  and  thus  it  would  be  disproportionate  to  remove   the
    appellant, her son and other family members.

80. I have considered and applied the five-stage test set out in Razgar.  I
    remind myself of what was said in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40, that a
    person whose life will be drastically  shortened  by  the  progress  of
    natural diseases if removed to his home country did not fall within the
    paradigm of Article 3. The court went on to hold that if the Article  3
    claim failed, Article 8 could not  prosper  without  some  separate  or
    additional factual element which brought the case within the Article  8
    paradigm. The core value protected by Article 8 is quality of life  and
    not its continuance. That meant that a specific case must be considered
    under Article 8.

81. I must identify whether Article 8 is  engaged  in  respect  of  private
    life, it not being contended that it was engaged in respect  of  family
    life. In the light of the agreement of the  advocates  before  the  FtT
    that Article 8 was engaged on the basis of the  appellant's  length  of
    residence in the UK since her entry in 2012 and that  of  her  partner.
    There is little evidence as to the nature of their private life and  it
    did not form part of the FtTJ assessment nor in the submissions made to
    the Upper Tribunal. In so far as the evidence in the witness statements
    refer to involvements with the church  and  friendships  made,  as  the
    respondent submits, those aspects of her private life can be maintained
    from Nigeria.  What is relied upon is the private life  established  in
    the UK by the appellant's son in the context of his  medical  condition
    and the treatment he receives in the UK.

82. There is no challenge to the medical reports filed in relation  to  the
    appellant's son. As set out in those documents, the appellants son  was
    born in October 2014 and by November of that year he was  diagnosed  as
    suffering from sickle-cell disease ("SCD"). This is commonest inherited
    disorder of haemoglobin in children resulting from the  inheritance  of
    abnormal haemoglobin genes from both parents. The  background  material
    estimates that between and 50,000 and 300,000 children are  born  every
    year with the condition in Africa. Nigeria  is  the  country  with  the
    highest burden of disease where 2% of all new-borns are born  with  the
    disorder (see p94 AB).

83.  The course of the disease varies widely with some children  exhibiting
    severe  manifestations   requiring   frequent   hospital   visits   and
    admissions. In the case of the appellant's son he has been admitted  to
    hospital. The FtTJ made reference to the  number  of  admissions  being
    between 5 to 6 times between May 2015 and January 2018.  The  documents
    make reference to an admission in May 2015 where he was examined before
    being discharged and given medication Amoxicillin (Annex E). Thereafter
    he was admitted in March 2016 and diagnosed with  viral  URTI  and  was
    sent home with no follow-up care required. There was also admission  in
    April 2016 and was discharged with medication  being  taken.  The  most
    recent medical report (page 61) written by the consultant haematologist
    makes reference to the most recent admission in January  2018  when  he
    had a chest infection and aplastic crisis (he stop  making  red  cells)
    and as a result of that began on hydroxyl carbamide treatment to reduce
    the likelihood of any such further events in the future. That treatment
    is a type of chemotherapy given in low doses which is supplied  by  the
    hospital and is monitored. He therefore requires blood tests  to  check
    the blood count and liver function.


84. The medical evidence is accepted by the FtTJ  also  made  reference  to
    being at an increased risk of infection because  of  SCD  therefore  he
    needs to take daily penicillin as well  as  antibiotic  prophylaxis  to
    prevent infection and also takes folic acid. His current medication  is
    set out at page 61.


85. It is also accepted that the background material demonstrates  that  in
    Nigeria the appellant's son will also need to take Proguanil which is a
    malaria prophylaxis (see page 79).


86. Ms Rogers confirmed that there had been no change in his  circumstances
    since the report at page 61  and  significantly  that  he  had  had  no
    further crises or admission since that identified in January 2018.


87. The material before the  FtTJ  demonstrated  that  the  medication  and
    treatment required for SCD  was  available  in  Nigeria.  The  decision
    letter set out excerpts  from  the  country  information  and  guidance
    Nigeria: medical and healthcare issues (May2 2015) at paragraph  2.11.1
    which demonstrated that there was inpatient and outpatient treatment by
    a paediatric haematologist, blood transfusions were available, clinical
    admissions in the case of SC crisis and antibiotic therapy.  The  folic
    acid and hydrocarbomide necessary for prevention of sickle cell  crises
    were available in Nigeria.


88. It was submitted  on  behalf  of  the  appellant  that  the  background
    material demonstrates the availability of the medication Nigeria varied
    (see page 67 of the bundle). However as noted by the judge, that relied
    on a chart published in 2013 and did not include information in respect
    of the appellant's home state but showed that there was availability of
    medication including Hydroxyurea  across  Nigeria  including  the  main
    cities.


89. No reference was made to the material  set  out  at  page  110  of  the
    appellant's bundle. This was a research article concerning prescription
    audit in a paediatric sickle-cell clinic  in  south-west  Nigeria.  The
    article assessed the pattern of drug prescription in children with  SCD
    attending paediatric outpatient clinics. It concluded that there was  a
    high rate of antibiotic prescription, a low use  of  opioid  analgesics
    and non-prescription of penicillin. However, the use of Hydroxyurea had
    contributed significantly to the reduction in morbidity  and  mortality
    in the quality-of-life patients with SCD.


90. Ms Rogers submitted that Nigeria did not have an ambulance service. The
    judge made no specific finding in relation to this submission at  [46].
    However, given that there must be a large  number  of  incidents  which
    require urgent hospitalisation by members of the population in Nigeria,
    the absence of an ambulance service  does  not  demonstrate  that  such
    treatment cannot be achieved.
91. I would accept that the evidence is broadly consistent that the medical
    treatment is expensive but as the material sets out (pages  93  -  106)
    the cost varies considerably depending on the nature of the SCD.


92. The FtTJ accepted that the likelihood of the appellant's son having  an
    episode  is  likely  to  increase  but  that  the  appellant  had   not
    established when this is  likely  to  occur.  Given  the  treatment  of
    hydroxyurea which reduces the frequency of  painful  crises,  this  has
    meant that the appellant's son has not had  an  episode  since  January
    2018. This treatment  is  available  in  Nigeria  and  forms  the  main
    component of preventative medication (see page 110).


93. The issue of life expectancy was raised  on  the  evidence  before  the
    FtTJ. He made reference to the "striking  feature"  of  the  background
    material in which it was estimated that only 5% of  the  children  with
    SCD Nigeria will live past the age of 10, whilst in the UK and the  USA
    over 96% of the children will live beyond the age of 10. The judge made
    reference to this as a "striking feature" and  it  was  this  which  he
    found to be the "key factor" (see [53] and [75]. That evidence was  set
    out at page 76 on the bundle and it was the evidence  which  the  judge
    based his conclusions on and was the central reason for  his  decision.
    The evidence reads as follows:

         "But with good medical care, people with SCD can live to  adulthood
         but with a decreased life expectancy. Although there is  no  recent
         data on sickle cell disorder in Nigeria, it is estimated that  only
         5% of the children with SCD live past the age  of  10  in  Nigeria,
         compared to over 96% surviving into adulthood in the United Kingdom
         and the United States."

94.  The source of that "background evidence" was a  newspaper  article  in
    the "Vanguard". There was no information before  the  FtTJ  as  to  the
    source information for the conclusion in that  newspaper  article  that
    only 5% of children live beyond the age of  10.  There  was  no  source
    documentation referred to in that article to  support  that  assertion.
    Furthermore, within the same document is referred to there being  "  no
    recent data" to even support the estimate given.


95. I would accept that the general thrust of the material  suggests  there
    is a high rate of child mortality, but the evidence does not  establish
    what that is in terms of years nor does it support the  statement  made
    in the newspaper article, which can,  in  the  circumstances,  only  be
    given little weight.


96. There is also other relevant evidence. At page 14  of  the  appellant's
    bundle, the doctor was asked to provide a prognosis but was not able to
    do so as it was not possible to predict with a child as  young  as  the
    appellant's son. It made reference to there being limited data  on  SCD
    and survival from within Africa and this is consistent with  the  other
    material in the bundle that there is lack of reliable data  and  up  to
    date information. Reference is made to a study in Benin and that it was
    possible to reduce the mortality rate  (see  page  44).  That  material
    demonstrates that because the data is of some  age,  it  does  not  she
    light on how the burden of SCD mortality might have changed  over  time
    based on medical care and that public health  had  improved,  including
    the use of hydroxyurea.

97. As set out by the FtTJ, given the low threshold Article  8  is  engaged
    and I  am  further  satisfied,  given  that  low  threshold,  that  the
    respondent's decision may interfere with the private  life  established
    in the UK. Such decision is in accordance with the law as the appellant
    cannot meet the requirements of the Immigration Rules and  is  for  the
    legitimate purpose of the maintenance of immigration control.

98. There is no ground of appeal  in  respect  of  the  Immigration  Rules.
    However, I have considered the appellant's appeal through the prism  of
    the Immigration Rules. Appendix FM was not pursued  by  the  appellant.
    For the reasons set out in the decision letter, the appellant  nor  her
    partner could meet the requirements  of  Appendix  FM  either  as  a  "
    partner" or as a " parent" in the light of  the  factual  circumstances
    that none  of  the  members  of  the  appellant's  family  are  British
    Citizens, are settled or  in  the  case  of  the  children,  have  been
    resident in the UK for 7 years.

99.  In respect of paragraph 276ADE(1)(vi), although  Mr  Diwncyz  accepted
    that in considering whether there were very  significant  obstacles  to
    the appellant's integration I had to consider all the factors including
    the appellant's son's health, it is the  respondent's  submission  that
    all the factors referred to  in  the  decision  letter,  including  the
    appellant's  extended  family  in   Nigeria,  and  her  contacts  there
    together with the  evidence  that  there  was  treatment  available  in
    Nigeria for the appellant's son, did not suggest that  there  would  be
    very significant obstacles.

100. Ms Rogers submits that the test is  satisfied  and  highlights  various
    factors in her submissions; whilst the  judge  found  that  they  could
    obtain employment, this was like to be casual work and the demands from
    the financial cost of the treatment would be likely to  impact  on  the
    family and the other two children. She further submitted that there was
    no ambulance service and therefore if he needed immediate treatment, he
    would not be likely to access it and the evidence that related  to  the
    percentage of life expectancy  was  a  relevant  consideration  in  the
    proportionality balance.

101. I would accept that in considering  the  issue  of  whether  they  were
    "very significant obstacles to the appellant's  integration"  that  her
    sons' medical condition may be a relevant  factor.  However,  I  cannot
    accept that is the only consideration when  considering  paragraph  276
    ADE for the reasons that I set out earlier when reaching the conclusion
    that the judge had erred in law on this issue. By only considering  the
    medical condition, this does not provide the holistic assessment of the
    likely circumstances that the appellant would be facing  on  return  to
    her country of nationality.

102. Even if I accepted that earnings in Nigeria  may  well  be  lower  than
    what might be earned in the UK, there was no  adequate  information  or
    evidence to support the appellant's claim, either before  the  FtTJ  or
    the Upper Tribunal  that her family would be unable to assist both  the
    appellant and her partner in reintegrating including in assisting them,
    if such was necessary, in accessing treatment and/or medication for the
    appellant's son. The adults concerned have lived the majority of  their
    lives in Nigeria and in the light of  the  FtTJ  findings,  have  close
    extended family there, as well as  the  likelihood  of  friends.  I  am
    satisfied, and it was not argued to the  contrary,  that  both  of  the
    adults continue to have social, cultural and family ties there. I  take
    into account that the appellant's son was born in the UK  and  has  not
    visited or lived in Nigeria, but there is no evidence that he would not
    be able to access education or would not be able adapt  to  life  there
    with the support, guidance and assistance of his  parents.  Whilst  the
    submissions made on  behalf  of  the  appellant  rely  on  the  medical
    condition of the appellant's son,  in the light of  the  FtTJ  findings
    that medical treatment is available for him and that the medication  he
    currently is prescribed is also available which he can  access  through
    his  parents(  see  [54]),   I  am  not  satisfied  that  it  has  been
    demonstrated that the  appellant  herself  meets  the  requirements  of
    paragraph 276ADE of the Immigration Rules on the  basis  of  her  sons'
    medical condition  or  on  a  consideration  of  the  relevant  factual
    circumstances set out above. The fact that the appellant does  not,  in
    my assessment, meet  the  requirements  of  the  Immigration  Rules  is
    relevant to my consideration of the appellant's human rights appeal.



103. I now turn to the best interests of the appellant's son.  I have
    applied the general principles when considering the interests of a
    child in the context of an Article 8 evaluation. These have recently
    been summarised by Kitchin LJ in TA (Sri Lanka) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ
    260 at [22] as follows:
    "In particular, the respondent has an overriding obligation to have
    regard to the welfare of a child in the exercise of her various
    statutory functions. The best interests of a child are therefore an
    integral part of the proportionality assessment under Article 8. In
    carrying out that assessment it is important to have a clear idea of a
    child's circumstances and of what is in a child's best interests before
    determining whether those interests are outweighed by the force of
    other considerations. In carrying out that evaluation, the best
    interests of the child must be a primary consideration although not
    necessarily the only primary consideration. It necessarily follows that
    the best interests of a child can be outweighed by the cumulative
    effect of other considerations; but no consideration can be treated as
    inherently more significant than the child's best interests. Ultimately
    the decision maker must carry out a careful examination and evaluation
    of all relevant factors with these principles in mind. The question is
    whether, having regard to the foregoing, there are compelling
    circumstances which justify the grant of leave to remain outside the
    immigration rules."


104. I have considered his best interests in the light of his circumstances
    and in particular his medical condition which I have summarised above.
    In terms of his private life, and on the light of his very young age,
    he has not established a private life beyond that of his parents and
    siblings. Thus, given his young age, his best interests would be to
    remain with his parents, wherever that might be. However, I would
    accept that in the light of his medical condition that his private life
    includes the medical treatment and care he had in the UK. In my
    assessment of the medical evidence, his reduction in life expectancy
    has not been established evidentially although I accept the high rate
    of mortality in general terms. In addressing his best interests in that
    context, I would conclude that it would be in his best interests to
    continue to remain in the UK where he could access all forms of
    treatment and obtain a high level of care. As the respondent submits
    the best interest's assessment is not determinative and is a primary
    consideration and not the only consideration.


105. Proportionality is the "public interest question" within the meaning
    of Part 5A of the 2002 Act apply the public interest considerations at
    section 117B of the Act. These are as follows:

         "(1) The maintenance of effective immigration controls is in the
         public interest.


         (2)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are able
         to speak English, because persons who can speak English-


             (a)  are less of a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (3)  It is in the public interest, and in particular in the
         interests of the economic well-being of the United Kingdom, that
         persons who seek to enter or remain in the United Kingdom are
         financially independent, because such persons-


             (a)  are not a burden on taxpayers, and


             (b)  are better able to integrate into society.


         (4)  Little weight should be given to-


             (a)  a private life, or


             (b)  a relationship formed with a qualifying partner,


         that is established by a person at a time when the person is in the
         United Kingdom unlawfully.


         (5)  Little weight should be given to a private life established by
         a person at a time when the person's immigration status is
         precarious.


         (6)  In the case of a person who is not liable to deportation, the
         public interest does not require the person's removal where-


             (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental
             relationship with a qualifying child, and


             (b)  it would not be reasonable to expect the child to leave
             the United Kingdom."

106. By section 117 A (2) I am obliged to have regard to the  considerations
    listed in section 117B. The  public  interest  in  the  maintenance  of
    effective immigration control is engaged on the  factual  circumstances
    of this appeal. There is no dispute  that  the  adult  appellants  have
    remained in the United Kingdom without leave following  the  expiry  of
    the visit visa in July 2012. Her claim for asylum as  a  potential  VOT
    was rejected and her appeal against that decision was dismissed by  the
    FtT in 2015. She became appeal rights exhausted on 14 August 2015.  Her
    partner also has no leave to remain in the United Kingdom. Against that
    background, little weight should be given to  the  appellant's  private
    life established at a time when her immigration status and those of her
    dependents were either precarious or unlawful (see S117B (4) and  (5)).
    The economic interest is also engaged as there is no evidence that  the
    appellant or her family members are financially independent,  and  they
    are likely to continue to access the publicly funded services of health
    and education. Although the appellant speaks English that  is  no  more
    than a neutral factor.


107. There is no dispute on the factual circumstances that  S117B  (6)  does
    not apply as none of the children are British citizens  nor  have  they
    been resident in the UK for seven years.

108.  In  considering  Article  8  and  the  public  interest  consideration
    applicable in all cases I have  I  have  applied  the  'balance  sheet'
    approach. The Supreme Court in Hesham Ali (Iraq) v Secretary  of  state
    for the Home Department [2016] UKSC 60 SC and R (Agyarko) ;  R  (Ikuga)
    [2017] UKSC 11 confirmed that the question to be determined is  whether
    a fair balance  has  been  struck  using  the  structured  approach  to
    proportionality. I have reminded myself that there are situations where
    private life might be accorded more than little weight.  I  have  taken
    into account as an additional factor, to be weighed in the balance with
    other factors, that the appellant's son, who is a  minor  is  receiving
    medical treatment here in the UK  and  that  it  is  submitted  on  the
    appellant's behalf that his mother seeks to remain on  the  basis  that
    given his condition it would be disproportionate to return  the  family
    unit to Nigeria, their country of nationality.


109. Turning to the final proportionality question  I  have  considered  all
    aspects of the appellant's private  life.  This  includes  his  medical
    conditions of SCD and the high level of treatment that  he  clearly  is
    obtaining in the UK.


110. I am satisfied that any interference with the appellant's private  life
    is proportionate, taking into account as I do in my findings  that  the
    appellant's claims are principally in relation to the circumstances  of
    her son's medical condition. For the reasons I have set out, whilst the
    availability of treatment may not be of a level he is receiving in  the
    UK I am not satisfied it has been established that he will not be  able
    to access treatment which he requires.  I am further satisfied that  on
    the findings of the FtTJ,  that  the  appellant  has  the  support  and
    assistance, both financially and socially, of her partner (who has  not
    leave to remain in the UK) but also has a network of family and friends
    who can assist them if necessary in Nigeria. The FtTJ found  that  both
    the appellant and her partner had the prospects of obtaining employment
    in Nigeria. Whilst he found it likely to be casual employment, that did
    not take in to account the point made in the decision letter  that  the
    appellant had obtained qualifications whilst in the UK  and  that  this
    would assist her in re-establishing the family unit in Nigeria. In  any
    event, as the judge found, the appellant has close  family  members  to
    whom she could derive support which could include financial assistance.

111. As for Article 8, in GS (India) and Ors [ 2015]  EWCA  Civ  40  it  was
    held that if the Article 3 claim failed, Article 8  could  not  prosper
    without some separate or additional factual element which  brought  the
    case within the Article 8 paradigm: the core value protected being  the
    quality of life not its continuance. That meant  that  a  special  case
    must be made under Article 8. Although the UK courts have  declined  to
    state that Article 8 could never be engaged by the health  consequences
    of removal from the UK,  the  circumstances  would  have  to  be  truly
    exceptional before such a breach could be established (per paras  [45],
    [85 - 87] and [106 -111]). Underhill LJ said this: "First, the  absence
    or inadequacy of medical treatment, even life preserving treatment,  in
    the country of return, cannot  be  relied  upon  at  all  as  a  factor
    engaging Article 8: if that is  all  there  is  the  claim  must  fail.
    Secondly, where Article 8 is engaged by other factors,  the  fact  that
    the claimant is receiving medical treatment in this country  which  may
    not be available in the country of  return  may  be  a  factor  in  the
    proportionality exercise; but that  factor  cannot  be  treated  as  by
    itself giving rise to a breach since  that  would  contravene  the  'no
    obligation to treat' principle." [111]


112.  More recently in SL (St Lucia) v SSHD [2018] EWCA Civ 1894  the  Court
    of Appeal commented that they were unpersuaded that Paposhvili had  any
    impact on the approach to Article  8  claims.  An  absence  of  medical
    treatment in the country of return would not of itself  engage  Article
    8. The only relevance would be where that was an additional factor with
    other factors  which  themselves  engaged  Article  8.  Ms  Rogers  has
    identified the "additional factor" as the appellant's son is a minor.

113. Whilst the circumstances of a child may (though not must) more  readily
    engage Article 8(1),  in  assessing  proportionality  and  taking  into
    account as a primary consideration a child's best interests, the public
    interest must be weighed bearing in mind that, even under Article 8 and
    in cases involving children,  the  public  interest  reflected  in  the
    economic wellbeing of the country remains a powerful and weighty factor
    in "health" or "welfare" cases.

114. It is not the case on the particular factual matrix here that there  is
    no available treatment or that the appellant's son would not be able to
    access treatment in Nigeria. Nor has it been established that there  is
    a significant reduction in life expectancy on the evidence  before  the
    Tribunal for the reasons I have set out earlier.



115. In addition, there are other public interest factors  relevant  to  the
    adults concerned which must also weigh in the balance.  They  were  set
    out  in  the  decision  of  the  FtTJ  and  summarised  earlier  in  my
    consideration of the section 117 public interest factors.


116.  Taking  into  account  all  the  evidence,  including   having   fully
    considered the medical evidence relating to  the  appellant's  son  and
    placing weight upon his circumstances as a minor child and the  special
    vulnerability that being a child brings to the Article 8 assessment,  I
    am not satisfied in the round, that  this  amounts  to  exceptional  or
    compelling circumstances or that the refusal of leave would  result  in
    unjustifiably harsh circumstances such that refusal of leave to  remain
    would be disproportionate on the particular facts of this appeal.

Notice of Decision

117. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal contains an error of  law  such
    that it is set aside. I substitute my decision re-making  the  decision
    dismissing the appellant's appeal on all grounds.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify the appellant  or  any  members  of  her  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds


     Date     25/5/2019

     Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds

