
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07473/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                      |Decision and Reasons           |
|On 2 November 2018                        |Promulgated                    |
|and 13 February 2019                      |On 11 March 2019               |
|                                             |                            |
|                                             |                            |


                                   Before

                  DEPUTY JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL CHANA


                                   Between

                                MS M.E. SHALO
                        (no anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms A Swain of Counsel
For the respondent:    Mr I Jarvis, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1. The appellant appeals to the  Upper  Tribunal  against  the  decision  of
   First-tier Judge Nicholls promulgated on  23  July  2018  dismissing  the
   appellant's appeal against the decision of the  respondent  refusing  her
   asylum and humanitarian protection and to  remove  her  from  the  United
   Kingdom pursuant to section 10 of the Immigration and Asylum Act 1999.

2. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge Shimmin  on
   23 August 2018 stating that it was arguable  that  the  First-tier  Judge
   erred when considering the appellant's  surplus  activities  because  the
   Judge appears to have accepted that the  appellant  had  participated  in
   those activities but there was  no  consideration  by  the  Judge  as  to
   whether she would come to the adverse attention of the authorities of  as
   a result.

3. The first-tier  Tribunal  judge  dismissed  the  appellant's  appeal  and
   stated that the appellant claims that she  would  be  at  risk  from  the
   Cameroonian authorities because of her political support  for  the  SCNC.
   She claims that she was an active supporter and as a result was  detained
   on two occasions being subject to regular intimidation and harassment  by
   Cameroon security forces and would be at risk of detention and torture if
   she is return to Cameroon. The Judge did not find the appellant  credible
   and dismissed her claim for asylum and humanitarian protection.

4. In respect of her surplus claim, the Judge stated that the appellant  has
   produced a number of photographs that she says show her participating  in
   demonstrations in the United Kingdom and claims she has been  politically
   active since March 2018. The Judge found that the appellant only  started
   these activities after her asylum claim was lodged. The Judge stated that
   although  the  appellant  can  be  readily  identified  in  some  of  the
   photographs but  found  it  only  shows  a  general  participation,  most
   probably, one day and not in circumstances  where  it  was  claimed  that
   recordings were being taken by staff from the Cameroon embassy. There  is
   no background information before me to show that the Cameroon authorities
   are actively monitoring ordinary protesters in other countries. The Judge
   found that the appellant has not shown that the appellant  activities  in
   the United Kingdom are of such a  weight  that  she  would  constitute  a
   particular target for treatment if she returns to Cameroon.

5. The Judge accepted the appellant participated in a protest in the  United
   Kingdom against the Cameroonian authorities. The Judge was  of  the  view
   that the timing of the  appellant's  participation  in  protests  in  the
   United Kingdom, which was after claim for asylum, was  opportunistic  and
   she would not be at risk from the Cameroonian  authorities  or  become  a
   target.

6. However, I accept the appellant's argument that even if  the  appellant's
   participation is opportunistic,  the  Judge  still  must  still  consider
   whether this would put her at risk on her return to Cameroon. The Judge's
   reasoning in this regard is inadequate.



7. I therefore direct that the appeal be placed before  the  Upper  Tribunal
   for submissions to  be  heard  as  to  whether  the  appellant's  surplus
   activity or activities in the United Kingdom would put the  appellant  at
   risk on her return to Cameroon. There are no findings of fact to be  made
   because I uphold all the other findings of the First-tier Tribunal Judge.













   The renewed hearing



8. At the renewed hearing, the appellant  provided  an  expert  report  from
   Prof Mario I. Aguilar which stated that he prepared  the  report  of  the
   request of Eagles Solicitors. Prof Mario states that he has  "researched"
   on the socio-political and  cultural  institutions  of  Cameroon  in  the
   context of his books on Rwanda, East Africa and the  Democratic  Republic
   of Congo. Therefore, he does not have any expertise on Cameroon  but  had
   to research it on information available in open sources. That  in  itself
   does not make the report inadmissible, but I give  consideration  to  its
   source, in particular its independence, reliability and objectivity.  The
   expert sets out the appellant's claim from the reasons for refusal letter
   and from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and  reaches  his
   conclusions. There  are  very  few  recent  references  and  there  is  a
   reference to a 2005 source. The opinion reads like  a  defence  statement
   where the appellant's explanations are  justified  and  the  respondent's
   reasons in his reasons for refusal letter are  rejected.  It  is  not  an
   independent report and I admit it but place no reliance on it.




9. The senior presenting officer objected to the  admission  of  the  report
   and said that she thought that appeal was on this  discreet  point  about
   the admissibility of the report. The senior presenting  officer  did  not
   have any background evidence to submit but said that there is no  country
   guidance case and very little background evidence  to  show  that  anyone
   returning to Cameroon  would  face  any  difficulty  even  if  they  have
   participated in demonstrations this country.



10. I  have  considered  the  background  evidence  in  the  63-page  bundle
   provided for the renewed hearing. I cannot  conclude  from  the  evidence
   that the appellant who has opportunistically attended a demonstration  in
   this country, in a bid to establish a surplus claim will be  at  risk  on
   her return to Cameroon. She has been found not to be credible  and  claim
   was considered not credible that she suffered any persecution before  she
   left Cameroon. She would not  be  of  any  interest  of  the  Cameroonian
   authorities on her return.



Decision

The           appellant's           appeal           is           dismissed.





Signed by,

A Deputy Judge of the Upper Tribunal
.............................................

Ms                                  S                                  Chana
           Dated this 25th day of February 2019

