
                                    [pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07503/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 4 December 2018                            |On 19 February 2019           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE ESHUN

                                   Between

                                     A A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr M Bhuiyan, Legal Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tuffan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                          DECISION ON ERROR OF LAW


1.   The appellant has  been  granted  permission  to  appeal  the  decision
    dismissing his appeal against the respondent's decision  to  refuse  to
    grant him asylum in the UK.
2.   The appellant's appeal was listed for hearing on  13  July  2018.   The
    appellant did not attend the hearing.  He was represented by Mr Ali who
    applied for an adjournment on  his  behalf.   The  judge  indicated  at
    paragraph 7 that the grounds for the application  were;  firstly,  that
    the appellant had not received the respondent's bundle, secondly,  that
    he had not received the verification report and thirdly, the  appellant
    has been hospitalised, evidence of which will  be  forwarded.   Mr  Ali
    said he had been instructed by his  solicitor/supervisor  to  seek  the
    adjournment.

3.   The judge asked Mr Ali to inform the Tribunal as to when  it  was  that
    the Appellant instructed his firm, to which he replied that he did  not
    know.  The judge said he asked why, since the  appeal  was  lodged  way
    back in June 2018, the appellant had not chased either  the  respondent
    or the Tribunal for a copy of the respondent's bundle, to which Mr  Ali
    replied that he did not know.  The judge said  that  in  response,  the
    Home Office Presenting Officer was willing to offer his  bundle  to  Mr
    Ali for perusal.

4.   The judge then indicated that he was not prepared to adjourn.  On  this
    indication Mr Ali withdrew from the proceedings.

5.   At the hearing before  me  Mr  Bhuiyan  submitted  a  "Confirmation  of
    Attendance" from a Nurse Practitioner stating that the  appellant  had,
    on 13 July 2018, visited the Barkantine Walk-In-Centre,  121  Westferry
    Road, London E14  8JH.   The  Nurse  Practitioner  confirmed  that  the
    appellant attended the walk-in clinic for medical treatment.   She  did
    not indicate what treatment the appellant  had  received.   Mr  Bhuiyan
    also submitted a letter from Dr Anne Nida a GP volunteer at the Doctors
    of the World to the registering GP at East One  Health  in  London  E1.
    The letter which is dated 15 August 2018 stated that the appellant  who
    is an asylum seeker from Bangladesh was seen because he had a knee pain
    with intermittent swelling.  The pain is severe at night and wakes  him
    up twice at night.  Dr Nida said the appellant was  going  to  make  an
    appointment with a GP to discuss investigation and treatment.

6.   I did not find any of the medical evidence satisfactory given that  the
    explanation that Mr Ali gave to the judge was that  the  appellant  had
    been hospitalised and that was why he could not come  to  the  hearing.
    That explanation was inconsistent with the medical  evidence  submitted
    to me.

7.   In any event, I accept Mr Bhuiyan's submission that the judge  did  not
    give a reason for not adjourning the hearing.  I also find that it  was
    not for the appellant to chase the respondent or  the  Tribunal  for  a
    copy  of  the  respondent's  bundle.   In  the  respondent's  Rule  24,
    paragraph  3(iv)  said  that  Home  Office  records   show   that   the
    respondent's bundle was sent to the appellant's representatives and the
    Tribunal on 10 July 2018.  This was rather tight given that the hearing
    was due to take place on  13  July  2018.   Mr  Tuffan  said  that  the
    respondent's bundle is usually sent either by post  or  electronically.
    He was not able to tell me how the respondent's bundle in this case was
    sent to the appellant's representative.

8.   There was also the issue of the DVR (the document verification  report)
    at pages E71 and E72 of  the  respondent's  bundle  which  I  find  the
    appellant would not have had sight of because he did  not  receive  the
    respondent's bundle.  Mr Bhuiyan said that the  DVR  alleged  that  the
    2010 document was not a genuine document.  He said there was a  further
    document which the appellant had submitted dated 2013 for  which  there
    was no DVR.  I told him that this was a matter for the respondent.  The
    appellant could deal with this matter at the hearing.

9.   Despite  the  inadequacy  of  the  medical  notices  submitted  by  the
    appellant, I find that the judge erred  in  law  for  failing  to  give
    reasons for not  adjourning  the  hearing.   The  judge's  decision  to
    proceed with the hearing in the absence of the appellant meant that the
    appellant was deprived of a fair hearing.

10.  Accordingly, the judge's decision cannot stand.  It  is  set  aside  in
    order to be remade.

11.  Mr  Bhuiyan  said  that  the  appellant  will  need  a  Bengali/Sylheti
    interpreter at the remitted hearing.

12.  The appeal is remitted to Hatton Cross for rehearing by a  judge  other
    than First-tier Tribunal Judge Hussain.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 19 December 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Eshun








