
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07781/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 February 2020                  |On 18 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                              SORAN OMAR SALIH
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Schwenk, instructed by Bankfield Heath solicitors

For the Respondent:    Mrs Pettersen, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born on 1 January 1996 and is a male citizen of Iraq.
    He is of Kurdish ethnicity. By a decision  dated  1  August  2019,  the
    Secretary  of   State   refused   the   appellant's   application   for
    international protection. He appealed the First-tier Tribunal which, in
    a decision promulgated on 27 September 2019, dismissed his appeal.  The
    appellant now appeals, with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. Mr Schwenk, who  appeared  for  the  appellant  before  the  First-tier
    Tribunal and at the initial hearing in the  Upper  Tribunal,  submitted
    that there were, in essence, two bases  of  the  appeal  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal. First, the judge had made errors in his fact-finding exercise
    and assessment of credibility. Secondly, confusion over the  home  area
    of the appellant and whether  internal  flight  within  Iraq  would  be
    unduly harsh had led  the  judge  to  a  confused  application  of  the
    relevant country guidance.  The  judge  had  rejected  the  appellant's
    account of past events, found that the appellant still in contact  with
    family members in Iraq who would be able to assist him, before he  left
    the United Kingdom, with  finding  his  CSID  identity  document  or  a
    replacement and who would be able  and  willing  to  provide  him  with
    accommodation and support from their own home within the IKR at Kalar.

 3. At [58], the judge found that the appellant had been 'unable to provide
    any reason that the security forces would be  interested  in  him.'  Mr
    Schwenk submitted that this was a misunderstanding of the evidence.  At
    [34], the judge had recorded the appellant's evidence that he had  been
    questioned by three individuals and had been 'accused of being a  spy.'
    The appellant submits that it was for that reason that security  forces
    were interested in him.

 4. I state at the outset that, in my view, the decision of  the  judge  is
    characterised in many places by what may politely be  described  as  an
    infelicitous use of language. There  are,  at  times,  inaccuracies  in
    expression which admit  more  than  one  possible  interpretation.  The
    question is whether these infelicities amount to an  error  of  law  so
    serious that the decision should be set aside. As  regards  this  first
    challenge, I find that, whilst it is strictly not  the  case  that  the
    appellant failed to provide any reason why the security forces would be
    interested in him, it is absolutely apparent from  a  reading  of  [58]
    that the judge considered that  the  appellant  had  not  provided  any
    credible reason for such interest. In a detailed analysis at [58],  the
    judge highlights an inconsistency in the appellant's  evidence  between
    what he said at his screening interview and in subsequent evidence.  At
    the screening interview,  appellant  said  that  a  militia  group  had
    attacked his town, that he had fought against them and then  run  away.
    He later said that is father had told him that the militia  group  were
    nearby and that the appellant and the family should travel to  the  IKR
    to stay with an uncle. The judge's analysis does not suggest  that  the
    appellant had provided no reason why the security forces would  not  be
    interested in him; the judge found that there was  no  credible  reason
    given the inconsistencies in his evidence.  I  am  well  aware  of  the
    dangers of completing a judge's decision  or  straining  to  clarify  a
    confused analysis. However, I consider in this particular instance that
    the judge's reasoning is tolerably clear.

 5. At [60], the judge observed that the appellant's evidence was  that  he
    been released after 20 days detention, felt unable to go to his uncle's
    house in Kalar, notwithstanding  that  he  would  be  safe  there,  but
    instead exposed himself to the risk of further detention and  harm.  Mr
    Schwenk  submitted  that  the  judge's  conclusion  ('This  is   simply
    incredible') amounted to an assertion rather than a reasoned finding. I
    disagree. It is entirely clear from the preceding analysis of the judge
    did not accept that the appellant would rationally have behaved in  the
    manner  which  he  described.  For  that  reason,  he  found  that  the
    appellant's account of his conduct was not credible.

 6. At [74], the judge has written a single line paragraph;  'I  found  the
    appellant is in fact an economic migrant.' Mr Schwenk  complained  that
    this was another assertion unsupported by reasoning. I agree  that  the
    form of expression employed is unhelpful.  However,  the  comment  does
    follow the judge's thorough analysis of the  appellant's  evidence.  It
    neither adds to nor detracts from that analysis.  The  comment  had  no
    effect on the outcome of the appeal.

 7. At [80], the judge moved  on  to  consider  the  question  of  internal
    flight. At [77], he had observed that the appellant 'emanated from' Tuz
    Khurmatu that time a contested area. He did not consider  it  safe  for
    the appellant to return to Tuz Khurmatu. At [83], judge notes that,  if
    the appellant did not 'emanate from' the IKR that he would be unable to
    return there. However, he found that the appellant last lived  in  Iraq
    in Kalar which both parties agree is  in  the  IKR.  Consequently,  the
    judge found the appellant could be 'return directly' to the IKR.

 8. I acknowledge that this part of the analysis is problematic. The  judge
    appears to find the appellant has two home areas, Tuz Khurmatu and  the
    IKR. Notwithstanding that finding, the judge then appears  to  consider
    whether the appellant might exercise internal flight to the IKR. He has
    not considered whether the appellant has the necessary documentation to
    access the IKR directly from the United Kingdom  or  on  transfer  from
    Baghdad. The judge has  considered  the  question  of  the  appellant's
    possession of a CSID [86]. He finds that the  appellant  has  not  been
    truthful regarding possession of the card and expresses his  view  that
    he is satisfied that the appellant 'can reasonably obtain one,  in  all
    likelihood, by contacting his uncle who may well be  in  possession  of
    the original or replacement from the appellant's  redocumentation  when
    he moved to Kalar and worked for his uncle (sic).' Whilst none of  this
    is very clear ('may well be in possession..' is hardly  an  unequivocal
    finding of fact) any reader of the decision is left in  no  doubt  that
    the judge considers that (1) the  appellant  is  in  contact  with  his
    family who are living in the IKR (2) that his uncle is a  man  of  some
    wealth and influence  who  is  previously  assisted  the  appellant  in
    finding work (3) that the  uncle  or  other  family  members  have  the
    appellant's  identity  card  (or  a  duplicate  generated  during   the
    appellant's time living and working in Kalar) or (4) are in a  position
    to obtain a replacement and to send it to the appellant in  the  United
    Kingdom before he departs for Iraq. The judge  is  well  aware  of  the
    problems which the appellant my face living for any length of  time  in
    Baghdad but he has found that, in possession of his CSID, he would  not
    be exposed to the risk of harm there but would be able to make his  way
    safely to the IKR. Once again, I do not believe that  I  am  completing
    the judge's analysis for him; these are findings which emerge from  the
    sometimes unhappily expressed but detailed analysis which the judge has
    undertaken. I find that, notwithstanding problems with  his  choice  of
    expression, the judge has reached findings as regards  internal  flight
    to the IKR (for that is what it would be given that his  home  area  is
    and remains Tuz Khurmatu) which were open to him on  the  evidence.  In
    consequence, his conclusion that the appellant has failed to  discharge
    the burden of proving that there are substantial grounds for  believing
    that he would be at real risk of serious harm upon return  to  Iraq  is
    also sound. Accordingly, the appeal is dismissed.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal judge did not  anonymize  the  proceedings  and
    there no application for anonymity was made to me.



    Notice of Decision

    This appeal is dismissed.


Signed                              Date 17 March 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane






















