
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07205/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 25 September 2018                        |On 12 October 2018            |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAMBERLAIN

                                   Between

                                     KG
                         (anonymity direction made)

                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:     Ms. A. Nizami, Counsel instructed by Wilsons
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms. A. Fijiwala, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

  1. This is an appeal by the Appellant against the decision  of  First-tier
     Tribunal Judge Cassel, promulgated  on  13  March  2018,  in  which  he
     dismissed the Appellant's appeal against the Respondent's  decision  to
     refuse a grant of asylum.

  2. I have made an anonymity direction continuing that made in  the  First-
     tier Tribunal.

  3. Permission to appeal was granted as follows.

     "It is arguable, as set out within the  grounds  of  appeal,  that  the
     First-tier Tribunal Judge has materially erred in failing  to  consider
     whether or not the appellant came from an area where Coptic  Christians
     will face a real risk of  persecution  or  ill  treatment  contrary  to
     article 3 as set out within paragraph 2 of the head note of MS  (Coptic
     Christians) Egypt CG [2013] UKUT 00611 (IAC).  It is  further  arguable
     that the Judge has failed to properly take account of the  contents  of
     the expert report from  Professor  Joffe  regarding  the  viability  of
     internal relocation.  It is further arguable the Judge  has  failed  to
     make any findings in respect of the evidence from the  Egyptian  lawyer
     Mr A, as to how he came to obtain the documents from  the  police/court
     records system."

  4. Following discussion between myself and the representatives,  I  stated
     that I found the decision involved the making  of  material  errors  of
     law.  I set the decision  aside  and  remitted  it  to  the  First-tier
     Tribunal to be remade.


Error of Law

  5. Ms. Fijiwala stated at the hearing that her submissions were  based  on
     the issue of internal relocation, with reference to  paragraph  (2)  of
     the headnote to MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG.  She accepted that, if
     I were to find an error of law in relation to the findings of fact,  in
     particular the credibility findings, she could not defend the decision,
     and would not be able to argue internal relocation on the basis of  the
     findings of the First-tier Tribunal.


  6. The Judge's conclusions are set out at [24] to [39], but  the  findings
     do not start until [32], and consist of just two paragraphs before  the
     Judge turns to consider section 8 of the 2004 Act from  [34]  to  [36].
     He concludes from [37] to [39] that  the  Appellant's  claim  fails  on
     asylum and humanitarian protection grounds.


  7. Within [32] and [33] there  is  no  consideration  of  the  Appellant's
     account of his treatment in Egypt prior to coming to the United Kingdom
     with reference to any of the background evidence, including the  expert
     report.  Rather in [32] and [33] the Judge finds that  the  Appellant's
     account lacks credibility on account of the finding that he was evasive
     in his responses first regarding contact  with  his  father  [32],  and
     secondly regarding how he came into possession of the originals of  the
     documents [33].  There is no consideration of the  Appellant's  account
     of what happened to him in Egypt prior to coming to the United  Kingdom
     in 2016, nor the expert report which corroborated his  claim.   I  find
     that the Judge's failure  to  consider  the  Appellant's  account  with
     reference to the evidence before him is a material error of law.

  8. At [38] the Judge simply states  in  one  sentence  that  he  does  not
     believe the Appellant's account of his treatment in his home area,  nor
     that he has been  sentenced  in  absentia.   However,  aside  from  his
     finding that the Appellant was not a credible witness based on the  two
     issues set out at [32] and [33], he has not given any reasons for  this
     finding.  This is clearly of relevance to consideration of the case  of
     MS (Coptic Christians) Egypt CG, in particular headnote (2) and whether
     or not the Appellant would be at real  risk  of  persecution  and  ill-
     treatment on account of where he came from.  There has been no detailed
     consideration of headnote (2).  Irrespective of the Judge's findings in
     relation to the Appellant's conviction in absentia, which  is  relevant
     for consideration of paragraph  (3)  of  the  headnote  to  MS  (Coptic
     Christians) Egypt CG, there is a failure to consider the  relevance  of
     where he comes from with reference to paragraph (2).  I find that  this
     is a material error of law.

  9. Further, the finding at [38] that he could internally relocate  is  not
     reasoned, in particular there is no consideration of Professor  Joffe's
     report.  The expert report is relevant both to the Appellant's  account
     of what happened in his home area, and  also  to  internal  relocation.
     There is reference to it at [29], but this is only  with  reference  to
     one aspect of the report.  The Judge does not finding that  the  expert
     report cannot be relied on, but there is no proper consideration of it.
      I find that the failure to consider the  expert  report  when  finding
     that the Appellant could internally relocate is  a  material  error  of
     law.

 10. I have taken account of the Practice Statement dated 10 February  2010,
     paragraph 7.2.  This contemplates that an appeal may be remitted to the
     First-tier Tribunal where the effect of the error has been to deprive a
     party before the  First-tier  Tribunal  of  a  fair  hearing  or  other
     opportunity for the party's case to be put to  and  considered  by  the
     First-tier Tribunal.  Given the nature and extent of  the  fact-finding
     necessary to enable this appeal to be  remade,  having  regard  to  the
     overriding objective, I find that it is appropriate to remit this  case
     to the First-tier Tribunal.

Decision

   11. The decision of the  First-tier  Tribunal  involves  the  making  of
       material errors of law and I set the decision aside.

   12. The appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be re-heard.

   13. The appeal is not to be heard by Judge Cassel.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date 6 October 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chamberlain

