
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07021/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 12 July 2018                      |On 15 October 2018                   |
|                                              |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE SYMES


                                   Between

                                     A A
                            (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:          Mr S Chelvan (for Duncan Lewis Solicitors)
For the Respondent:       Mr N Bramble (Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appeal of AA, a citizen of Bangladesh born  30  June  1989,
    against the decision of the First-tier Tribunal to dismiss  his  appeal
    on asylum grounds on  22  January  2018,  itself  brought  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State of 7 July 2017 to refuse his  asylum
    claim.

 2. The Appellant's claim as summarised by the First-tier  Tribunal  is  as
    follows. He had had a strict upbringing in Bangladesh and was sent to a
    Madrassa, where he was  sexually  abused.  From  puberty  he  began  to
    develop feelings for other boys. Around the age of  15  he  was  caught
    kissing another boy by a classmate, who then complained to  a  teacher,
    who in turn reported the incident to his parents, who beat him. He  was
    subsequently bullied at school. He left education soon afterwards,  and
    kept a low profile until he left Bangladesh.

 3. Following his arrival in the UK he began to express his sexual identity
    more openly, and created profiles on gay dating  websites,  and  met  a
    Hungarian male with whom he had a  sexual  relationship  for  some  six
    months. He met another Bangladeshi man in Basingstoke and  they  stayed
    at each other's places. The relationship ended after six months. He met
    another man with whom he went on holiday to Cornwall; the  relationship
    ended when that individual was removed from the UK. He had engaged with
    sexual  activities  with  several  individuals  without  any  emotional
    involvement. He had always been open about his sexual  orientation,  in
    his dress, speech and demeanour.

 4. The Appellant has  pursued  another  asylum  claim  previously.  On  28
    September 2016 he had previously claimed asylum based on  his  family's
    affiliation with the  Bangladesh  National  Party  and  the  subsequent
    problems this caused him, combined with his atheism, embodied by having
    joined the Council of Ex-Muslims of Britain, and expressed  via  social
    media postings. That claim culminated with an adverse decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal of 10 January 2017 in which the Judge rejected  his
    claim to have a  profile  as  a  prominent  blogger  and  social  media
    activist who might risk persecution for religious or other  reasons  in
    Bangladesh. The  Upper  Tribunal  subsequently  refused  permission  to
    appeal on 3 April 2017.

 5. In evidence before the First-tier Tribunal in the  instant  proceedings
    the Appellant explained that he had felt  uncomfortable  talking  about
    his sexuality during the earlier asylum claim.

 6. That matter aside, the Appellant's immigration history as summarised by
    the Respondent is that he arrived in the UK on 8 September  2009  as  a
    Tier 4 General Student. Events are  then  obscure  though  he  made  an
    application for leave to remain on 10 March 2013 which was  refused  on
    14 May 2014. He was served with a notice of intention  to  remove  him,
    though failed to report in line with the conditions imposed on him, and
    was arrested by an immigration enforcement team on 14 July 2016  whilst
    working at Spice Bank Restaurant.

 7. Two factual witnesses supported  the  Appellant's  claim  below.  Linda
    Piercy, a former colleague of the Appellant, had met him in  2011,  and
    he had disclosed to her the fact that he was gay around 2012.  She  did
    not suggest she had met any of his claimed partners.

 8. John Elworthy, a journalist, gave  evidence,  that  he  had  known  the
    Appellant since March 2014 when he met him at the restaurant where  the
    latter worked. He had written about the Appellant's  asylum  claim  and
    his gender preference, the Appellant's circumstances having first  come
    to his attention when he witnessed him at first-hand  being  questioned
    by immigration officers who came to the restaurant.  He was aware  that
    the Secretary of State disbelieved the  Appellant's  proclaimed  gender
    preference - but nevertheless his  personal  conviction  was  that  the
    Appellant was speaking the truth, and that his claim to be gay was  not
    simply not a peg of convenience on which to mount a claim  for  further
    leave to remain.

 9. The First-tier Tribunal noted the Appellant's evidence that he had used
    his Facebook site to post comments about homosexuality, religion, human
    rights and other issues. It did not accept the Appellant as being  gay,
    because

      a) Photographs said to show his effeminate personality appeared to be
         posed;


      b) The relative who had stood surety on his bail application had not
         given any evidence in support of his case; whilst he had mentioned
         in evidence that he had friends in the UK with whom he had
         discussed his sexuality, none of them had been called as witnesses,
         and nor had anyone who appeared in the various photographs he
         provided showing him at celebrations and events in clubs;


      c) The evidence of the cancellation of a booking reservation at a
         Cornwall hotel offered no ostensible support for his case, and nor
         did his membership of the BoyCrush dating site of which he had been
         a paying member during 2011: it was not a dating site;


      d) He had made no efforts to join or obtain support from a gay
         organisation in the UK;


      e) There was no evidence that his dating profiles had brought any same-
         sex encounters;


      f)  His gender preference asylum claim was brought very late, after
         the exhaustion of a claim on other grounds.

10. In the light of these findings, there was no  reason  to  consider  the
    Appellant's sexuality would come to  the  attention  of  any  potential
    antagonist such as to place him at real risk of harm: because he simply
    had not established himself as being a gay man.

11. Grounds of appeal submitted that the First-tier Tribunal had  erred  in
    law by

      a) Failing to assess the likelihood of the Appellant being perceived
         as a gay man given his social media profile;



      b) Failing to assess the evidence from the supporting witnesses who
         had given oral evidence;



      c) Failing to have regard to the Difference, Stigma, Shame, Harm
         ("DSSH") model which had been advanced as an appropriate reference
         point for the assessment of the Appellant's credibility, and which
         was consistent with the UNHCR position set out in their Guidelines
         On International Protection No. 9;



      d) Failing to appreciate that the Appellant had provided further
         evidence regarding his online profile, which in turn might create
         risks for him, notwithstanding his sexual identity;



      e) Holding the lateness of the Appellant's asylum claim against him
         notwithstanding the policy guidance found in relevant Home Office
         Guidance.


12. Permission to appeal was granted on 21 May 2018 by the Upper  Tribunal,
    on the basis that all grounds were arguable.

13. Before me Mr Chelvan briefly  elaborated  on  the  grounds  of  appeal,
    emphasising that the DSSH model had received a degree of endorsement by
    the United Nations  High  Commissioner  for  Refugees  (UNHCR).  At  my
    invitation, Mr Bramble intervened to express the view of the  Secretary
    of State that the grounds had force,  particularly  in  so  far  as  no
    findings had been made on the witnesses who gave live evidence  and  on
    the possibility that the Appellant's  online  profile  might  create  a
    perception that he was gay, whatever the underlying reality.

14. Both advocates joined in encouraging the  Upper  Tribunal  to  consider
    this case as potentially apt to go forward by determination by a  legal
    panel, with a view to giving guidance on the timing  of  asylum  claims
    based  on  sexual  orientation  generally,  and  to   provide   Country
    Guidelines  for  claims  based  on  sexual  and  gender  identity   and
    expression for asylum seekers from Bangladesh.

Findings and reasons

15. It seems to me that the grounds of  appeal  have  real  force  in  this
    appeal, which  it  is  convenient  to  address  in  an  order  slightly
    different to that taken in the grounds.

16. Firstly, there were independent witnesses who were able to give  first-
    hand accounts of the manner in which the  Appellant's  sexual  identity
    had come across to them. Given the First-tier  Tribunal  actively  held
    the absence of other sources  of  corroborative  evidence  against  the
    Appellant, the evidence which tended to support  his  account  demanded
    attention.

17. Secondly, the First-tier Tribunal held the delay in making  his  asylum
    claim against the Appellant when assessing his  credibility.  Doubtless
    that is a relevant consideration and indeed statute  identifies  it  as
    such. However, there was no indication that the  issues  identified  by
    the Home Office guidance as relevant to a delay in making such a  claim
    had been given appropriate consideration. The Asylum Policy instruction
    Sexual orientation in asylum claims (Version 6.0) states:

      "Feelings  of  shame,  cultural  implications,  or  painful  memories,
      particularly those of a sexual nature, may have led some claimants  to
      feel reluctant  about  speaking  openly  about  such  issues  and  may
      therefore not be uncommon."

18. That policy instruction also contains these further passages  which  are
   consistent with broader themes identified in the DSSH model:


         "Stigmatisation, shame and secrecy
         Some LGB people may originate from countries in which they are made
         to feel ashamed, humiliated and stigmatised due to their sexual
         orientation. This may be through homophobic attitudes, instilled
         within children in early years that being gay is shameful and
         wrong. This can be compounded where the individual is made to feel
         different and separated from their peers, causing such negative
         messages to become internalised. Claimants may reference in their
         narratives, elements of strong disapproval from external sources,
         indicating that the claimant's sexual orientation and or conduct is
         seen to be unacceptable, immoral, sinful, and socially disgusting.
         ...
         Responding to a claimant's narrative: issues around 'difference'
         Most LGB asylum claimants live their lives in societies where being
         'straight' is considered as the norm. From the perspective of the
         persecutor, the issue can be the fact that the individual is not
         conforming to common prevailing normative heterosexual stereotypes.
         In effect, the behaviour which may give rise to harm, harassment or
         persecution may not be LGB behaviour (or perceived LGB behaviour),
         but behaviour or lifestyles which are deemed not to be heterosexual
         enough."

19. The UNHCR have also recognised these themes,  in  their  Guidelines  On
    International Protection No. 9


         "Ascertaining the applicant's LGBTI background  is  essentially  an
         issue of credibility. The assessment of credibility in  such  cases
         needs to be undertaken in  an  individualized  and  sensitive  way.
         Exploring elements around  the  applicant's  personal  perceptions,
         feelings and  experiences  of  difference,  stigma  and  shame  are
         usually more likely  to  help  the  decision  maker  ascertain  the
         applicant's sexual orientation or gender identity,  rather  than  a
         focus on sexual practices."


20. Thirdly,  the  Appellant  clearly  has  a  social  media  profile  that
    indicates he is a gay man. His Facebook blogs include  titles  such  as
    "homosexuality and Islam - what does the Quran actually say  about  gay
    people", "What it is like to be gay and Muslim"; his Facebook  profile,
    which must be assessed in the context of him having 2,208 "friends"  on
    the website, identifies him as being proud  to  be  homosexual,  to  be
    actively interested in men, and records that he supports LGBT meetings.
    Clearly material of this nature could result in him being perceived  as
    gay, whatever his true identity. The  Refugee  or  Person  in  Need  of
    International Protection (Qualification) Regulations 2006 at  Reg  6(2)
    addressing the Reasons for Persecution state:


         "In deciding whether a person has  a  well-founded  fear  of  being
         persecuted, it is immaterial  whether  he  actually  possesses  the
         racial, religious, national,  social  or  political  characteristic
         which attracts the persecution, provided that such a characteristic
         is attributed to him by the actor of persecution."


21. Furthermore, this intensity of self-expression generally  supports  the
    veracity of his claim to be a gay man. It seems to me that this  aspect
    of the potential support it afforded the Appellant's claim should  have
    received express consideration.

22. In the light of these flaws in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal,
    the  appeal  should  be  re-heard.  There  has  been  some   delay   in
    promulgating this decision whilst consideration was  given  to  whether
    the case was suitable to go forwards as  suitable  for  the  giving  of
    Country  Guidelines.  On  reflection  I  do  not   consider   that   is
    appropriate: there are  not  clear  findings  of  fact  and  given  the
    significant failures of the First-tier Tribunal decision  making  first
    time round, I consider that the Appellant should  enjoy  the  potential
    protection of a second tier of appeal once more.




    Decision:


    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contains  material  errors  of
    law. It is appropriate for the matter to be  re-heard.  The  appeal  is
    remitted for hearing afresh with no findings preserved.




    Anonymity Order


    I make an anonymity order under Rule 14(1) of  the  Tribunal  Procedure
    (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008  prohibiting  the  disclosure   of   any
    information or matter likely to lead members of the public to  be  able
    to identify the Appellant.

[pic]
Signed:                                            Date: 8 October 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Symes


