
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07206/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 19 December 2018                        |On 18 February 2019              |
|                                           |                                 |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                  MR M S A
                           (ANONYMITY ORDER MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Khan, counsel instructed by Chancery Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr M Mills, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    The Appellant is  a  national  of  Bangladesh,  born  on  1.10.85.  He
arrived in the UK as a student on 28.1.10 and claimed asylum on  23.8.13  on
the basis of his political  opinion.  This  application  was  refused  in  a
decision dated 26.5.18. The Appellant appealed and his  appeal  came  before
Judge of the First tier  Tribunal  Cameron  for  hearing  on  6.7.18.  In  a
decision and reasons promulgated on 30.7.18, he dismissed the appeal.

2.    Permission to appeal to the Upper Tribunal was  sought,  in  time,  on
the basis that the Judge erred:

    (i)    in failing to assess the sufficiency of protection in  light  of
    the Appellant's sur place activities in the UK; and

    (ii)   in failing to consider the case in the round, in his  assessment
    of credibility; failed to take account of  country  guidance;  made  an
    adverse finding despite the fact that no DVR was submitted and  applied
    the wrong standard of proof at [84].

3.    Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal  Judge  Gill  in  a
decision dated 16.11.18 in the following terms:

    "It is arguable that Judge of the First tier Tribunal Cameron may  have
    materially erred in law in  his  assessment  of  credibility,  for  the
    following reasons:

         1. Arguably, paras 84,  86,  87  and  88  show  that  he  drew  the
         inference,  from  his  finding  that  the  appellant  had  produced
         documents that were not genuine, that the appellant's  account  was
         therefore  untrue.  Arguably,  this  is  not  consistent  with  the
         guidance  in  Tanveer  Ahmed  (documents  unreliable  and   forged)
         Pakistan [2002] UKIAT 00439. Arguably, the correct approach was  to
         consider the reliability of the documents (as  opposed  to  whether
         they are genuine) on the whole of the evidence.

         2.  Much  of  the  judge's  decision  from  para  53-81  represents
         recitation of the evidence. As far as I can see, there  appears  to
         be  little  assessment  of  the  credibility  of  the   appellant's
         evidence. The judge appears to reject the appellant's whole account
         for the following reasons: (a) his finding that the  appellant  had
         produced documents that were not genuine;  and  (b)  the  appellant
         failed to claim asylum sooner. Accordingly, if the judge did err in
         law in his assessment of the documents, this may be material to the
         outcome.

    I do not think there is much in the argument that the judge applied the
    wrong standard of proof although I will not refuse permission  on  this
    or the remaining grounds. Although the judge did refer to  the  balance
    of probabilities at [84] it is clear from [96] that this was because he
    was considering whether the respondent had  shown  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities at [84] it is clear from [96] that this  was  because  he
    was considering whether the respondent had  shown  on  the  balance  of
    probabilities that the documents were not genuine..."

Hearing

4.    At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Mr  Khan  submitted  that  a
strong steer had been  provided  by  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Gill,  who  had
correctly identified the issue of the reliability of the documents at  [52]-
[81].  He  submitted  that  there  had  been  no  real  assessment  of   the
documentary evidence. He asserted that from  [82]  to  [130]  there  was  no
assessment of credibility of the Appellant.

5.    In his submissions, Mr  Mills  submitted  that  [51]  of  the  refusal
letter dealt with the documentary evidence and that,  whilst  there  was  no
DVR, issue was taken with the alleged FIR as  the  record  book  and  charge
sheet book were checked and there is no record in their record books  nor  a
case registered.

He acknowledged that at [53] the  Respondent  appears  to  assert  that  the
documents cannot be relied upon rather than being fraudulent.

6.    Mr Mills submitted that the Judge has not  overstepped  the  line  and
that he had given the case a very fair consideration. There was  no  written
consent to make enquiries the Judge gives a reasoned conclusion why at  [84]
the checks the Secretary of State has undertaken  discharge  the  burden  of
proof. The Judge refers to  the  lower,  civil  standard  and  finds  it  is
discharged even in the absence of the DVR. He submitted that the grounds  of
appeal are nothing more than a disagreement with that conclusion.  Mr  Mills
accepted that, having reached that conclusion and having commented over  the
page at [89] on section 8 issues due  to  the  delay  by  the  Appellant  in
claiming asylum, that these are the two main issues the Judge considers  and
consequently rejects the Appellant's credibility.

7.    Whilst Upper Tribunal Judge Gill suggests concern  at  that  approach,
it is not far short of determinative that the documents were  not  found  to
be authentic which, when coupled  with  section  8  point,  means  that  the
Judge's findings and conclusions were not perverse and  were  sufficient  to
justify rejecting the Appellant's credibility.

8.    In reply, Mr Khan submitted that the  Judge's  approach  at  [84]  did
disclose a material error of law.

9.    I reserved my decision, which I now give with my reasons.

Findings and reasons

10.   It is clear from Tanveer Ahmed [2002] UKIAT 00439 that:

    (i)    It is for the individual claimant to show  that  a  document  is
    reliable in the same way as any other piece of evidence which  he  puts
    forward and on which he seeks to rely [33]; and

    (ii)   The decision maker should consider whether a document is one  on
    which reliance should properly be  placed  after  looking  at  all  the
    evidence in the round.

11.   When rejecting the FIR 198/2009 as genuine,  the  Judge  at  [84]  was
satisfied that he could place weight on checks  made  by  a  member  of  the
British High Commission in the absence of  a  DVR.  A  note  of  the  checks
carried out is at [68] when it is said that the FIR record book  and  charge
sheet book at Golaponj police station were checked on 1.9.14  and  the  duty
officer confirmed that there was no case registered.

12.   The Judge also noted that the  Appellant's  claim  to  have  been  the
president of Ward Bhadehswar Union Chhatrashibir had been  rejected  by  the
Respondent, based on the fact  that  the  official  website  of  the  Islami
Chhatra Shibir shows a list of branches for the political party  around  the
country, however, number 9 ward Badeshar Union  is  not  listed.  The  Judge
took into consideration letters of  support  from  Moulana  Habibur  Rahman,
Parvaz Ahmad and Md Abdur Rahman set out at [78]-[80].  He  also  considered
an extract from the Banglapedia National Encyclopaedia, however,  the  Judge
found this evidence to be contradictory to the Appellant's oral evidence  as
that document, at page 223 of the Appellant's  bundle,  does  not  refer  to
Ward 9.

13.   Given that the basis of the Appellant's claim that  an  FIR  had  been
issued against him  was  because  of  his  political  involvement  with  the
Bangladeshi Islami Chhatrashibir, I consider that the  Judge  did  correctly
follow the guidance in Tanveer Ahmed (op cit) in that he  properly  assessed
the FIR  in  light  of  both  the  checks  conducted  by  the  British  High
Commission and the other supporting evidence of  the  Appellant's  political
involvement and reached sustainable findings in respect  of  that  evidence.
Given that it was ultimately for the Appellant to  show  that  the  FIR  was
reliable and that the Judge properly found at [84] that he had failed to  do
so to the lower  standard,  there  is  no  material  error  of  law  in  his
decision.

14.   Mr Khan did not seek to argue any of the other matters raised  in  the
grounds of appeal before the Upper Tribunal.

Decision

15.   For the reasons set out at [11]-[13] above, I find no  material  error
of law in the decision of First tier Tribunal Judge Cameron. The appeal  is,
therefore, dismissed.


Rebecca Chapman
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman

20 January 2019
