

                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07844/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|On the papers on 6 July 2020         |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|                                     |On 29 July 2020                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                            AISSATOU SEBHE DIALLO
                       (anonymity direction not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                      ERROR OF LAW FINIDNG AND REASONS


     1. On 30 September 2019 First-tier Tribunal Judge Boyes ('the  Judge')
        dismissed the appellant's appeal on  protection  and  human  rights
        grounds.
     2. Permission to appeal has been granted by a judge of the  First-tier
        Tribunal the operative part of the grant  being  in  the  following
        terms:


        2.   The grounds assert that the Judge erred in his treatment of an
             expert report by Dr Turvill including a failure to  apply  the
             correct  standard  of  proof  when  considering   the   expert
             evidence. It  is  also  asserted  that  the  Judge  failed  to
             consider the risk to the appellant on return to Guinea.


        3.   The Judge deals with Dr Turvill's evidence at [39] -  [43]  of
             his decision. At [39] the  Judge  says  "the  fact  that  [the
             injuries] are consistent with the claim  made  does  not  mean
             that they could only have been caused in the manner which  was
             alleged". (My emphasis). It is  arguable  that  this  suggests
             that the Judge  applied  the  wrong  standard  of  proof  when
             considering Dr Turvill's evidence, particularly in  the  light
             of the criticism of the Doctors findings at [42].


        4.   The other grounds appear to have less  strength;  however  all
             grounds can be argued.


     3. In light of the Covid-19  pandemic  directions  were  sent  to  the
        parties on 2 April 2020 advising them of the Upper Tribunal's  view
        that the question of whether the Judge had made  an  error  of  law
        material to the decision to dismiss the appeal could be  determined
        on the papers and inviting the parties to  make  observations  upon
        this  proposal  and  providing  additional  time  for  any  further
        submissions the parties wished to make to be lodged.
     4. The respondent replied to the directions  in  a  Rule  24  response
        dated 16 April 2020. There has as yet been  no  response  from  the
        appellant's representatives, Asylum Justice, based in Cardiff.
     5. The  Overriding  Objective  is  contained  in  the  Upper  Tribunal
        Procedure Rules. Rule  2(2)  explains  that  dealing  with  a  case
         fairly  and  justly  includes:  dealing with  it   in   ways  that
        are  proportionate   to   the   importance   of   the   case,   the
        complexity   of   the    issues,    etc;    avoiding    unnecessary
        formality   and   seeking  flexibility    in    the    proceedings;
        ensuring,  so  far  as  practicable,  that the parties are able  to
        participate fully in the proceedings; using any  special  expertise
        of the Upper Tribunal effectively; and avoiding delay,  so  far  as
        compatible with proper consideration of the issues.
     6. Rule 2(4) puts a duty on the parties to help the Upper Tribunal  to
        further the overriding objective; and to cooperate with  the  Upper
        Tribunal generally.
     7. Rule 34 of The  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
        provides:


        34.-
        (1)  Subject to paragraphs (2) and (3), the Upper Tribunal may make
             any decision without a hearing.
        (2)  The Upper Tribunal must have regard to any view expressed by a
             party when deciding whether to hold a hearing to consider  any
             matter, and the form of any such hearing.
        (3)  In immigration judicial review proceedings, the Upper Tribunal
             must hold a hearing before making a decision which disposes of
             proceedings.
        (4)  Paragraph (3) does not affect the power of the Upper  Tribunal
             to-


             (a)  strike out a party's case, pursuant to  rule  8(1)(b)  or
             8(2);
             (b)  consent to withdrawal, pursuant to rule 17;
             (c)  determine an application for permission to bring judicial
                  review proceedings, pursuant to rule 30; or
             (d)  make a consent order disposing of  proceedings,  pursuant
                  to rule 39, without a hearing.


     8. It has not been shown to be inappropriate or unfair to exercise the
        discretion provided in  Rule  34  by  enabling  the  error  of  law
        question to be determined on the papers. There has been no response
        from the appellant despite having been given ample  opportunity  to
        have done so, and nothing  on  the  facts  or  in  law  that  makes
        consideration of the issues on the papers not  in  accordance  with
        overriding objectives at this stage. The Grounds drafted by  Asylum
        Justice, dated 14 October 2019, set out the appellants case  as  to
        why it is alleged the Judge has erred in law.



Background


     9. The appellant is a citizen of Guinea born  on  18  June  1981.  The
        Judge had the benefit  of  considering  not  only  the  documentary
        evidence but also seeing and hearing oral evidence being  given  as
        set out in the Judge's record of proceedings.
    10. The Judge sets out findings of fact from [31] of the decision under
        challenge recording that he was not satisfied that the  appellant's
        account that she had been trafficked to the United Kingdom for  the
        purposes of domestic servitude, had been persecuted in the past, or
        faced a real risk persecution and/or harm in the future if returned
        to Guinea, was credible [34]. The Judge considered the evidence  of
        Dr Turvill between [39 - 43] concluding in the latter paragraph the
        following:


        43.  The upshot of the medical evidence in terms  of  the  physical
             injuries is that it is, for its failings, unable to support or
             buttress the appellant's claim to any significant degree  that
             she was injured or suffered  the  violence  that  she  claims.
             There is no explanation as to how the appellant could  achieve
             the injuries in any other way as they are injuries  which  are
             not, for example, unique to torture type  situations  and  are
             such as can occur  in  ordinary  everyday  life.  Further  the
             diagnosis of the appellant with moderate depression  and  PTSD
             does not mean that the claim she is made as to the genesis  or
             foundation of such an illness is accurate or correct. There is
             no assessment by Dr Turvill as to other  potential  causes  of
             such illnesses. As is often and routine in  the  circumstances
             medical professionals who examine the appellant in relation to
             their mental  health  accept  at  face  value  that  which  is
             claimed. It does not necessarily follow that which is  claimed
             is accurate or correct or is accurately the  true  genesis  of
             the illness itself. Having considered all that  I  have  about
             this appellant in terms of her credibility in the plausibility
             of her account I am not satisfied that her mental illness such
             as it is, emanates from the matters that she complains of.


    11. The Judge notes other concerns in relation to the report noting  Dr
        Turvill's assessment that the injuries are consistent in  terms  of
        the Istanbul Protocol, a category which means there are a number of
        other potential causes for the injuries.
    12. The Judge  find  other  inconsistencies  in  core  aspects  of  the
        appellant's evidence as  carefully  noted  in  the  decision  under
        challenge.




Respondents submissions



    13. The respondent's  submissions  in  the  Rule  24  response  are  as
        follows:


         4.   Ground one argues that the incorrect weight has been placed on
             the medical report of Dr Turvill. It is well established  that
             weight remains a matter for  the  Judge  to  decide  and  that
             disagreement with the weight given to a particular  aspect  of
             the  evidence  can  only  succeed   if   there   is   adequate
             demonstration of irrationality (see Durueke (PTA: AZ  applied,
             proper approach) [2019] UKUT 00197 (IAC).  There  is  no  such
             argument of irrationality set out in the grounds  relied  upon
             by the appellant.
         5.   The grounds criticise the  FTTJ  for  failing  to  conduct  an
             overall assessment of the scars, and that it was inappropriate
             to focus on specific scars. It is well established that a FTTJ
             does not have to engage with or rehearse every detail  in  the
             evidence but should only have to  provide  clear  reasons  for
             their decision. It is clear [at 40 and 41] that the  FTTJ  has
             given examples of scars  where  the  paucity  evidence/account
             given by the appellant does not accord with a conclusion  that
             the injury was consistent with the account  given,  especially
             given the account was vague and could not be recalled.


             These are detailed as examples that have informed the  overall
             conclusion/finding of the FTTJ; where the FTTJ details 'I give
             but a few examples'.


         6.   At [41] the FTTJ finds that 'if the  appellant  cannot  recall
             what she was being struck  with,  it  is  surprising  that  Dr
             Turvill remarked that it is consistent with the  scar  from  a
             violent blow'. It is submitted that this  is  a  rational  and
             logical finding that was open to the FTTJ to make.


         7.   At [42] the FTTJ identifies another example where the  medical
             report lacks expected detail. Again, it was open to  the  FTTJ
             to identify such a shortcoming in the report.


         8.   At paragraph 8 of  the  grounds,  it  is  suggested  that  the
             Tribunal could have assessed the  appellant  as  a  vulnerable
             adult. It is noted that there  was  no  other  medical  report
             before the Tribunal beyond that of  Dr  Turvill  completed  18
             months prior  to  the  hearing,  nor  was  there  an  apparent
             application before the  FTTJ  to  treat  the  appellant  as  a
             vulnerable adult. Nevertheless, the FTTJ expressly  recognised
             and made allowances during the hearing due to the  distressful
             nature of the evidence - see [31]. There is no error  in  this
             regard, nor one identified as a consequence.


         9.   At  paras  11  -  13,  the  grounds  criticise  the  FTTJ  for
             'departing' from the conclusions of Dr Turvill.  The  FTTJ  is
             not bound by the opinion of a medical expert in an  assessment
             of credibility. It is submitted  that  at  [43]  the  FTTJ  is
             simply identifying the fact that Dr Turvill had not  conducted
             an assessment  of  whether  the  scars  could  have  been  the
             consequence of everyday activities rather than self-harm. This
             much was accepted in the grounds at para 11. It  was  open  to
             the FTTJ to identify any shortcomings in a report which  would
             affect the weight that could be attributed to  it,  this  does
             not amount to a material error of law.


         10.  In granting permission to appeal,  FTTJ  Bulpitt  referred  to
         [39] of the FTTJ decision:


             ... As is accepted by  Dr  Turvill  the  fact  that  they  are
             consistent with the claim made does not mean that  they  could
             only have  been  caused  in  the  manner  which  was  alleged.
             Consistent in the terms of the Istanbul  Protocol  means  that
             there are a number of other potential causes for the injuries.


         11.  Under the Istanbul Protocol, the category of  scarring  deemed
             'consistent' itself states: consistent with: the lesion  could
             have been caused by the  trauma  described,  but  it  is  non-
             specific and there are many other possible causes.


         12.  It is submitted that contrary  to  the  observations  of  FTTJ
             Bulpitt in granting permission, the FTTJ did not  applied  too
             high a standard when considering the  report  of  Dr  Turvill.
             Rather the FTTJ was  simply  paraphrasing  the  definition  of
             'consistent' as set out in the Istanbul Protocol  demonstrated
             above. It is noted that the category of consistent is only one
             step up from the definition of 'inconsistent with'  under  the
             Istanbul Protocol.


         13.  In similar vein, it was open to the  FTTJ  to  find  that  the
             medical report failed to explore any other avenues that  could
             have contributed to the mental health conditions  suffered  by
             the appellant. This is a matter that affects the weight to  be
             given to the report. The FTTJ was not obliged to explore  make
             findings on alternative reasons for PTSD; the burden of  proof
             is upon the appellant.


         14.  It is well established that whilst  the  medical  reports  can
             support an appellant's claim they are not determinative of  an
             assessment credibility. It is noted that there  is  no  direct
             challenge to the findings at [36 - 38] where the FTTJ  rejects
             the claim that the appellant was forced into marriage  by  her
             uncle. It is submitted  that  this  is  the  material  context
             against which the rest  of  the  claim  has  to  be  assessed.
             Likewise, there is no direct challenge to the findings made at
             [44 - 54] where the FTTJ  rejects  the  claim  the  series  of
             events that brought to the UK, and her claim to how she  lived
             in the UK prior to claiming asylum.


         15.  It is submitted that the consideration of the medical  reports
             is wholly in line with the  principles  set  out  in  Mibanga,
             since it informed the findings made in relation to the claimed
             abuse suffered in Guinea. It was not considered  in  isolation
             to the entirety of the claim.


         16.  Ground two argues that the incorrect  standard  of  proof  has
             been applied. At [11] the FTTJ clearly identifies the  correct
             standard of proof to be applied distinguishing the  assessment
             from that conducted under the NRM process. At [31  -  33]  the
             FTTJ sets out that he has had regard to all the  evidence  and
             made appropriate allowances in light of the  sensitive  nature
             of the evidence and directs himself to the correct standard of
             proof.


         17.  Ground three criticises the FTTJ for failing to  consider  the
             country  and  background  evidence  of  domestic  violence  in
             Guinea. As noted above the FTTJ set out that he has had regard
             to all the evidence [31], and at [37] makes a clear finding in
             relation to background  evidence  in  the  appellant's  bundle
             being at odds with the claim.


         18.  Further, the  grounds  do  not  directly  challenge  the  FTTJ
             findings in the  alternative  at  [56  -  57]  that  echo  the
             submissions made in the reasons for refusal letter  from  para
             89 onwards, namely that there is a sufficiency  of  protection
             and internal relocation alternative. Reliance is placed on  OK
             (PTA: alternative findings) Ukraine [2020] UKUT 44 (IAC) which
             provides guidance in the headnote:


             Permission should not be granted on the grounds as pleaded  if
             there is, quite apart from the grounds,  the  reason  why  the
             appeal should fail.


         19.  Further at paras 16:


             16.   We  observe  that  when  considering  applications   for
                  permission to appeal to this Tribunal,  judges  must  give
                  careful consideration to whether there is  any,  well  any
                  meritorious,  challenge  to  an  alternative   basis   for
                  refusing or allowing an appeal  as  the  absence  of  such
                  challenge  would  normally  be  determinative  as  to  the
                  prospect of success.


         20.  That there is no challenge to the findings in the  alternative
             that there is a sufficiency of protection and internal  flight
             option, no challenge to the rejection of how/why she  came  to
             the UK, and no challenge to the rejection of  her  account  of
             living in the UK as a consequence it is submitted  that  there
             are clear reasons why the appeal would fail.




Discussion



    14. It is important to read the Judge's decision as a whole. This is  a
        detailed and very carefully written decision  taking  into  account
        all the evidence before the Judge. The Judge sets out  the  correct
        legal self-direction in relation to  the  burden  and  standard  of
        proof and the grounds fail to establish that  having  done  so  the
        Judge ignored it and applied an incorrect burden or standard to the
        evidence.
    15. In relation to the medical report the Judge does not challenge that
        the appellant may have the scars/marks on  her  body  noted  by  Dr
        Turvill as these are specifically recorded in the decision but does
        not accept the appellant's evidence as to  causation  is  credible.
        The Judge  was  entitled  to  record  limitations  in  the  medical
        evidence. In RT (medical reports - causation of scarring) Sri Lanka
        [2008] UKAIT 00009 the Tribunal held that, where a  medical  report
        is tendered in support of a claim that injuries  or  scarring  were
        caused by actors of persecution or serious  harm,  close  attention
        should be paid to the guidance set out by the Court of Appeal in SA
        (Somalia) [2006] EWCA Civ 1302. Where  the  doctor  makes  findings
        that there is a degree of consistency between the injuries/scarring
        and the appellant's claimed causes which admit of there being other
        possible causes (whether many, few or  unusually  few),  it  is  of
        particular importance that the report specifically  examines  those
        to gauge how likely they are, bearing in mind what is  known  about
        the individual's life history and experiences.
    16. The Judge was also entitled to refer to the  Istanbul  Protocol  on
        Medical Reports.


           Paragraphs 186 and 187 of the Istanbul Protocol in  relation  to
           the term "consistency" state:

           "186...for each lesion and for the overall pattern  of  lesions,
           the physician should indicate the degree of consistency  between
           it and the attribution:


              (a) Not consistent: the lesion could not have been  caused  by
             the trauma described;
              (b) Consistent with: the lesion could have been caused by  the
             trauma described, but it is non specific and  there  are  many
             other possible causes;
              (c) Highly consistent: the lesion could have  been  caused  by
             the trauma described, and there are few other possible causes;
              (d) Typical of: this is an appearance that  is  usually  found
             with this type of trauma, but there are other possible causes;
              (e) Diagnostic of: this appearance could not have been  caused
             in any way other than that described.

             187...   Ultimately  it  is  the  overall  evaluation  of  all
             lesions  and  not  the  consistency  of  each  lesion  with  a
             particular form of torture that is important in assessing  the
             torture story."

    17. No material legal error is made out in  the  manner  in  which  the
        Judge assessed this evidence. It is also important to note that the
        Judge does not assess the medical  evidence  in  isolation  of  the
        other evidence available in the appeal. It is accepted the approach
        required of the Judge was to assess the weight that could be  given
        to the medical evidence in light of all the  other  material  which
        the Judge did, as disclosed by a careful reading  of  the  decision
        under challenge.
    18. The Rule 24 response is correct to note that the  question  of  the
        credibility of the claim is not the role of the medical expert.  An
        expert report sets out the opinion of the person suitably qualified
        in  relation  to  matters  appertaining  to  their  expertise.  The
        evidence they will have seen will, in most cases, be far less  than
        that a judge may have who will  have  the  benefit  of  seeing  and
        hearing oral evidence being given, as the Judge did in this appeal.
        It  is  clear  from  reading  the  determination  that  the   Judge
        identifies a  number  of  concerns  arising  from  the  appellant's
        evidence and it is the cumulative effect of the same that  warrants
        the adverse credibility findings being made.  Disagreement with the
        weight that was given  on  the  basis  the  appellant  will  prefer
        greater weight to be attached does  not  establish  arguable  legal
        error.
    19. In S v SSHD [2006] EWCA Civ 1153 the Court of Appeal said  that  an
        error of law only arose in this type of situation where  there  was
        artificial separation amounting to a structural  failing,  and  not
        where there was  a  mere  error  of  appreciation  of  the  medical
        evidence.  Mibanga was distinguished.  In  that  case  the  medical
        evidence had been so powerful and extraordinary that  it  took  the
        case into an exceptional area.  The Court of Appeal  said  that  HE
        (2004) UKIAT 00321 was relevant to the case in  so  far  as,  where
        medical  evidence  merely  confirmed  that  a   person's   physical
        condition was consistent with his claim, the effect of the evidence
        was only not to negate the claim.  It  did  not  offer  significant
        separate support for the claim.  The Court also said  that  Mibanga
        was not to be regarded as laying down a rule of law as to the order
        in which judicial fact finders were to approach evidential material
        before them.  In this case an explanation as  to  why  the  medical
        evidence did not carry weight had been given by the IJ.
    20. It has not been made out that the weight given to the  medical  and
        other evidence by the Judge is irrational, unfair, or unreasonable,
        when considering all aspects of this appeal together.
    21. The Judge clearly considered the background country information and
        the claim otherwise does  not  reflect  a  proper  reading  of  the
        decision under challenge.
    22. There  is  arguable  merit  in  the  respondent's  submission  that
        although the primary findings  of  the  Judge  are  challenged  the
        alternative findings are not. The availability of a sufficiency  of
        protection and internal flight option is specifically  referred  to
        by the Judge. At [55], in which the  Judge  sets  out  the  primary
        finding, and [56 - 57] the Judge writes:


             55.  It follows therefore that in light of the fact that I  do
                  not accept that the appellant  has  been  treated  in  the
                  manner in which she has alleged in Guinea by  her  husband
                  or indeed her uncle that she has suffered such persecution
                  or harm in the  past  which  could  or  may  lead  to  her
                  suffering such in the future.


             56.  Such that she has a genuine fear of return to Guinea  she
                  can and must avail herself of the protection  afforded  to
                  persons in Guinea by the police force. I accept that which
                  is contained in the reasons for refusal  letter  paragraph
                  91 that there is increased cooperation between the NGO and
                  the Guinea  government  in  terms  of  protecting  women's
                  rights and that there is a toll free number for women  who
                  fear being subject to forced marriage and in  the  capital
                  there is a police unit that  specialises  in  sex  crimes.
                  Protection does not have to equal or be  similar  to  that
                  which is offered or available in the  United  Kingdom,  it
                  must be sufficient which is a fluid and malleable  concept
                  when it comes to particular risks.


             57.  The appellant can no doubt be assisted by  her  Majesty's
                  government  with   funds   to   enable   her   to   obtain
                  accommodation and/or the necessities in the  capital  city
                  in which she has lived while studying at  university.  I'm
                  confident that the appellant is able  to  use  the  skills
                  obtained at university and in her  working  life  and  the
                  general fortitude which she has shown living in a  country
                  not of her birth for a not insignificant period of time in
                  re-establishing herself in her  own  country.  She  is  of
                  course able to speak the language of Guinea and knows  the
                  culture and currency at and life in general there.

    23. The Judge also expresses concern and  unease  with  regard  to  the
        appellant's account at [60] and the fact  there  may  be  something
        which the appellant has held back or not  properly  explained.  The
        Judge can only be expected to make findings upon the evidence  that
        has been made available and with regard to  that  material,  whilst
        the appellant disagrees with the findings made, the grounds fail to
        establish arguable legal error material to the decision to  dismiss
        the appeal. Findings are adequately reasoned and within  the  range
        of those reasonably available to the Judge  on  the  evidence.  The
        appellant's disagreement and desire to remain in the United Kingdom
        do not warrant the Upper Tribunal interfering any further  in  this
        decision.

Decision

    24. There is no material  error  of  law  in  the  Immigration  Judge's
        decision. The determination shall stand.

   Anonymity.


    25. The First-tier Tribunal did not make  an  order  pursuant  to  rule
        45(4)(i) of the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal  (Procedure)  Rules
        2005.


I make no such order pursuant to rule 14 of the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008.



Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 7 July 2020.
