
                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-SAR-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07478/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 28 February 2020                  |On 09 March 2020                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     BNA
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr McVeety, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Ms Choudhry, Nebula Law Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. I shall refer to the appellant as the 'respondent' and  the  respondent
    as the 'appellant', as they appeared respectively before the First-tier
    Tribunal. The appellant was born in 1972 and is a citizen of Iraq. By a
    decision dated 12  July  2019,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  his
    application for international protection. The appellant appealed to the
    First-tier Tribunal which in a  decision  promulgated  on  26  November
    2019, allowed the appeal.

 2. The parties agree that the judge erred in law. The  judge  should  have
    allowed the appeal on Article 15 (c) (humanitarian protection)  grounds
    and not on asylum grounds. Both parties agree that the decision  should
    be set aside and remade by the Upper  Tribunal  dismissing  the  asylum
    appeal but allowing the appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.



    Notice of Decision

    The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside. I have remade the
    decision. The appeal is dismissed on  asylum  grounds.  The  appeal  is
    allowed on humanitarian protection grounds.



Signed                                       Date 28 February 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.









