
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07377/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 10th August 2020                  |On 18th August 2020                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JACKSON


                                   Between

                                    z K s
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADe)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to directions sent on 29 May 2020,  indicating  a  provisional
    view that in light of the need to take precautions against  the  spread
    of Covid-19 and the overriding objective, it would  be  appropriate  in
    this case to determine the issue of whether the  First-tier  Tribunal's
    decision involved the making of an error of law and if so  whether  the
    decision should be set aside, without a hearing.   Written  submissions
    in accordance with those directions have been received by both  parties
    with no objections being raised as to the  procedure  of  determination
    without a hearing proposed.

 2. In circumstances where no objections were  made  to  the  issues  being
    determined without a hearing and where the parties  have  made  written
    submissions; it is in the interests of justice to proceed to  determine
    the error of  law  issues  on  the  papers  in  light  of  the  written
    submission available and the full appeal file.

 3. The Appellant appeals with permission against the  decision  of  First-
    tier Tribunal Judge Osbourne promulgated on 5 December 2019,  in  which
    the Appellant's appeal against the decision to  refuse  his  protection
    and human rights claim dated 22 July 2019 was dismissed.

 4. The Appellant is a national of Afghanistan, born on 1 January 1999, who
    claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  clandestinely  in  March
    2018, having left Afghanistan in March or April  2017  (on  his  claim,
    although  it  was  found  to  have  been  earlier  given  that  he  was
    fingerprinted in Hungary in 2015).  He  claimed  asylum  on  3  October
    2018,  following  which  he  underwent  a  screening  and   substantive
    interview.  The Appellant's asylum claim was on the basis  of  risk  of
    persecution on return to Afghanistan  from  the  Taliban,  having  been
    accused of spying against them.  The Respondent refused his  protection
    and human rights claim in a decision dated 22 July 2010.

 5. Judge Osborne dismissed the appeal  in  a  decision  promulgated  on  5
    December 2019 on all grounds.  In essence, the First-tier Tribunal  did
    not find the Appellant's asylum claim to be credible given  the  number
    of discrepancies in it and found that he could return to his home  area
    and family without risk from  the  Taliban.   The  First-tier  Tribunal
    found that the Appellant was suffering from PTSD,  not  caused  by  any
    incidents  or  events  in  Afghanistan  but  from  his   journey   from
    Afghanistan to the United Kingdom.  The First-tier Tribunal noted  that
    the Appellant is receiving treatment for PTSD and it is likely that  he
    will have received most if not all of the proscribed  treatment  before
    he is returned to Afghanistan.

 6. In relation to humanitarian protection, the First-tier  Tribunal  found
    that there was no substantial grounds for believing the Appellant would
    face a real risk of suffering serious harm if returned to  the  country
    of origin; primarily on the basis that his account of serious  harm  is
    incredible.  In relation to human rights, the First-tier Tribunal found
    no material breach of any protected rights under Article 2, 3 or  8  of
    the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  can  not  meet   the
    requirements of the Immigration Rules for a grant of leave to remain on
    private life grounds.

The appeal

 7. The Appellant appeals on the basis that the First-tier Tribunal  failed
    to properly consider the Appellant's claim under Article 15(c)  of  the
    Qualification Directive making only scant findings on whether there was
    "armed conflict" in the Appellant's home area and  without  considering
    whether  there  was  a  general  risk  of  harm  to  the  Appellant  of
    indiscriminate violence; which necessarily  required  consideration  of
    his personal circumstances as a young man with PTSD.  Further,  it  was
    accepted that even if so, the Appellant would need to establish that he
    could not internally relocate to Kabul but it  was  submitted  that  in
    light of his mental health and lack of family connections in Kabul;  he
    could arguably do so.

 8. At this stage it is helpful to note that in the grounds of  appeal  the
    Appellant does not challenge the dismissal  of  his  appeal  on  asylum
    grounds; nor is there any challenge to the dismissal of his  appeal  on
    human rights grounds.  The grant of permission by  the  Upper  Tribunal
    records this and confirms that the findings on those matters stand.

 9. Further to the  directions  of  Upper  Tribunal  Judge  Owens,  written
    submissions were filed on behalf of the Appellant on 15 June 2020 (with
    an extension of time for the same having been granted)  which  expanded
    upon the grounds of  appeal  as  follows.     The  written  submissions
    reiterate that there has been no meaningful determination of the  issue
    of whether the Appellant, as a young  man  with  PTSD,  would  face  an
    individualised risk of serious harm  from  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Laghman province.  The Appellant's submissions make  reference  to  the
    medical evidence of PTSD with likely detrimental impact on removal from
    the United Kingdom and the country evidence showing that fewer than 10%
    of Afghan conflict survivors received adequate social support from  the
    state, together with the expert report that stated that the Taliban had
    concentrated their efforts on the Appellant's home area.

10. Although  it  is  accepted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  found  the
    Appellant, on return to his home area,  would  be  no  worse  off  than
    anyone else seeking treatment for  a  similar  illness,  the  Appellant
    highlights that this finding  was  in  the  context  of  assessment  of
    whether there would be very significant obstacles to  reintegration  on
    return to Afghanistan; not in the context  of  risk  of  indiscriminate
    violence.  On behalf of the Appellant it is submitted that his personal
    circumstances might well put him at enhanced risk of serious harm.

11. The Appellant submits that the First-tier Tribunal failed to take  into
    account relevant evidence, including (i) whether or not  the  Appellant
    had in fact completed any necessary mental health treatment; (ii)  that
    Dr Banting's report records that the Appellant  tries  to  avoid  being
    around families at times as this  reminds  him  of  past  trauma,  when
    finding he would receive family support on return;  and  (iii)  whether
    the Appellant's family has any material experience or qualifications to
    assist in alleviating the Appellant's mental health problems.

12. Further it is submitted that the  Appellant's  circumstances  would  be
    exacerbated by the large number of  mental  health  sufferers  and  the
    diminished available healthcare facilities  in  Afghanistan.   Specific
    consideration should have been given as  to  the  Appellant's  risk  of
    suicide on return as a potential breach of Article 3  of  the  European
    Convention on Human Rights.  For those purposes,  the  decision  in  AM
    (Zimbabwe) v Secretary of State for the Home Department [2020] UKSC  17
    would be relevant to  assess  whether  there  would  be  a  significant
    reduction in the Appellant's life expectancy on account of the  absence
    of appropriate treatment or lack of  access  to  such  treatment.   The
    Appellant submits that such a consideration has direct relevance  to  a
    claim under Article 15(c) of the Qualification  Directive  because  the
    threshold of serious harm must include at least those  matters  against
    which Article 3 of the  European  Convention  on  Human  Rights  offers
    protection.

13. Finally, it is submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  would  have  to
    consider the option of internal relocation to Kabul and in doing so, it
    is noted that there is no overt evidence of the  Appellant  having  any
    family connection there, or whether any such person could alleviate his
    mental health problems.

14. The Respondent made written  submissions  in  reply  on  16  June  2020
    opposing the appeal.  The Respondent submits that there  is  no  proper
    basis to depart from the findings in paragraph 41 of the  decision  and
    that although this was by reference to the rubric of  paragraph  276ADE
    of the Immigration Rules, there is no doubt the appeal  was  considered
    globally and the same findings of face inform  each  distinct  area  of
    legal analysis required.  It is  noted  that  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    expressly stated that the facts will not be repeated in the section  on
    humanitarian protection, given that they have already been set out.

15. The Respondent also  submits  that  in  his  written  submissions,  the
    Appellant seeks to expand upon the grounds  of  appeal  on  matters  in
    relation to which no permission to appeal was sought or granted;  these
    include the risk of suicide on return, which  does  not  arguably  come
    within the ambit of protection of Article 15(c) and Article  3  of  the
    European Convention  on  Human  Rights  and  in  any  event,  the  high
    threshold  for such cases on mental health and suicide grounds can  not
    arguably be met on the Appellant's evidence and no  reliance  has  been
    placed on the analogous provision in Article 15(b) of the Qualification
    Directive.

16. As to the remainder of  the  Appellant's  submissions,  the  Respondent
    submits that these  amount  to  no  more  than  disagreement  with  the
    findings made.  In particular, it was open to the  First-tier  Tribunal
    to find that, three months after Dr Banting's  report  in  August  2019
    expecting treatment for a further six to nine months; the Appellant was
    likely to have received most of the prescribed treatment before  return
    to Afghanistan.  It was also not necessary for the First-tier  Tribunal
    to refer to each and every part of the evidence in the decision.

17. In relation to the  availability  of  healthcare  in  Afghanistan,  the
    Respondent submits that there is nothing to indicate  that  the  First-
    tier Tribunal was not aware of the difficulties in accessing the  same,
    but the salient finding is that the treatment required would have  been
    wholly or largely completed before removal.

18. Finally, any issue as to the reasonableness of internal relocation does
    not arise in circumstances where the First-tier Tribunal found that the
    Appellant could return to his home area.

19. In response to the  Respondent's  written  submissions,  the  Appellant
    clarified that there was no intention to expand or widen the grounds of
    appeal or issues to be addressed at this stage; only  to  identify  the
    materiality of the error of law by reference to the matters which would
    be in  play  on  reconsideration  of  Article  15(c)  and  whether  the
    Appellant would be entitled to  humanitarian  protection;  which  would
    include an assessment of mental health and suicide risk as well as  the
    possibility of internal relocation.



Findings and reasons

 1. The only paragraph  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal's  decision  relating
    specifically to humanitarian protection is as follows:

         "38. I have considered this aspect of the  appeal  separately  from
         the asylum appeal.  I do not need to and so will not  repeated  the
         facts.  On the established facts  I  find  that  the  core  of  the
         Appellant's  account  of  serious  harm  is  incredible  and  is  a
         fabrication designed to gain access to the United  Kingdom.   Given
         these conclusions, I find that substantial grounds  have  not  been
         shown for believing  the  Appellant  would  face  a  real  risk  of
         suffering serious harm if returned to the  country  of  return  and
         that the Appellant's removal would not cause the United Kingdom  to
         be in breach of its obligations under the Qualification Directive."

 2. The essence of this appeal is that findings above are wholly inadequate
    and that there  has  not  been  a  proper  assessment  of  whether  the
    Appellant meets the requirements of Article 15(c) of the  Qualification
    Directive.  Although it is  self-evident  that  there  is  no  detailed
    consideration in the decision; it is necessary  to  consider  what  the
    Appellant's position on this was before the First-tier Tribunal and the
    evidence relied upon when considering the adequacy of  this  assessment
    in the overall context of the decision under appeal.

 3. In paragraph 4 of the decision, the First-tier Tribunal identified  the
    substantive issues in the  appeal,  which  included  the  Qualification
    Directive in relation to humanitarian protection as one of the  grounds
    of appeal and which in any event inevitably goes hand in hand  with  an
    asylum claim.  However the record of  proceedings  shows  that  at  the
    outset of the hearing before the First-tier Tribunal the issues in  the
    appeal agreed by both representatives were (i) credibility;  (ii)  risk
    on return/internal relocation; and  (iii)  sufficiency  of  protection.
    The record of  proceedings  does  not  disclose  any  specific  witness
    evidence in relation to the issue of humanitarian protection;  nor  any
    substantive  submissions  on  Article  15(c)   of   the   Qualification
    Directive, only  a  brief  reference  at  the  very  end  to  it  being
    unreasonable for the Appellant to relocate to  Kabul  by  reference  to
    asylum, Article 15(c) and Article 8.

 4. The Appellant was legally represented before  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    and his Counsel submitted a skeleton argument, which only included  the
    following in relation to humanitarian protection:

         "23. In the alternative, the appeal should be allowed on the  basis
         that the Appellant would experience  breaches  of  Article  3  ECHR
         and/or Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive.

         24. The return of the Appellant as a young person would expose  him
         to a very high degree  of  suffering  and  leave  him  particularly
         vulnerable to exploitation.  The situation in Kabul for  vulnerable
         young men without families is dire.  The Appellant has  significant
         mental health difficulties, suffers from PTSD and lived  previously
         in rural Afghanistan, not a major city.  He is simply not  equipped
         mentally, culturally or in any other way to survive  adequately  in
         Kabul or elsewhere in Afghanistan."

 5. As can be seen from  above,  there  were  no  detailed  submissions  in
    relation to humanitarian protection either  in  writing  or  orally  on
    behalf of the Appellant and there is nothing to  suggest  that  matters
    now relied upon in the grounds of appeal and further  submissions  were
    put in issue before the First-tier Tribunal at all; nor any  suggestion
    that the humanitarian protection claim was distinct from or relied upon
    any different factors than the asylum claim  such  that  it  would  not
    stand or fall with the main claim and on the same factual matrix.

 6. In particular, there  was  no  substantive  reliance  on  any  specific
    evidence or particularised submission the  Appellant  was  at  risk  of
    indiscriminate violence in his home area; either by  mere  presence  or
    due to his personal characteristics, only a  bare  statement  that  the
    appeal should be allowed in the alternative under Article 15(c) of  the
    Qualification Directive.  There was  further  no  submission  that  the
    First-tier Tribunal should depart from  the  findings  in  AK  (Article
    15(c)) Afghanistan CG [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) (confirmed as  unaffected
    by the decision in AS (Safety of Kabul) CG [2020] UKUT  130  (IAC))  in
    which it was  found  that  the  level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Afghanistan as a whole was not at such a high  level  to  meet  Article
    15(c) such that a civilian does not face a real risk  to  his  life  or
    person solely by being present in the country.

 7. As to whether that starting point of no general risk of  indiscriminate
    violence was affected by  consideration  of  the  Appellant's  personal
    characteristics, primarily his PTSD and  suicidal  ideation,  again  no
    specific reliance was placed on this before the First-tier Tribunal and
    there was no reliance on any particular evidence in this regard.

 8. The Appellant's bundle did contain a medical report which detailed  his
    symptoms, diagnosis and treatment.   In  terms  of  treatment  and  the
    future position for the Appellant, the report concluded as follows:

         "Treatment:

         In terms of treatment, [the Appellant] has engaged  well  with  the
         YMOAT group and is keen to access 1:1 support.  He is currently  on
         the 1:1 waiting list.  He is keen to improve his mental health  and
         continue to build a meaningful life for himself.

         I anticipate that [the Appellant] will be in mental health services
         for the next 6-9 months.  I anticipate  that  this  treatment  will
         allow him to function well in the future and move on in  his  life.
         It is my view that it would be highly  detrimental  to  his  mental
         health for him to be removed from the UK and it would increase  his
         risk of suicide.  [The Appellant] also notes that if he was  to  be
         sent  back to Afghanistan that he would be  very  worried  that  he
         would have nowhere to go, as he cannot go back to his  village  and
         he does not know where his family are.  He is also  very  concerned
         that he would end up in the hands of the Taliban and that his  life
         would be at significant risk."

 9. The First-tier Tribunal were unarguably entitled to find on  the  basis
    of this evidence, from August 2019, that the Appellant  was  likely  to
    have wholly or largely completed the planned medical treatment prior to
    his return to Afghanistan on the basis that three of the  six  to  nine
    months that it was envisaged that the Appellant would remain in  mental
    health services had already passed at the date of hearing and given the
    time taken for  onward  appeal  rights  and  practicalities  of  actual
    removal; that was an unassailable finding.   There  was  no  suggestion
    from the Appellant at the date of hearing that his  proposed  treatment
    was not going according to the timetable set out in  evidence  or  that
    the position had  changed.   In  these  circumstances,  the  First-tier
    Tribunal were not  required  to  consider  whether  the  Appellant  had
    actually completed the planned treatment, the  evidence  supported  the
    finding made.

10. As to the medical evidence itself, it  is  notable  that  it  does  not
    include any  further  treatment  beyond  1:1  support  expected  to  be
    completed within six to nine months; either within the  United  Kingdom
    or if the  Appellant  were  removed  to  Afghanistan.   The  First-tier
    Tribunal  clearly  referenced  the  relatively  limited  mental  health
    facilities in Afghanistan and  difficulties  accessing  the  same,  but
    there was simply no evidence before it as  to  what,  if  any,  further
    treatment was required.

11. Further, although the medical evidence refers to the detrimental impact
    on the Appellant's mental health of removal; it is not  stated  whether
    that was before or after completion of the  planned  treatment  in  the
    United Kingdom; nor is this statement explained  at  all,  particularly
    against  the  potentially  contradictory  statement  that  the  planned
    treatment will allow the Appellant to function well in the  future  and
    move on with his life.  In any event, there is no assessment whatsoever
    of the likely impact, if any, of the Appellant's mental health  on  his
    circumstances on return to Afghanistan.  Further, the  statement  about
    detrimental impact would have to be considered in light of  the  report
    referring  to  the  Appellant's  PTSD  being  caused  in  part  by  his
    experiences of an incident in Afghanistan, which  is  contrary  to  the
    unchallenged finding of the First-tier Tribunal that there was no  such
    incident as claimed.

12. The Appellant placed no express reliance on any  part  of  Mr  Foxley's
    expert report in support of a claim  for  humanitarian  protection  and
    Article 15(c) and it is notable that although this refers to  incidents
    of violence in the Appellant's home  area;  the  primary  risk  to  the
    Appellant was said to be of indiscriminate violence and  identification
    by the Taliban (the latter rejected by the First-tier Tribunal).  There
    is some suggestion that the problems faced  by  the  Appellant  may  be
    exacerbated by his mental health problems but this is not expanded upon
    nor specifically related to any Article 15(c) risk, and as above, there
    is no detailed evidence as to the Appellant's likely mental  health  on
    return.

13. The lawfulness of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  on  humanitarian
    protection contained in paragraph 38 set out above has to  be  assessed
    in light of the evidence that was before it and the  Appellant's  claim
    in relation to it.  As can be seen from what is set  out  above,  there
    were no substantive or particularised submissions  on  the  Appellant's
    behalf as to any risk under Article 15(c) and no  express  reliance  on
    any particular evidence to provide  a  basis  for  departure  from  the
    country guidance as to general risk  or  personal  to  him  as  to  any
    increased  risk  of  indiscriminate  violence  based  on  his  personal
    circumstances.  In any event, there was a lack of any detailed evidence
    of his  likely  mental  health  on  return  (after  wholly  or  largely
    completing all planned treatment in the United  Kingdom)  or  how  this
    would or could place him at greater risk of indiscriminate violence  in
    his home area compared to a person not at risk  of  the  same  by  mere
    presence in the area.

14. In these circumstances, although at first sight it may appear that  the
    First-tier Tribunal  failed  to  undertake  a  detailed  assessment  of
    whether the Appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection,  I  find
    that on the evidence and submissions presented to  it,  the  relatively
    short findings were entirely lawful and appropriate in  response.   The
    First-tier Tribunal was faced with no more than a bare  assertion  that
    Article 15(c) applied, without any submissions or relevant evidence  to
    support  it;  and  no  suggestion  that  any  claim  for   humanitarian
    protection was distinct from the asylum claim.

15. Further, even if there was an error of law in the  First-tier  Tribunal
    failing to expressly make any more detailed assessment of  whether  the
    Appellant was entitled to humanitarian protection and or established  a
    risk under Article 15(c), it would not be material to  the  outcome  of
    the appeal given that on no rational or lawful basis could  the  First-
    tier Tribunal on the evidence that was before it, allow the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

16. As accepted by the Appellant, there was no application  for  permission
    to appeal on the grounds of Article 3 or specifically suicide risk  and
    matters of internal relocation are only relevant if the  Appellant  had
    established a risk on return to home area; which  he  had  not.   These
    matters could only become relevant to any remake  if  I  had  found  an
    error of law in the decision of the First-tier Tribunal requiring it to
    be set aside; which I have not.



Notice of Decision

The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve  the
making of a material error of law.  As such  it  is  not  necessary  to  set
aside the decision.

The decision to dismiss the appeal is therefore confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed G Jackson                        Date     10th August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Jackson
