

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07736/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Determination issued         |
|on 5 June 2017                                |on 7 June 2017               |
|                                              |                             |


                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN

                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                      G

                                                                  Respondent

For the Appellant:     Mr O Olabamiji, Solicitor, of Ethnic Minorities Law
Centre, Glasgow
For the Respondent:    Mr A Govan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer

                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The parties are as described above, but the rest of this  determination
    refers to them as they were in the FtT.

 2. Judge Mill allowed the appellant's appeal by decision promulgated on 17
    January 2017.

 3. The SSHD appeals to the UT on the following grounds:

      ... the judge identified the issue at [19]  as  specifically  directed
      towards the risk that the appellant's  mother-in-law  would  have  her
      daughter forcibly circumcised.

      In respect of that risk the judge finds at [23], "It may be said  that
      the appellant's risk on return may be low due to the  fact  she  would
      not require to contact mother-in-law with whom she has had  no  recent
      contact. The appellant has some  fear  that  her  mother-in-law  could
      trace her as a consequence of her other family connections  but  I  do
      not think this is likely".

      Having effectively found no well-founded fear of persecution on return
      for the reasons claimed, the judge nevertheless goes  on  to  find  at
      [24] that  the  appellant  would  not  readily  access  employment  in
      Nigeria. This is unexplained; the judge has  already  noted  that  the
      appellant worked in Nigeria for 10 years as a teacher [19, iii].  From
      there, the judge proceeds to speculate  at  [24]  that  the  appellant
      "would succumb to undue negative pressures which are likely to involve
      either the real risk of FGM being inflicted on  her  daughter  from  a
      source other than her  [mother-in-law]  or  her  seeking  support  and
      refuge from her mother-in-law  despite  her  express  wishes  for  her
      daughter which constitute her asylum claim". This finding is  perverse
      or, in the alternative, inadequately reasoned.

 4. A rule 24 response for the appellant runs as follows:

      The finding at [23] is to be read in the context that risk is  low  in
      terms of internal relocation. The appellant does not have  to  show  a
      real risk in the safe haven, simply that internal relocation would  be
      unreasonable.

      Although the FTT noted that the appellant had worked as a teacher  for
      10 years, the FTT explained why the appellant would not readily access
      employment at [19, vi, ix, xi, xiv, xv, xvi], [22] and [24] ...

      The remaining finding criticised at [24] is not speculation but  based
      on the [above] findings made on the evidence ...

      The FTT's approach ... does not disclose an error of law. The FTT  has
      explained in clear terms why the appellant won ... No misdirection  of
      law has been identified, the fact-finding process cannot be criticised
      and the findings were reasonably open to the FTT. In any event,  there
      was evidence on which the FTT was entitled to reject grounds (pp. 73 -
      76, 155 and 267 - 268 of the appellant's bundle).  The  SSHD  has  not
      pointed to convincing reasons leading to a contrary conclusion ...

      In any event, the refusal letter did  not  take  issue  with  internal
      flight.

      Separatim the finding is not perverse... The SSHD  may  disagree  with
      the findings, but such findings were within the  range  of  reasonable
      responses open to the FTT.

      The grounds are simply a disagreement...

 5. Both parties' submissions were along the lines of the above.  The  main
    additional points which I noted from the SSHD were these:

    From the finding at [23], the judge should have  gone  on  to  find  no
    risk.  The appellant is well  educated  and  worked  for  10  years  in
    Nigeria.  Even with two children and without  outside  family  support,
    she would be able to find work and re-establish herself.  The  decision
    did not have full regard to her background.   As  pointed  out  in  the
    refusal letter, she had spent 3 years in Lagos, where there would be no
    risk.  There was no evidence to justify the finding at  [24]  that  the
    appellant was likely to  succumb  to  "negative  pressures";  that  was
    highly speculative.  The outcome would be logical only if the  evidence
    supported a risk to all females in Nigeria,  without  regard  to  their
    background.  The outcome was unreasoned or even perverse.  The SSHD had
    submitted to the FtT on relocation.  The case should be remitted to the
    FtT for assessment of risk by another judge.

 6. These were the further points for the appellant:

    [23] was to be read in full and in context.  The appellant did not have
    to show risk everywhere in  Nigeria,  only  that  relocation  would  be
    unreasonable, or unduly harsh.  There was no absence of  reasoning  for
    the outcome.  It was  justified  by  the  findings  identified  in  the
    response, which excluded  relocation.   Alternatively,  relocation  was
    excluded by the conclusions in an expert report, pp.267 - 268,  against
    which the SSHD had made no submission,  and  by  the  evidence  of  the
    prevalence of FGM in Nigeria, pp. 73 - 76.  The  findings  referred  to
    explained why the judge thought that despite her 10 years working as  a
    teacher in Nigeria the circumstances of the appellant had changed;  she
    then had remittances from her husband, but she would now  be  a  single
    parent, as he had moved to Canada, and they had separated.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 8. The FtT's decision is not based on the appellant's circumstances  being
    such that relocation, away from an area of local risk, would be  unduly
    harsh.  It is based on relocation not excluding risk, which would apply
    throughout Nigeria.  The outcome is derived from the facts set  out  as
    established at [19, i - xvii], the last of which sub-paragraphs states:

      The appellant would be highly vulnerable and unable to support herself
      ... She would be returning with two young children ... unlikely to  be
      in a position to provide sufficient levels of care  to  meet  her  own
      needs and those of her two children ... likely  to  succumb  to  local
      cultural traditions and /  or  family  pressures  from  her  husband's
      family ... to obtain necessary supports.

 9. That finding is not criticised directly, but only through  the  grounds
    directed against [23] and [24].

10. As Mr Olabamiji contended, [23] is to be read in context and in full.

11. The grounds take the first two sentences of [23] rather out of context.
     The first sentence recognises the low point of the  appellant's  case.
    The second discounts the alleged risk of direct tracing by her  mother-
    in-law.  The third and final sentence, omitted from the  grounds,  says
    that the appellant's circumstances "must be  looked  at  in  the  wider
    sense".  That is what leads the judge to find a risk, not directly from
    the appellant's mother-in-law tracing her, but through falling back  on
    outside support, possibly including her mother-in-law.

12. The findings from which the ultimate  conclusions  follow  include  the
    breakdown of the  marital  relationship;  little  contact  between  the
    appellant and her husband, although he communicates with the  children;
    no close relative on the appellant's side to whom she might  turn;  and
    an economic crisis with high unemployment  rates,  all  as  cited  from
    [19].

13. The respondent's final submission, in seeking a remit to  the  FtT,  in
    effect rowed back from the argument that the  outcome  was  irrational,
    and that the appeal could only properly have been dismissed.

14. The evidence of high rates of FGM to which Mr Olabamiji referred is not
    enough to show real risk; the question is one of the risk of infliction
    against the will of the victim and of her carer or  carers.   Not  only
    the appellant but also the father of the child  opposes  the  practice.
    The judge did consider a direct risk from a 70-year-old  mother-in-law,
    extending throughout such a  vast  and  populous  country  as  Nigeria,
    unreal.  It might not be difficult to find cases where women  qualified
    for  teaching  or  similar  work  have  been  judged  capable  of   re-
    establishing themselves and their female children without falling  back
    on assistance which brings a risk from pro-FGM sources.  But points  of
    that nature made by the SSHD do not amount to more than re-argument  on
    the facts in a borderline case.

15. While another judge might  well  have  decided  otherwise,  the  SSHD's
    grounds do not show  that  the  judge's  ultimate  conclusion  was  not
    rationally available to him, or that  it  is  supported  by  less  than
    legally adequate reasoning.

16. The determination of the First-tier Tribunal shall stand.

17. An anonymity direction was made in the FtT, and  is  preserved  herein.
    No report of these proceedings shall directly  or  indirectly  identify
    the appellant or any member of her family.  This direction applies both
    to the appellant and to the respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this
    direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


            [pic]


            6 June 2017
            Upper Tribunal Judge Macleman




