
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal number: PA/07516/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decided under rule 34                |Decision and Reasons Promulgated     |
|                                     |On 13 July 2020                      |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                     N K
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. This  is  an  appeal  against  the  decision  of  FtT  Judge  N  Lodge,
    promulgated on 4 December 2019.

 2. The grounds are:

    [1]  no assessment of whether the appellant and  another  witness  were
    "vulnerable witnesses";

    [2]  errors in treatment of medical evidence - most  significantly,  in
    addressing that only after rejecting credibility;

    [3]   absence  of  reasoning  on   medical   treatment   available   in
    Afghanistan;

    [4]   inadequacy  of  reasons  for  rejecting  evidence  of  supporting
    witness;

    [5]  absence of finding on relationship to two commanders, a key aspect
    of the claim; and

    [6]  absence of consideration [or of reasoning] on article 15  (c)  and
    on internal relocation.

 3. The FtT granted permission on all grounds.  The  UT  issued  directions
    with a view to deciding without a hearing whether the FtT erred in  law
    and, if so, whether its decision should be  set  aside.   In  response,
    parties agree that the case is suitable for decision "on  the  papers";
    the decision of the FtT errs in law; it should be set  aside;  and  the
    case should be remitted to the FtT for a fresh hearing.

 4. For the reasons advanced by parties, I am satisfied that it appropriate
    to proceed accordingly.

 5. The one outstanding issue that the SSHD asks for the FtT's findings  on
    the appellant's age (derived in part from  a  previous  appeal)  to  be
    preserved.  The appellant does not agree that this was  not  in  issue,
    and asks for no findings to be preserved.

 6. It appears that age was in issue.  I also consider  that  it  would  be
    artificial and cumbersome to bind the next tribunal on the  point.   In
    this case, an unhampered remit is preferable.

 7. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is set aside.  Under section 12
    of the 2007 Act, and under Practice Statement 7.2, the case is remitted
    to the FtT for an entirely fresh hearing.  The member(s) chosen to hear
    the case are not to include Judge Lodge.

 8. The anonymity direction made by the FtT is preserved.

 9. The date of this determination is to be taken as the date it is  issued
    to parties.




    Hugh Macleman Date 29/06/2020


    UT Judge Macleman




                        NOTIFICATION OF APPEAL RIGHTS

1.   A person seeking permission to appeal against this decision  must  make
a written application to the Upper Tribunal.  Any such application  must  be
received by the Upper Tribunal within  the  appropriate  period  after  this
decision was sent to the person  making  the  application.  The  appropriate
period varies, as follows, according to the location of the  individual  and
the way in which the Upper Tribunal's decision was sent:

2.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  in  the
United Kingdom at the time that the application for permission to appeal  is
made, and is not in detention under the Immigration  Acts,  the  appropriate
period is 12 working days (10 working days, if the  notice  of  decision  is
sent electronically).

3.   Where the person making the  application  is  in  detention  under  the
Immigration Acts, the appropriate period is 7 working days (5 working  days,
if the notice of decision is sent electronically).

4.   Where the person who appealed to the  First-tier  Tribunal  is  outside
the United Kingdom at the  time  that  the  application  for  permission  to
appeal is made, the appropriate period is 38 days  (10 working days, if  the
notice of decision is sent electronically).

5.   A "working day" means any day except a Saturday or a Sunday,  Christmas
Day, Good Friday or a bank holiday.

6.   The date when the decision is "sent' is that appearing on the  covering
letter or covering email.


