
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07524/2019 (P)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Decision under Rule 34               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 August 2020                    |On 26 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                      UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE O'CALLAGHAN


                                   Between

                                     S A
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION CONFIRMED)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


                            DECISION AND REASONS

   Decision made under rule 34 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal)
                                 Rules 2008

Introduction

 1. This is an appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal Graves ('the Judge') sent to the parties on 3 December 2019 to
    refuse the appellant's appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

 2. The appellant has not appealed the decision of the Judge to refuse  his
    asylum and human rights (articles 2 and 3) appeals.

 3. The Judge allowed the appellant's appeal on human  rights  (article  8)
    grounds and the respondent did not appeal this decision.  I  have  been
    informed by Ms.  R  Pettersen  that  the  respondent  has  granted  the
    appellant limited leave to remain on human rights (article 8) grounds.

 4. By a decision dated 18 February 2020 Upper Tribunal Judge Blum  granted
    the appellant permission to appeal on  the  two  grounds  advanced  and
    stayed consideration of the error of law hearing until the handing down
    of the decision in AS (Safety of  Kabul)  Afghanistan  CG  [2020]  UKUT
    00130 (IAC), which took place on 1 May 2020.

 5. The appellant's legal representatives are Ata & Co, Harrow, Middlesex.

'Rule 34'

 6. This decision is made without a hearing under rule 34 of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008 ('the 2008 Rules').

 7. In light of the present need to take precautions against the spread  of
    Covid-19, the Vice-President considered the papers filed in this matter
    and observing the overriding objective expressed at rule  2(1)  of  the
    2008 Rules, and  also  at  rule  2(2)-(4),  indicated  by  a  Note  and
    Directions sent to the parties on 23 March 2020  his  provisional  view
    that it would be  appropriate  to  determine  the  following  questions
    without a hearing:

      i) Whether the making of the First-tier Tribunal's  decision  involved
         the making of an error of law, and if so

     ii) Whether the decision should be set aside.

 8. The parties were requested to  inform  the  Tribunal  if,  despite  the
    directions, a face-to-face hearing was required.  The  time  limit  for
    such objections has passed and neither party raised an objection to the
    Tribunal's provisional view.

 9. The appellant filed written submissions,  authored  by  Mr.  J  Dhanji,
    Counsel, dated 20 April 2020. Ms. Pettersen's written submissions  were
    filed on behalf of the respondent on 24 April  2020.  The  Tribunal  is
    grateful to the representatives for their helpful submissions.

10. In the circumstances and being  mindful  of  the  importance  of  these
    proceedings to the appellant and to the overriding objective  that  the
    Tribunal deal with cases fairly and justly I am satisfied  that  it  is
    just and appropriate to proceed under rule 34.

Anonymity

11. The Judge issued an anonymity direction  and  neither  party  requested
    that it be set aside. The direction is detailed at  the  conclusion  of
    this decision.

Background

12. The appellant is a national of Afghanistan and is presently aged 24. He
    asserts a well-founded fear of persecution  consequent  to  his  having
    rebutted efforts by the Taliban  to  join  them.  He  arrived  in  this
    country in 2009, whilst a minor, and  claimed  asylum.  The  respondent
    refused  his  claim  for  international  protection  but  granted   him
    discretionary leave to remain until November 2012. The  appellant  made
    an in-time application for further leave to remain which was refused by
    the respondent consequent to a decision letter dated 10 September 2014.
    The appellant's appeal was dismissed by a decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge of the First-tier Tribunal  Sangha)  dated  3  November
    2014 (AA/07294/2014). JFtT Sangha did not find the appellant  to  be  a
    credible witness. The appellant became appeal rights  exhausted  on  19
    May 2015.

13. The appellant submitted further representations on 20 October 2017. The
    respondent accepted that the representations constituted a fresh  claim
    for the purpose of paragraph 353 of the Immigration Rules ('the Rules')
    but refused to grant the appellant leave to remain in this country.

14. The appeal came before the Judge sitting at Hatton Cross on 3  December
    2019. She determined at [41]  that  there  was  insufficient  basis  to
    depart from the findings  of  fact  made  by  JFtT  Sangha  as  to  the
    appellant's personal history  in  Afghanistan.  Having  considered  the
    expert report of Dr. Giustozzi, the Judge concluded  that  there  would
    not be a breach of the appellant's article  3  rights  if  he  were  to
    relocate to Kabul, at [43]-[44]. Further, the situation  in  Kabul  did
    not meet the relevant article 15(c) Qualification  Directive  threshold
    required for a grant of humanitarian protection, at [44].

15. The Judge allowed the appellant's  article  8  appeal  under  paragraph
    276ADE(1)(vi), determining, inter alia, at [50}

         '50. I therefore find that this is an appellant who, while he is in
             good  physical  health,  and  is  now  an  adult,   is   still
             vulnerable, and even with a significant degree of  support  in
             this country, is still not fully independent. He is physically
             capable of work, but is struggling with severe  mental  health
             problems, that I find will affect his ability to  engage  with
             other people in Kabul and elsewhere in Afghanistan,  to  build
             social and other relationships, and to fend for himself, in  a
             difficult environment, where he will have no  support  network
             at all.

Grounds of appeal

16. The appellant filed detailed grounds of appeal drafted by counsel  that
    raised  two  grounds   concerned   with   the   First-tier   Tribunal's
    determination of his  humanitarian  protection  appeal,  identified  at
    para. 3 of the grounds as:

      i) A failure to properly engage  with  the  evidence  adduced  by  the
         appellant in support of his submission that the security  situation
         in Afghanistan has deteriorated  significantly  since  AK  (Article
         15(c)) Afghanistan [2012] UKUT 00163 (IAC) was promulgated and that
         there were grounds for the Tribunal to  depart  from  that  country
         guidance case and find that there is an article 15(c) risk in Kabul

     ii) Reaching a decision - that there is no article 15(c) risk in  Kabul
         - that was wrong  in  light  of  the  country  background  evidence
         adduced by the appellant.

Decision

17. The challenge advanced  by  the  appellant  is  a  narrow  one  and  as
    recognised by Mr. Dhanji in his written submissions, and  appropriately
    so, the conclusions of the Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul) Afghanistan
    CG  [2020]  UKUT  00130  (IAC)  is  of  material   relevance   to   the
    determination  of  this  appeal.  The  Country  Guidance  decision  was
    promulgated on 1 May 2020, after Mr Dhani's submissions were filed with
    the Tribunal, and the material part of the headnote  as  concerns  this
    appeal details:

         (ii) There is widespread and persistent  conflict-related  violence
             in Kabul. However, the proportion of the  population  affected
             by indiscriminate violence is small and not at a level where a
             returnee, even one with no family or other network and who has
             no experience living  in  Kabul,  would  face  a  serious  and
             individual threat  to  their  life  or  person  by  reason  of
             indiscriminate violence.'

18. I am  satisfied  that  the  Judge  carefully  considered  the  evidence
    presented by both parties as to the situation in  Kabul  and  undertook
    her assessment in the round at [42]-[44]. However, even if there was an
    error of law in her consideration of the evidence of Dr. Giustozzi, the
    UNHCR Eligibility Guidelines (30 August 2018) and the EASO report (June
    2019), it cannot be said to be material consequent to their  subsequent
    consideration by the Tribunal in AS (Safety of Kabul) and the  findings
    of facts drawn from such evidence by the Tribunal, when coupled with  a
    much broader range of evidence, which is contrary to that  asserted  by
    the appellant.

19. The Country Guidance decision in AS is authoritative unless  and  until
    it is set aside on appeal or replaced by a subsequent country  guidance
    determination: R. (on the application of Qader) v  Secretary  of  State
    for the Home Department [2011] EWHC 1765 (Admin). In the  circumstances
    as arise in this matter where the evidence relied upon was subsequently
    considered by the Tribunal in AS there is  no  material  error  of  law
    arising from either ground of appeal advanced and  so  the  appellant's
    appeal against the Judge's decision in  relation  to  his  humanitarian
    protection appeal is dismissed.



Notice of Decision

20. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of a
    material error on a point of law.

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal,  dated  3  December  2019,  is
    upheld and so the following is confirmed:

      i) The appellant's asylum appeal is dismissed

     ii) The appellant's humanitarian protection appeal is dismissed

    iii) The appellant's human rights (articles 2 and 3) appeal is dismissed

     iv) The appellant's human rights (article 8) appeal is allowed

22. The anonymity direction is confirmed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

23. Unless the Upper Tribunal or a court directs  otherwise  no  report  of
    these proceedings or any form of publication thereof shall directly  or
    indirectly identify the appellant. This direction applies  to,  amongst
    others, the appellant and the respondent. Any failure  to  comply  with
    this direction could give rise to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 21 August 2020



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

As the appellant has been  successful  in  his  article  8  appeal,  I  have
considered a fee award. The appellant was exempt from paying a  fee  and  so
no fee was paid. I therefore do not make a fee award.


Signed: D. O'Callaghan
Upper Tribunal Judge O'Callaghan

Dated: 21 August 2020

