
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                            Appeal Number:
PA/07855/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 16 May 2017                             |On 31 May 2017                   |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE WARR


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

                                     hz
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Miss J Isherwood, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Miss Moffatt of Counsel instructed by Fisher Jones
Greenwood
     Solicitors

                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   This is the appeal of the Secretary of State but I will  refer  to  the
    original appellant, a citizen of Iraq, born on  3  June  1999,  as  the
    appellant herein.

2.   The appellant arrived in this country illegally and applied for  asylum
    in January 2016.  The application was refused on 13 July 2016,  however
    it was accepted that the  appellant  was  Kurdish  and  from  the  Iraq
    Kurdistan region and that he came from Kushaf.  The appellant  referred
    to a land dispute in his claim and  stated  that  his  father  used  to
    transport alcohol to and from Mosul.  The Secretary of  State  rejected
    the appellant's claim on humanitarian protection  grounds  as  well  as
    under Articles 2 and 3 of the ECHR.

3.   The appellant appealed and his appeal came before  a  First-tier  Judge
    on 15 March 2017 when the appellant was represented  by  Miss  Moffatt,
    who appears before me.

4.    At  the  hearing  the  respondent's  representative  argued  that  the
    appellant would not be returned as a minor, but  it  was  submitted  on
    behalf of the appellant that the hearing was  to  consider  how  things
    were as at the date of hearing when the appellant was a child.

5.   The judge  in  her  findings  noted  that  it  was  accepted  that  the
    appellant was a child and as at the date of the hearing  was  17  years
    and 8 months old.  The  appellant  would  be  returned  to  Erbil.   In
    relation to the asylum appeal the judge found that  the  appellant  had
    exaggerated the question of the land  dispute,  although  she  accepted
    that there had been an issue about land in Gwer which was approximately
    fourteen kilometres from his village.  However, no-one worked the  land
    at present and the judge found there was no land dispute which affected
    his  ability  to  live  safely  in  Kushaf.   The  judge  accepted  the
    appellant's  evidence  that  his  father's  business  was  transporting
    alcohol in the region and travelling to  Gwer  and  she  accepted  that
    there was no difficulty with his father travelling through  the  region
    with his business, as identified by the appellant.

6.   The judge found that the appellant did not come  within  the  scope  of
    the Refugee Convention and there has been no challenge to  that  aspect
    of her decision.

7.   The judge refers to the country guidance case  of  AA  (Article  15(c))
    Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 00544 in considering the  appellant's  humanitarian
    protection claim and his claim based on Articles 2 and 3  of  the  ECHR
    and concludes her determination as follows:

         "46. He is an Iraqi Kurd from the Iraqi Kurdish Region  (IKR)  area
             and I rely on the Country Guidance case.  The headnote  to  AA
             states:


                  The respondent  will  only  return  P  to  the  IKR  if  P
                  originates from the IKR and P's identity  has  been  'pre-
                  cleared' with the IKR authorities. The authorities in  the
                  IKR do not  require  P  to  have  an  expired  or  current
                  passport, or laissez passer.


                  The IKR is virtually violence free. There  is  no  Article
                  15(c) risk to an ordinary civilian in the IKR.


         47.  Elgafaji (C-465/07) sets out:


             '39. In that regard, the more the applicant is  able  to  show
                  that he is specifically  affected  by  reason  of  factors
                  particular to his personal circumstances,  the  lower  the
                  level of indiscriminate violence required for  him  to  be
                  eligible for subsidiary protection.


             40.  Moreover, it should be  added  that,  in  the  individual
                  assessment of an application  for  subsidiary  protection,
                  under Article 4(3) of the Directive, the following may  be
                  taken into account:


                  -     the  geographical  scope   of   the   situation   of
                      indiscriminate violence and the actual destination of
                      the applicant in the event that he is returned to the
                      relevant country, as is clear from  Article  8(1)  of
                      the Directive, and


                  -    the existence, if any, of  a  serious  indication  of
                      real risk, such as that referred to in  Article  4(4)
                      of the Directive, an indication in the light of which
                      the level of  indiscriminate  violence  required  for
                      eligibility for subsidiary protection may be lower.'


         48.  I find that the appellant is a minor and I make this  decision
             with facts at the date of the  hearing,  such  that  he  is  a
             minor.  I find that he left Iraq at the beginning of 2015 with
             his uncle, aunt and sister.  He was separated from them on his
             journey when he was put into a separate van  by  agents.   His
             sister had his documents and therefore he is undocumented.  He
             has  had  no  contact  with  them  and  does  not  know  their
             whereabouts.


         49.  I bear in mind that his mother has  died  and  his  father  is
             missing.  He has other family who were in Erbil when  he  left
             Iraq but I have no information that they have been  traced  or
             indeed that they remain in Iraq.  I accept  that  he  was  not
             close to some family members who did not accept  his  father's
             business.  There is no information before me that  his  father
             has been traced.


         50.  I note the information in the respondent's bundle that Kurdish
             forces had pushed back ISIS from the villages  of  Kushaf  and
             Saqlyah dated 30 November 2014.  I find  that  this  does  not
             clarify the position in early 2015.  I note that  the  numbers
             identified are small, with 12 ISIS militants  captured  and  3
             killed.  I find this consistent with the appellant's  evidence
             that he has not seen ISIS but that ISIS were in the area.


         51.  The UNHCR report sets out that  the  area  controlled  by  the
             Kurdistan  Regional  Government  has  difficulties  with  "...
             continued insecurity, large scale contamination with mines and
             IEDs ..." and the Home Office country information dated August
             2016 confirms that the Kurdistan region  has  seen  airstrikes
             and the use of chemical weapons  has  been  reported.   I  put
             weight on this evidence.


         52.  The absence of support for  the  appellant  from  family,  his
             youth and the increased risks  arising  out  of  the  conflict
             encroaching in the region are all factors I bear  in  mind  in
             considering the risks to him on return.  I note that  he  does
             not have a CSID and that there may be difficulties and  delays
             in obtaining a CSID which exposes him to a risk of destitution
             on return.  I accept that he is in good health  and  would  be
             returning to Erbil but, on balance, I find that the  appellant
             cannot be returned to the IKR without breach of Article  15(c)
             of the Qualification Directive and Article 3 ECHR.


         53.  I am not satisfied that the appellant  would  be  at  risk  of
             treatment counter to Article 2 ECHR.


         Notice of decision


         54.  The appeal is allowed.  Whilst the  appellant's  removal  does
             not breach the Refugee Convention, his  removal  would  breach
             Article 15(c) of the Qualification Directive and/or Article  3
             ECHR."

8.   On 24 March 2017  the  respondent  applied  for  permission  to  appeal
    noting that while the judge had found that  the  appellant  was  not  a
    refugee, she had gone on to consider whether the appellant would be  at
    risk on humanitarian protection grounds and the  judge  had  failed  in
    considering whether there was a situation of internal armed conflict in
    Erbil.  The judge had failed to make any findings on this and there was
    nothing within the country guidance or in the Secretary of State's  own
    guidance which accepted that  there  was  an  internal  armed  conflict
    there.  The risk of serious harm only arose when there was an  internal
    armed conflict, and if there was not an internal  armed  conflict,  the
    appellant could not succeed on humanitarian  protection  grounds.   The
    judge had failed to explain why the appellant would  be  at  risk  from
    indiscriminate violence or serious harm.   The  lack  of  documentation
    identified by the judge was not without more a reason to find a risk of
    serious harm.  This was "precisely what the Tribunal in AA (Iraq) found
    against when considering the lack of documentation in such cases.   The
    findings are therefore inadequately reasoned."

9.   Permission to appeal was granted on  10  April  2017.   The  First-tier
    Judge commented that what was said in paragraph 50 of the decision  was
    "arguably insufficient to meet the test for internal armed conflict and
    accordingly it would be an error".  Counsel  filed  a  response  on  25
    April 2017.  It was pointed out that the judge had found that returning
    the appellant would breach Article 3 and it was not necessary  to  show
    the existence of an internal armed  conflict  for  removal  to  violate
    Article 3.

10.  In relation to the humanitarian protection claim the judge  had  relied
    on the appellant's minority, his lack of documentation and the lack  of
    any family support and that he would be an unattached child on  return.
    She had also referred to the background country evidence of  "continued
    insecurity, large-scale contamination  with  mines  and  IEDs"  in  the
    Kurdistan region, air strikes and the use of chemical weapons  as  well
    as the difficulties and delays the appellant would face in obtaining  a
    civil status identification document ("CSID"), thereby exposing him  to
    the risk of destitution.

11.  While the Secretary of State had  criticised  the  findings  about  the
    documentation  the  CSID  was  required  to   access   income/financial
    assistance, employment, education,  housing  and  medical  treatment  -
    reference was made to paragraph 152 of AA Iraq.   The  appellant  would
    have difficulty based on the findings in that case at paragraph 186  in
    obtaining a CSID. A conclusion that he would face a risk of destitution
    was  open  to  her.   She  had  not  simply  relied  on  the  lack   of
    documentation to find a violation of Article 3  and  the  Secretary  of
    State had misinterpreted her decision.

12.  At the hearing it emerged that Miss Isherwood  had  not  had  sight  of
    Counsel's reply and so I put the matter  back  to  enable  that  to  be
    copied to her.  She relied on the grounds and submitted that the  judge
    had been required to consider the situation in the place to  which  the
    appellant was to be returned and  his  individual  circumstances.   The
    fact that the asylum claim had been dismissed had not been  challenged.
    The lack of documentation was not sufficient to allow  the  appeal  and
    Miss Isherwood referred to H v Secretary of State  (application  of  AA
    Iraq CG) IJR [2017] UKUT 119 (IAC).  It was clear from that  case  that
    the state of internal armed conflict only existed in certain  parts  of
    Iraq.  That did not include the appellant's area.  The country guidance
    confirmed that the IKR was virtually violence-free  and  there  was  no
    risk to the ordinary civilian there.  The judge had  found  that  there
    was no risk from ISIS in the appellant's region  and  no  risk  flowing
    from the land dispute and his father could carry on his  business  with
    no significant difficulties.  It was accepted that  the  appellant  was
    still a minor and that the judge had been correct to deal with  him  as
    such.  She submitted however that the lack  of  documentation  was  not
    enough to enable the appellant to succeed.

13.  The appellant had other family in the area and was  not  an  unattached
    child, although his  mother  had  died  and  his  father  was  missing.
    Although the appellant was a minor the lack of documents was not enough
    and he had other family members.  No reasons had  been  given  for  the
    judge's findings.

14.  Miss Moffatt submitted that the case of  H  v  Secretary  of  State  to
    which Miss Isherwood had referred did  not  establish  the  proposition
    relied on by her.  The lack of documentation was not the sole factor in
    the appellant's case and she referred to paragraph 40 and the  citation
    from the case of AA.  It was said in paragraph 41 that a person who was
    returnable might nevertheless face difficulties if a CSID could not  be
    obtained following return.  The case did not advance matters  from  the
    decision of AA itself.  Counsel referred to  paragraph  152  of  AA  to
    which she had made reference in her  skeleton  argument.   There  would
    have to be a careful examination of  the  facts  in  each  case  -  for
    example, whether there was an adequate support mechanism.

15.  The judge had taken the correct approach.  It was clear  in  the  light
    of the judge's findings at paragraph 49 of her determination  that  the
    appellant had no support mechanism.  He  had  no  contact  with  family
    members and would face destitution as an unattached child.   As  argued
    in her reply, the judge had also found in  the  appellant's  favour  in
    relation to Article 3 and accordingly  any  error  in  considering  the
    humanitarian protection claim was  not  material.   The  appellant  had
    individual characteristics - he was still a child,  he  was  unattached
    and he would be returned alone and his  family  had  not  been  traced.
    There was no documentation and there would be a  risk  of  destitution.
    The judge had made findings about the difficulties  in  the  region  at
    paragraphs 50 to 52 of her determination.  In relation to the challenge
    in ground 2 the judge had been entitled to have regard to the  material
    before her and Counsel relied on her response.

16.  Miss Isherwood submitted that in the refusal letter reference had  been
    made to the Home Office guidance and it had been stated that:

     "Persons originating  from  the  IKR  whose  identity  has  been  'pre-
         cleared' with the IKR  authorities  are  not  required  to  have  a
         current  or  expired  passport,  or  a   laissez   passer.    Their
         nationality and identity has  been  established  and  accepted  and
         return is feasible."

     In the respondent's letter reference had been  made  to  returning  the
    appellant as an adult.  The decision of H v Secretary of State had  not
    been available to the First-tier Judge.  The judge had accordingly  not
    dealt with the country guidance as explained in H v Secretary of State.



17.  At the conclusion of the hearing  I  reserved  my  decision.  I  remind
    myself that I can only interfere with the decision  of  the  First-tier
    Judge if it was materially flawed in law. The  judge  appears  to  have
    directed herself correctly on the law and the  country  guidance.   For
    example, Miss Isherwood in her final remarks  referred  to  an  extract
    from the Home Office guidance but this appears to be based on the  head
    note to the country guidance of AA which is reproduced by the judge  at
    paragraph 46 of her decision.  The judge also reproduces what  is  said
    in AA about the IKR being  virtually  violence-free.   There  does  not
    appear to be any misdirection in her approach.  The judge  also  refers
    to Elgafaji paragraph 47 of her decision.

18.  The judge gives  careful  consideration  to  the  appellant's  personal
    circumstances.  She notes how he was separated from his uncle, aunt and
    sister on the journey and that he was undocumented as his sister,  from
    whom he was separated by the agents, had  the  documents.   He  had  no
    contact with them and did not know their whereabouts.  In addition, his
    mother had died and his father was missing.  There was  no  information
    before the judge that other members of the appellant's family had  been
    traced, or indeed that they remained in Iraq.  The  judge  specifically
    accepted that the appellant  was  somewhat  estranged  to  some  family
    members who did  not  accept  his  father's  business.   There  was  no
    information that the appellant's father had been traced.

19.  The judge considered the respondent's position in paragraph 50  of  her
    decision which I have reproduced above.

20.  It is clear that the  judge  did  not  rely  on  one  factor  alone  in
    reaching her decision and she sets out in  paragraph  52  a  number  of
    points of which the absence of a CSID is only one.  The  judge  focused
    on the circumstances as at the date of hearing - when the appellant was
    a minor - and Miss Isherwood acknowledges that is correct,  and  indeed
    that aspect of her decision was not challenged in the grounds.  I agree
    with Counsel that the case of H v Secretary of State does  not  advance
    matters.  Indeed, it stresses the importance of making findings of fact
    regarding an appellant's circumstances in order to  apply  the  country
    guidance.  Paragraph 41  of  the  determination  makes  it  clear  that
    difficulties may be faced by  someone  who  cannot  obtain  a  CSID  on
    return, even if there are no difficulties about obtaining a passport or
    laissez passer.  The Tribunal refers to an  extract  from  the  country
    guidance in paragraph 40 - the concluding paragraph  of  paragraph  170
    reads:

     "The Tribunal will need to know,  in  particular,  whether  the  person
         concerned has a CSID.  It is only where return is feasible but  the
         individual concerned does not have a CSID that the consequences  of
         not having one come into play."

     The Tribunal found that the country guidance decision of AA  "does  not
    support the respondent's approach in the present case to the  issue  of
    documentation".

21.  I am not satisfied that the determination is materially flawed for  the
    reasons advanced by the Secretary of State in  this  case.   The  judge
    went carefully into the appellant's individual circumstances.   It  was
    open to her to allow the appeal under Article 15C and  Article  3.   As
    Counsel points out, if the  judge  erred  in  finding  that  there  was
    indiscriminate violence in the appellant's home area - and Counsel does
    not concede this - then the error was not material as  the  appeal  had
    also been allowed under Article 3.

22.  I note that the judge had referred to Elgafaji at paragraph 47  of  her
    determination  and  the  question   of   the   appellant's   individual
    circumstances which might lower the level  of  indiscriminate  violence
    required for the appellant to be eligible  for  subsidiary  protection.
    She took all relevant matters into account.

23.  For the reasons I have given  I  am  not  satisfied  that  the  grounds
    disclose a material error of law on the part of the First-tier Judge.

24.  The appeal of the Secretary of State is dismissed.



Anonymity Direction

25.  The First-tier Judge made an anonymity  order  and  it  is  appropriate
    that that should continue:

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

The First-tier Judge made no fee award and I make none.






Signed                                  Date 26 May 2017


G Warr, Judge of the Upper Tribunal

