
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07231/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 27th November 2018                         |On 12th December 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                    [g d]
                         (ANONYMITY order not made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr I Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr E Wilford, Counsel instructed by Globetrot
                    Consultancy Services


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. For convenience purposes I shall employ  the  appellations  "Appellant"
    and "Respondent" as at first instance.

 2. The Appellant is a citizen of Zimbabwe who  came  to  this  country  in
    August 2002 as a visitor and when in this country was diagnosed as  HIV
    positive; she has been receiving appropriate treatment during her  time
    here.  She also suffers from  epilepsy.   She  sought  asylum  but  was
    unsuccessful in that regard.  The most recent decision is a decision by
    First-tier Tribunal Judge Cockrill who in  a  decision  promulgated  on
    13th September 2018 concluded that  she  would  face  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration into Zimbabwe and allowed the appeal  on
    human rights grounds (Article 8).  He dismissed the  protection  appeal
    on asylum grounds and there is no further argument about that.

 3. The decision of Judge Cockrill is challenged by the Secretary of  State
    who lodged grounds of application stating that  there  was  a  material
    misdirection of law in that the judge had said he  was  not  given  any
    evidence that would suggest that  the  sort  of  device  necessary  for
    epilepsy would be available to the Appellant in Zimbabwe and it did not
    need much imagination to think about what could happen to  a  woman  of
    her years who would be living on her own  there  and  who  suffered  an
    epileptic seizure.  The conclusion reached was that the Appellant would
    face very  significant  obstacles  to  her  reintegration  and  it  was
    submitted by the Secretary of State that the main reason  for  allowing
    the Appellant's appeal was her health condition which clashed with  the
    findings in GS (India) [2015] EWCA Civ 40 at paragraph 111.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Lambert
    in a decision dated 3rd October 2018.

 5. For the  Appellant  a  skeleton  argument  was  submitted  noting  that
    permission had been granted on the basis that Judge Cockrill had failed
    to apply GS (India).

 6. It was said that Judge Cockrill neither held Article 8(1) to be engaged
    on the basis of the absence or inadequacy of medical  treatment  or  on
    the fact that she is receiving medical treatment in this country  which
    might not be available in the country of return.  What was important to
    note was that there were findings at paragraph 42 of the decision where
    the judge said there was family life in existence  between  mother  and
    daughter.  The judge commented on the particularly  close  relationship
    which existed between the two because of the extent of dependence  upon
    the daughter that the Appellant has had and still does have.  There had
    been no assertion or at any point in the decision that Article 8(1) was
    engaged by the absence of inadequacy or inadequacy of medical treatment
    in the country of return.  The judge had  moved  on  to  the  balancing
    exercise and it was plain that the medical treatment point was not  the
    sole basis upon which his finding that the decision to remove  her  was
    disproportionate.  Judge Cockrill had plainly taken into account on the
    one side the period of the Appellant's residence in the UK and the bond
    between the Appellant and her daughter and the  practical  difficulties
    with illness; on the other side he had taken into  account  the  public
    interest.

 7. It was said that the decision disclosed no error of law.

 8. Before me Mr Jarvis relied on his  grounds  but  wished  to  amend  the
    grounds orally to note that the judge had  misapplied  the  burden  and
    standard of proof in setting  out  that  he  had  not  been  given  any
    evidence at all in paragraph 44.   The  burden  of  proof  was  on  the
    Appellant and the judge had failed to recognise that.

 9. It was argued per the grounds  that  there  were  no  very  significant
    obstacles to her reintegration in Zimbabwe.

10. For the Appellant Mr Wilford relied on his skeleton argument. The  Home
    Office had had plenty of time to consider their position and it was far
    too late now to amend on the morning of  the  hearing  the  grounds  of
    application.  The point was that the judge did not rely solely  on  the
    medical issue in allowing the appeal  under  Article  8  grounds.   The
    judge had given other reasons all are set out in the skeleton argument.
     As such the decision did not involve the making of an error on a point
    of law and the decision should stand.

11. I reserved my decision.

Conclusions

12. It seems to me that the Home Office are too late to amend their Grounds
    of Appeal. While it is to be noted that at no point does Judge Cockrill
    set out the formal burden  and  standard  of  proof  (where  under  the
    Immigration rules the burden rests on the Appellant) he was entitled to
    say that there  was  a  lack  of  evidence  on  an  issue  before  him.
    Furthermore, there is, in  my  view,  no  passage  of  narration  which
    suggests he has applied the wrong standard of proof.

13. I think the point to note here is as set  out  by  Mr  Wilford  in  his
    skeleton argument namely that this is not purely  a  medical  treatment
    case.  The judge noted (paragraph 41) that the Appellant  had  been  in
    the United Kingdom for some sixteen years and for the vast majority  of
    her time here she has had the close and loving support of her daughter.
     The judge noted that the daughter's position had been  regularised  to
    the extent that she had been granted a period of leave and that was not
    the case before the previous judge.  In paragraph 42 the judge went  on
    to say that there was family life in existence here between mother  and
    daughter  and  he  said  that  because  of   the   particularly   close
    relationship which existed between the two  of  them  and  because  the
    extent of dependence upon the daughter that the Appellant has  had  and
    still does have that this was  an  important  factor  in  allowing  the
    appeal.

14. The judge referred  to  the  Appellant's  medical  condition  and  said
    (paragraph 44) that he  was  deeply  concerned  that,  looking  at  the
    totality of  the  situation,  that  she  would  face  very  significant
    problems in  going  back  now  to  Zimbabwe.   In  terms  of  paragraph
    276ADE(vi) he was prepared to accept that  her  clinical  position  was
    sufficiently marked and serious such that the Appellant would have very
    serious problems in adjusting to life in  Zimbabwe  without  day-to-day
    support and care.  He recognised the test was  an  unquestionably  high
    one but, in his judgment, he considered it had been met  and  concluded
    that the  Appellant  would  face  very  significant  obstacles  to  her
    reintegration in Zimbabwe if she was expected to return  there  and  he
    said that because of the various major health conditions from which she
    suffers.

15. In my view the judge's conclusions in relation to paragraph  276ADE(vi)
    are reasoned and coherent and entirely sustainable.   It  follows  from
    that finding alone that the judge was entitled to go on and  allow  the
    appeal on human rights grounds.

16. I also repeat that I agree with the submissions set out by  Mr  Wilford
    namely that this is clearly not just a purely  medical  treatment  case
    and the judge has given entirely adequate reasons for concluding  that,
    overall, the appeal should be allowed on human rights grounds.

17. As such there is no error of law in the  judge's  decision  which  must
    stand.

Notice of Decision

18. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

19. I do not set aside the decision.

20. No anonymity order is made.


Signed     J  G  Macdonald                               Date  7th  December
2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald

