

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                 Appeal Number:
PA/07649/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at North Shields             |       Decision & Reasons          |
|                                   |Promulgated                        |
|On 9 June 2017                     |       On 20 June 2017             |
|                                   |                                   |

                                   Before

                      DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE DOYLE

                                   Between

                            MEHDI MAHMUD MOHAMMED
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:          Mr C Boyle of Halliday Reeves Law Firm
For the Respondent:       Mr S Whitwell, Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1. I have considered whether  any  parties  require  the  protection  of  an
anonymity direction. No anonymity direction was made previously  in  respect
of this Appellant. Having considered all the circumstances  and  evidence  I
do not consider it necessary to make an anonymity direction.


2. This is an appeal by the Appellant against  the  decision  of  First-tier
Tribunal Judge  Hussain  promulgated  on  19/12/2016,  which  dismissed  the
Appellant's appeal on all grounds.



Background


3. The Appellant was born on  24/0/1991  and  is  a  national  of  Iraq.  On
12/07/2016 the Secretary of State refused the Appellant's protection  claim.



The Judge's Decision

4. The Appellant appealed to the First-tier  Tribunal.  First-tier  Tribunal
Judge Hussain ("the Judge") dismissed the appeal  against  the  Respondent's
decision. Grounds of appeal were lodged and on 28/03/2017  Judge  Ford  gave
permission to appeal stating inter alia

      2. The appellant is an Iraqi Kurd from Diyala. It was accepted by  the
      tribunal that the appellant could not be returned safely to  his  home
      area. He is without documents but the Tribunal considered  his  appeal
      on the basis that once documents were secured  he  could  be  returned
      safely to Baghdad or alternatively the KRG via Baghdad.


      3. It is arguable that the tribunal may have erred in the approach  it
      took to the issue of internal relocation (Baghdad and/or the KRG),  in
      particular the  feasibility  of  such  a  return  given  the  lack  of
      documents and whether such a relocation would be unduly harsh.


      4. It is also arguable  that  the  tribunal  may  have  erred  in  its
      consideration of the article 3 and humanitarian protection grounds.


      5. There is an arguable material error of law.

The hearing

5. (a) Mr Boyle, for the appellant, moved the grounds of appeal. He told  me
that although there are four grounds of appeal,  they  all  fall  under  the
umbrella of failure to follow country guidance and  inadequate  findings  of
fact. He referred me to the cases of AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT
544 (IAC) & BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC).

(b) Mr Boyle told me that it is accepted by  the  respondent  that,  because
the appellant is undocumented, his return is unfeasible. He took me  to  [4]
of the decision, where the Judge records that the appellant's return is  not
feasible. He took me to [16] of the decision where the  Judge  accepts  that
the appellant does not have a CSID. He  told  me  that  although  the  Judge
referred to AA, he did not properly follow the guidance  contained  therein.
Mr  Boyle  told  me  that  the  Judge  had  approached  internal  relocation
incorrectly because the Judge found that, simply because the appellant is  a
Kurd, the appellant can enter the IKR. He told  me  that  the  Judge  should
have considered how the appellant would make his way  from  Baghdad  airport
to the IKR, and then consider whether or not internal relocation  is  unduly
harsh, he told me that the Judge had not considered whether  or  not  it  is
safe and reasonable for the appellant to relocate.


(c) Mr Boyle told me that the  appellant  is  a  Kurd  who  does  not  speak
Arabic, he is a Sunni Muslim and he does  not  have  family  or  friends  in
Baghdad. He told me that the Judge's conclusion at [18] of the  decision  is
unsafe. There, he told me, the Judge takes the view that  because  a  friend
of the appellant's father was able to help the appellant  make  his  way  to
Europe, that same family friend must be available to help the  appellant  on
return to Baghdad. He told me that that conclusion is illogical


(d) Mr Boyle told me that, for the same reasons, the Judge has  not  carried
out an adequate article 15c  assessment,  and  that,  overall,  the  Judge's
findings of fact are inadequate. He urged me to allow  the  appeal  and  set
the decision aside.


6. For the respondent Mr  Whitwell  told  me  that  the  decision  does  not
contain errors material or  otherwise.  He  told  me  that  the  Judge  took
guidance from  AA,  and  that  BA  has  no  application  to  the  facts  and
circumstances of this case. He referred me to paragraph 18 of  SAID  v  SSHD
[2016] EWCA civ 442, and told me that the Judge had carried out  a  flawless
assessment of internal relocation, finding that the  appellant  has  support
in Baghdad and finding at [19] of the decision that, because  the  appellant
is Kurdish, he can secure entry to IKR and will not be removed  from  there.
He told me that the Judge is obliged to follow country guidance and that  at
both [2] and [17] of the decision the Judge correctly identifies AA  as  the
relevant country guidance. He urged me to dismiss the appeal and  allow  the
decision to stand.


   Analysis


7. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544 (IAC) it was held that  (i)
Return of former residents of the Iraqi Kurdish Region (IKR) will be to  the
IKR and all other Iraqis will be to  Baghdad.  The  Iraqi  authorities  will
allow an Iraqi national (P) in the United Kingdom to enter Iraq  only  if  P
is in possession of a current or expired Iraqi passport relating to P, or  a
laissez passer; (ii) No Iraqi national will be returnable to Baghdad if  not
in possession of one of these documents; (iii)  In the light  of  the  Court
of Appeal's judgment in HF (Iraq) and Others v Secretary of  State  for  the
Home Department [2013] EWCA Civ  1276,  an  international  protection  claim
made by P cannot succeed by reference to any alleged risk  of  harm  arising
from an absence of  Iraqi  identification  documentation,  if  the  Tribunal
finds that P's return is not currently feasible, given what is  known  about
the state of P's documentation.

8. In AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015] UKUT 544  (IAC)  it  was  also  held
that (i) It will only be where the Tribunal is satisfied that the return  of
an Iraqi national (P) to Iraq is feasible that the issue of alleged risk  of
harm arising from an absence  of  Iraqi  identification  documentation  will
require  judicial  determination;  (ii)  Having  a  Civil  Status   Identity
Document (CSID) is one of the ways in which it  is  possible  for  an  Iraqi
national in the United Kingdom to obtain a passport  or  a  laissez  passer.
Where the Secretary of State proposes to remove P by means of a passport  or
laissez passer, she will be expected to demonstrate to  the  Tribunal  what,
if any, identification documentation led the Iraqi authorities  to  issue  P
with the passport or laissez passer (or to  signal  their  intention  to  do
so); (iii) Where P is returned to  Iraq  on  a  laissez  passer  or  expired
passport, P will be at no risk of serious harm at the  point  of  return  by
reason of not having a current passport  or  other  current  form  of  Iraqi
identification document; (iv) Where P's return  to  Iraq  is  found  by  the
Tribunal to be feasible, it will generally be necessary to decide whether  P
has a CSID, or will be able to obtain one, reasonably soon after arrival  in
Iraq. A CSID  is  generally  required  in  order  for  an  Iraqi  to  access
financial assistance from the authorities; employment;  education;  housing;
and medical treatment.  If P shows there are  no  family  or  other  members
likely to be able to provide means of support, P is  in  general  likely  to
face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by the  time
any funds provided to P by the Secretary of State or her  agents  to  assist
P's return have been exhausted, it is reasonably likely that  P  will  still
have no CSID; (v) Where return is feasible but P does not  have  a  CSID,  P
should as a general matter be able to  obtain  one  from  the  Civil  Status
Affairs Office for P's home Governorate, using an  Iraqi  passport  (whether
current or expired), if P has one. If P does not have such a  passport,  P's
ability to obtain a CSID may depend on whether P knows the page  and  volume
number of the book holding P's information (and that  of  P's  family).  P's
ability to persuade the  officials  that  P  is  the  person  named  on  the
relevant page is likely to depend on whether P has family members  or  other
individuals who are prepared to vouch for P; (v) P's  ability  to  obtain  a
CSID is likely to be severely hampered if P is unable to  go  to  the  Civil
Status Affairs Office of P's Governorate because it  is  in  an  area  where
Article 15(c) serious harm is  occurring.  As  a  result  of  the  violence,
alternative  CSA  Offices  for  Mosul,  Anbar  and  Saluhaddin   have   been
established in Baghdad and Kerbala.  The evidence does not demonstrate  that
the "Central Archive", which exists in  Baghdad,  is  in  practice  able  to
provide CSIDs to those in need  of  them.  There  is,  however,  a  National
Status Court in Baghdad, to which P could apply for  formal  recognition  of
identity. The precise operation of this court is, however, unclear.


9. In BA (Returns to Baghdad) Iraq CG [2017] UKUT 18 (IAC) it was held that
(i) The level of general violence in Baghdad city remains significant,  but
the current evidence does not justify departing from the conclusion of  the
Tribunal in AA (Article 15(c)) Iraq CG [2015]  UKUT  544  (IAC).  (ii)  The
evidence shows that those who worked for non-security  related  Western  or
international companies, or any other categories of  people  who  would  be
perceived as having collaborated with foreign coalition forces,  are  still
likely to be at risk in areas which are under ISIL  control  or  have  high
levels of insurgent activity. At the current time the  risk  is  likely  to
emanate from Sunni insurgent groups  who  continue  to  target  Western  or
international companies as well as those who are perceived  to  collaborate
with the Government of Iraq. (iii) The current evidence indicates that  the
risk in Baghdad to those who worked for  non-security  related  Western  or
international companies is low although there  is  evidence  to  show  that
insurgent groups such as ISIL  are  active  and  capable  of  carrying  out
attacks in the city. In so far as there may be a low  level  of  risk  from
such groups in Baghdad it is not sufficient to show a real risk solely as a
perceived  collaborator.  (iv)  Kidnapping  has  been,   and   remains,   a
significant and persistent problem contributing to the breakdown of law and
order in Iraq. Incidents of kidnapping  are  likely  to  be  underreported.
Kidnappings might be linked to  a  political  or  sectarian  motive;  other
kidnappings are rooted in criminal activity for a purely financial  motive.
Whether a returnee from the West is likely to be perceived as  a  potential
target for kidnapping in Baghdad may depend on how long he or she has  been
away from Iraq. Each case will be fact sensitive,  but  in  principle,  the
longer a person has  spent  abroad  the  greater  the  risk.  However,  the
evidence does not show a real risk to a returnee in Baghdad on this  ground
alone. (v) Sectarian violence has increased since the withdrawal of  US-led
coalition forces in 2012, but is not at the levels  seen  in  2006-2007.  A
Shia dominated government is supported by Shia  militias  in  Baghdad.  The
evidence indicates that Sunni  men  are  more  likely  to  be  targeted  as
suspected supporters of Sunni extremist groups such as ISIL. However, Sunni
identity alone is not sufficient to give rise to a  real  risk  of  serious
harm. (vi) Individual characteristics, which do not in themselves create  a
real risk of serious harm on return to Baghdad, might amount to a real risk
for  the  purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention,  Article  15(c)   of   the
Qualification Directive  or  Article  3  of  the  ECHR  if  assessed  on  a
cumulative basis. The assessment will depend on the  facts  of  each  case.
(vii) In general, the authorities in Baghdad are unable, and in the case of
Sunni complainants, are  likely  to  be  unwilling  to  provide  sufficient
protection.

10. What is not in dispute in this case is that the appellant is a Kurd;  he
is a Sunni Muslim; the appellant does not speak Arabic,  and  the  appellant
has no family in Iraq.

11. At [4] of the decision the Judge finds that the appellant cannot  return
to his home area because he faces article 15c risk there.  At  [15]  of  the
decision the Judge  finds  that  return  will  be  to  Baghdad  because  the
appellant is not a resident of  IKR.  At  [18]  the  Judge  finds  that  the
appellant will be able to re-establish contacts in Iraq which


   Could help him to relocate in the IKR and nearer to his father's friend.

12. At [20] the Judge finds that the appellant can fly from Baghdad to  IKR,
and that he will not become destitute whilst in Baghdad awaiting his  onward
flight.

13. The decision contains a number  of  conclusions.  It  does  not  contain
adequate findings of fact to support those  conclusions.  Although  at  [17]
the Judge quotes correctly from AA, and is clearly mindful of  the  need  to
consider whether or not relocation is unduly harsh, the Judge does not  then
carry out adequate consideration of what faces the appellant in  Baghdad  or
how he will travel from Baghdad to IKR

14. BA tells me that the authorities are likely to be disinterested  in  the
plight of a Sunni Kurd in Baghdad. The background  materials  tell  me  that
the appellant will be  allowed  to  visit  IKR  for  10  days.  The  Judge's
decision contains no realistic consideration of what is likely to happen  to
the appellant at the end of that 10-day period. The  Judge  has  found  that
the appellant is returning as a single man with (at best)  limited  support.
Those findings have not been factored into consideration of  whether  it  is
safe and reasonable for the appellant to return to an  area  of  Iraq  other
than his home area.

15.  In MK (duty to give reasons) Pakistan [2013] UKUT 00641 (IAC),  it  was
held that (i) It was axiomatic that a determination  disclosed  clearly  the
reasons for a tribunal's decision. (ii) If a tribunal  found  oral  evidence
to be implausible, incredible or unreliable or a document  to  be  worth  no
weight whatsoever, it was necessary to say so in the determination  and  for
such findings to be supported by reasons. A bare statement  that  a  witness
was not believed or that a document was afforded no weight was  unlikely  to
satisfy the requirement to give reasons.

16.  I therefore find that the decision is tainted  by  material  errors  of
law because the Judge, having found that the appellant will not be  safe  in
his home area,  does  not  go  on  to  properly  consider  whether  internal
relocation is safe and reasonable for this appellant.  The conclusions  that
the Judge reaches are not supported by adequate reasoning - so  that  it  is
impossible for the objective  reader  to  see  how  the  Judge  reached  his
conclusions. A  fuller  fact-finding  exercise  might  have  resulted  in  a
different outcome to this  appeal.  I  must,  therefore,  set  the  decision
promulgated on 19 December 2016 aside.

17. I have already found material errors of law in the fact-finding  process
carried out by the First-tier in the decision  promulgated  on  19  December
2016. I therefore find that I cannot substitute my own decision  because  of
the extent of the fact-finding exercise required to reach  a  just  decision
in this appeal.


Remittal to First-Tier Tribunal

18. Under Part 3 paragraph 7.2(b) of the Upper Tribunal  Practice  Statement
of the 25th of September 2012 the case may be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
Tribunal if the Upper Tribunal is satisfied that:

   (a) the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the First-
   tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other  opportunity  for  that  party's
   case to be put to and considered by the First-tier Tribunal; or


   (b) the nature or extent of any judicial fact finding which is necessary
   in order for the decision in the appeal to be re-made is such that,
   having regard to the overriding objective in rule 2, it is appropriate to
   remit the case to the First-tier Tribunal.

19. In this case I have determined that the case should be remitted  because
a new fact-finding exercise is required.  None of the findings of  fact  are
to stand and a complete re hearing is necessary.

20. I remit the matter to the First-tier Tribunal sitting at  North  Shields
to be heard before any First-tier Judge other than Judge Hussain.

Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal is tainted  by  material  errors
of law.

22. I set aside the Judge's decision promulgated on 19  December  2016.  The
appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal to be determined of new.

Signed                Paul Doyle
  Date 12 June2017
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Doyle


