
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07854/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 14 January 2019                            |On 6 February 2019            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                                DR H H STOREY
                         JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     DA
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms S Bassiri-Desfouli, Counsel instructed by A2
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms A Everett, Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant who is  from  Kuwait  has  permission  to  challenge  the
    decision of Judge Parkes of the First-tier Tribunal  sent  on  30  July
    2018 dismissing his appeal against the decision made by the  respondent
    on 15 June 2018 refusing his protection claim.

2.   The essence of  the  grounds  is  that  the  judge  took  an  incorrect
    approach to the evidence of the witness, Mr Hamed, who is a  recognised
    refugee in the UK and also failed to make proper findings.

3.   At the outset the representatives said they had conferred and  were  in
    agreement in thinking that the  judge  had  materially  erred  in  law.
    Based on my own pre-reading of the file, I was not  initially  prepared
    to agree, but having sought submissions and clarifications from both of
    them, I am persuaded that the decision is vitiated by legal error.

4.   There are two main difficulties with the judge's  decision.   First  of
    all I agree with the parties that the judge's treatment of the witness'
    evidence was defective.  At paragraphs 21-22 the judge wrote:

         "21. I appreciate that Mr Hamed has been granted asylum  but  I  do
             not have the full details of his circumstances, the  basis  on
             which he was granted and whether that was following a  hearing
             or by the Home Office.  In any event his evidence did not  add
             much to the Appellant's case.   He  could  not  give  evidence
             relating to the Appellant's claimed problems with the security
             forces in Kuwait only confirming the Appellant's working as  a
             street vendor, knowing the Appellant's  employer  vaguely  and
             that the Appellant was upset over his mother's health.


         22.  It is a strange coincidence that both  the  Appellant  and  Mr
             Hamed were employed by individuals who were prepared  to  take
             the risk of association with undocumented Bidoon and then they
             were housed by their respective employers  in  safe  locations
             and that the  employers  also  arranged  and  paid  for  their
             departure for the UK."

5.   I  consider  that  this  assessment  went  wrong  in  saying  that  the
    witness's evidence did not have potential weight because  it  "did  not
    add much."  This witness's' evidence included an unambiguous claim that
    he knew t the appellant to be an undocumented Bidoon.  If this  witness
    was accepted as credible this was potentially material evidence (albeit
    hearsay).  Second, the  judge's  view  that  "(i)f  the  appellant  was
    undocumented it is not clear how the security forces would be  able  to
    identify or locate him" is at odds with the background country evidence
    which indicates that within Kuwait the authorities have often  targeted
    undocumented Bidoon and subjected them to a number of adverse measures,
    including detention.  It is not suggested  in  the  background  country
    evidence that the undocumented status of such  persons  has  made  them
    untraceable or that  all  those  detained  are  detained  on  a  purely
    haphazard or random basis.

6.    Whilst  therefore  I  find  some  of  the  points   raised   by   both
    representatives to miss the mark, I am persuaded  that  the  above  two
    deficiencies   together   constitute   a   material   error   of   law.
    Unfortunately, since there is no agreement between the  parties  as  to
    the facts - including whether the appellant is in fact an  undocumented
    Bidoon - I see no alternative to a  remittal  back  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal for a de novo hearing.
7.   For the above reasons I conclude that  the  First-tier  Tribunal  judge
    materially erred in law and that his decision is to be remitted to  the
    First-tier Tribunal to be heard de novo (not before Judge Parkes).

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                                  Date: 2 January 2019
             [pic]

Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal

