
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07783/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 6th November 2018                          |On 23rd November 2018         |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D N HARRIS


                                   Between

                                    [P T]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION NOT MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr N Paramorthy, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Ms Brocklesby-Weller, Home Office Presenting Officer



                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a  citizen  of  Sri  Lanka  born  on  [~]  1987.   The
    Appellant claimed to have arrived in the United Kingdom  on  20th  June
    2011 on a student visa valid until 23rd September 2012.  The  Appellant
    claimed asylum  on  3rd  October  2012.   That  claim  was  refused  on
    2nd November 2012 and his appeal against the decision dismissed on 2nd
    January 2013.  Further submissions  were  made  and  raised  and  these
    eventually led to a Notice of Refusal being issued on 13th June 2018.

 2. The Appellant appealed against that decision and the appeal came before
    Judge of the First-tier Tribunal Oliver sitting at Hatton Cross on 20th
    July 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated on 20th  August  2018
    the Appellant's appeal was dismissed on all grounds.

 3. The Appellant lodged Grounds of Appeal to the Upper  Tribunal  on  31st
    August 2018.  On 13th September  2018  Designated  First-tier  Tribunal
    Judge McCarthy granted permission to appeal.  The grant  of  permission
    succinctly set out the basis of the Appellant's grounds.

 4. Judge McCarthy noted that the first ground  argued  that  Judge  Oliver
    failed to make findings on the evidence he recorded at paragraphs 15 to
    20 and other evidence that  was  before  him  at  the  hearing.   Judge
    McCarthy found that that ground was made out because  it  was  arguable
    that Judge Oliver erred by failing to make findings on  the  wealth  of
    the evidence submitted in support of the second appeal.

 5. The second ground argued that the First-tier Tribunal Judge had  failed
    to give appropriate weight to the expertise of the medical examiner who
    reported on the Appellant's scars and injuries.

 6. The third ground contended that the judge had failed to  give  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the written evidence of  the  Appellant's  father
    and the oral evidence of the Appellant's TGTE  witness  to  the  extent
    that the finding might be perverse.  Finally it  was  submitted -  and
    acknowledged that this ground could only succeed if Ground 3  was  made
    out - that the judge had erred by failing to make  findings  that  the
    Appellant would be at risk in Sri Lanka because of his  involvement  in
    the TGTE in the UK.

 7. It is on that basis the appeal comes before me to determine whether  or
    not there is a material error of law in the decision of the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge.  The Appellant appears by his  instructed  Counsel,  Mr
    Paramorthy.   The  Secretary  of  State  appears  by  her  Home  Office
    Presenting Officer, Ms Brocklesby-Weller.

 8. The matter is greatly assisted by the approach adopted by Ms Brocklesby-
    Weller.  She accepts the submissions made in Ground 1 of the Grounds of
    Appeal, namely that the judge has erred in law in his approach to,  and
    consideration of, whether the Appellant's claim to have  been  detained
    and tortured in Sri Lanka in 2010 was credible despite a previous judge
    concluding  that  his  account  was   incredible.    There   was,   she
    acknowledges, before the First-tier Tribunal a second bundle and  there
    is no reference made to the documentation therein and no recognition of
    material set out within  that  bundle,  including  a  letter  from  the
    Appellant's attorney.  She acknowledges that it would be  inappropriate
    for the Secretary of State to argue against the finding that the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge has not looked at the evidence available and indeed
    may not have even given proper or full consideration to the evidence to
    be found in the Appellant's bundle at all.  She concedes that  in  such
    circumstances such a finding must constitute a material error of law.

 9. So far as the other grounds are concerned Mr  Paramorthy  submits  that
    the evidence has been produced to impugn the adverse findings  made  by
    previous judges on the Appellant's credibility and clearly that if that
    has not been looked at, (and he  endorses  the  view  expressed  by  Ms
    Brocklesby-Weller,) that the inevitable fact is  that  the  finding  on
    credibility is unsustainable and that the evidence  must  be  revisited
    and reheard.

Findings on Error of Law

10. I have had the benefit of considering the bundles  that  were  produced
    and cross-referencing them to the judge's decision.  It is difficult to
    conclude that the judge has not looked at the evidence,  on  the  other
    hand it is clear that there is no reference to it.  It  is  a  material
    error of law for a judge to rely on  evidence  which  is  of  paramount
    importance and not to make reference to it.  I acknowledge that a judge
    does not need to refer to every piece  of  evidence  but  he  certainly
    needs to make reference and consider and make findings  on  documentary
    evidence that is relevant and it is incumbent upon a judge to  consider
    all the evidence when making findings of credibility.

11. Consequently I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal  Judge  contains  a  material  error  of  law  and  that   the
    submissions made by Mr Paramorthy and supported by Ms Brocklesby-Weller
    are ones that are sustainable and I consequently set aside the decision
    of the First-tier Tribunal Judge and give  directions  hereinafter  for
    the rehearing of this matter.

Notice of Decision and Directions

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal Judge contains material  errors
    of law and is set aside with none of the findings of fact to stand.

 2) That the appeal is remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting  at
    Hatton Cross on the first available date 28 days hence with an  ELH  of
    three hours.

 3) That the appeal is to be before any Judge of  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    other than Immigration Judge Oliver.

 4) That there be leave to either party to file  and  serve  an  up-to-date
    bundle of such subjective and/or objective  evidence  upon  which  they
    seek to rely at  least  seven  days  prior  to  the  restored  hearing.



 5) That a Tamil interpreter do attend the restored hearing.

No anonymity direction is made.


Signed                              Date 16 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No application is made for a fee award and none is made.


Signed                              Date 16 November 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge D N Harris
