

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration  and   Asylum   Chamber)                                 Appeal
Numbers: PA/07907/2016

                                                               PA/07910/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS
Heard                at                Manchester,                Piccadilly
Decision & Reasons Promulgated
On             the             29th              September              2017
On 16th October 2017

                                   Before:

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGINTY

                                  Between:

                                     S N
                                     Y N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                  Appellants
                                     And

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant:              Ms G Patel (Counsel)
For  the  Respondent:           Mr  Bates  (Senior  Home  Office  Presenting
Officer)

                            DECISION AND REASONS

   1. This is the Appellants' appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Moore promulgated on the 31st January 2017, in which he
      dismissed the Appellant's' appeal on asylum,  humanitarian  protection
      and human rights grounds. The lead  Appellant  SN  is  a  National  of
      Pakistan who was born on the 20th October 1968. The  second  Appellant
      YN is her son, and who was dependent upon SN's asylum appeal.


   2. At the appeal hearing before First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore,  SN  had
      claimed that her husband had been killed in Pakistan for political and
      religious  motives,  such  that  there  would  be  a  real   risk   of
      persecution, were she and her son to be removed back to Pakistan. SN's
      asylum appeal had previously  been  determined  by  Immigration  Judge
      McGarr on the 23rd  February  2015.  Both  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Chohan and Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul had not granted permission  to
      appeal against that decision.



   3. In her fresh claim for asylum she provided further evidence  including
      an updated death certificate for her husband Mr YZ dated the 22nd July
      2015, post mortem report on him dated the 5th September 2014, a burial
      verification certificate for him  dated  the  5th  September  2014,  a
      letter of support from the general secretary of the Anjuman Azadaran-E-
      Maqdooma-E-Konanin dated the 19th July 2015, together with  a  country
      expert report from Ms Uzma Moeen dated the 27th August 2015.



   4. In his decision Judge Moore agreed with the previous decision of Judge
      McGarr and did not accept that the Appellant's husband had been killed
      as claimed and did not accept that either Appellant would be  at  risk
      upon return.



   5. The Appellant sought to appeal against that decision for  the  reasons
      set out within the Grounds of  Appeal.  That  document  as  matter  of
      record and is therefore not repeated in its entirety here. However,  I
      have fully taken account of the same in reaching my decision.



   6. Permission to appeal has been granted  by  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
      Hodgkinson on the 23rd May 2017, when he found that  it  was  arguable
      that the Judge fell into error in making adverse findings  and  relies
      upon the findings of Judge  McGarr  prior  to  considering  the  fresh
      evidence which was before him and failed to simply treat  the  earlier
      Judge's findings as a starting point, despite the Judge's assertion at
      [35] of the decision that  he  had  considered  the  evidence  in  its
      entirety prior to reaching any adverse credibility findings. He  found
      it was also arguable that the Judge  failed  to  consider  the  expert
      evidence which was before him and that  he  failed  to  give  adequate
      reasons for certain findings made. He granted permission to appeal  on
      all grounds.



   7. Although within the Rule 24 Reply dated the  8th  June  2017,  it  was
      argued by the Respondent that the Judge directed himself appropriately
      and that the Appellants' were simply attempting to reopen and  reargue
      the matters before the Tribunal.



   8. However, after discussions with the legal representatives, Mr Bates on
      behalf of the Secretary of State conceded that the Judge  appeared  to
      have been side-tracked in dealing with the chronology of the case  and
      the timeline, and had not given adequate consideration to  the  expert
      evidence of Mrs Moeen. Mr Bates conceded that failing to properly take
      account of the expert report was  a  material  error  in  the  Judge's
      decision,. In that regard, I note that Judge  Moore  at  [35]  of  his
      decision states that in reaching his decision he  said  that  he  must
      assess the expert evidence of Mrs Usma Moeen and  that  following  the
      case of NA v UK Application 25904/07 2008 ECHR 616 the Judge had noted
      that "in assessing such material consideration must be  given  to  its
      source, in particular its independence, reliability and objectivity...
      The consistency of their conclusions and that corroboration  by  other
      sources are all relevant to  considerations".  However,  as  Mr  Bates
      conceded, other than the Judge stating that he had made  his  findings
      in respect of the  death  certificate  at  [36]  "notwithstanding  the
      expert report, an addendum expert report that the expert  was  of  the
      opinion that the death certificate was a genuine document", he had not
      actually examined or assessed the expert evidence of Mrs Usma Moeen. I
      find in that regard, regrettably, Judge Moore has  not  adequately  or
      sufficiently taken account of the expert evidence  of  Mrs  Moeen,  in
      regard to the death certificate and Mrs Moeen's consideration  of  the
      authenticity of the death certificate between paragraphs 23 and 26  of
      her original opinion dated the 27th August 2015. Further, as Mr  Bates
      conceded, there is seemingly no consideration by her of  the  expert's
      findings regarding the verification and authenticity of the FIR  dated
      the 5th September 2014  or  the  post  mortem  report  dated  the  5th
      September 2014. Other than the Judge's one sentence that he  had  made
      his findings in regard to the death  certificate  notwithstanding  the
      expert opinion, there is no analysis of the  reasoning  given  by  the
      expert, in making his findings. I therefore agree with Mr  Bates  that
      in fact the Judge has not adequately considered the  expert  evidence,
      when considering the evidence in the round when making  his  findings,
      and has not given adequate and sufficient reasons for  rejecting  that
      evidence, given that he has not actually  adequately  considered  what
      findings the expert made or  reasons  for  rejecting  those  findings,
      regarding the veracity  of  the  FIR,  post-mortem  report  and  death
      certificate.


   9. Further, the Judge found at [38] that the Appellant  had  provided  no
      explanation as to the inconsistency regarding the husband's age at the
      date of death, the newspaper  report  of  his  death  in  the  Karachi
      edition of Jange-paper dated the 6th September 2014, referred  to  him
      being 50 years old, a newspaper report at page 176 which  referred  to
      him being 48 years old, the death certificate indicating that  he  was
      47 years old. The Judge further found that the Appellant's explanation
      of the newspaper article giving the wrong time of death as being 11:20
      a.m. was that the newspaper reporter "did not ask the family  for  the
      time. No one contact the family". He stated "I do  not  find  such  an
      explanation credible or plausible and  would  expect  a  newspaper  to
      contact a least one family member, but even if that was not the  case,
      such  inconsistencies  undermine  the  account".  I  agree  with   the
      concession made by Mr Bates that in that regard, the Judge's  findings
      are not adequate and sufficient to allow the losing party to know  why
      they have lost, and that as Mr Bates conceded, the newspaper would not
      necessarily have spoken to  the  family,  and  could  have  got  their
      information from  other  sources.  I  find  that  the  Judge  has  not
      adequately explained why it would not be plausible that the newspapers
      had not contacted a family member, or that even if that was the  case,
      why an inconsistency between what is reported in a newspaper  and  her
      account, undermines her  credibility.  She  was  not  responsible  for
      writing the newspaper articles, as Mr Bates conceded, as she  had  not
      actually provided information to the  newspaper,  the  Judge  has  not
      adequately explained why  she  should  be  held  responsible  for  any
      inconsistencies  between  the  death  certificate  and  the  newspaper
      reports.


  10. In such circumstances, I do find in light of the concessions  made  by
      the Secretary of State at the appeal hearing,  that  the  decision  of
      First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore does contain material errors  of  law,
      such that the decision should be set aside in its entirety. Given  the
      fact that credibility will have to be  reassessed,  I  find  that  the
      appeal  should  be  remitted  back  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  for
      rehearing before any First-tier Tribunal Judge other  than  First-tier
      Tribunal Judge Moore.

Notice of Decision

The decision of  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Moore  does  contain  material
errors of law and is set aside;
I remit the case back to the First-tier Tribunal for  rehearing  before  any
First-tier Tribunal Judge other than First-tier Tribunal Judge Moore.

I do make an anonymity order in this case, such an  anonymity  order  having
been made by the First-tier Tribunal, in light of the fact that  the  second
Appellant is still a minor, and the case deals  with  an  asylum  claim.  No
report or transcript of these proceedings or  this  judgement  may  identify
the  Appellants  or  any  members  of  their  family,  either  directly   or
indirectly.  This  direction  applies  both  to  the  Appellants   and   the
Respondent. Failure to comply with this direction could lead to contempt  of
court proceedings.


Signed

[pic]
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGinty                              Dated  29th
September 2017
