

                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
            (Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07084/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Stoke                        |Decision promulgated                 |
|On 15 November 2017                   |On 9 March 2018                      |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE HANSON


                                   Between

                                     SKH
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Representation:

For the Appellant: Mr Jarro instructed by Bhogal Partners Solicitors.
For the Respondent: Mr Bates Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


     1. Following a hearing at Field  House  on  31  July  2017  the  Upper
        Tribunal found a judge  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  had  made  a
        material error of law and set aside that decision. The  matter  has
        been listed for a Resumed hearing after which this  tribunal  shall
        substitute a decision to allow or dismiss the appeal.



Background


     2. SKH is a citizen of Namibia born on [ ] 1980 who claimed asylum  in
        the United Kingdom on the basis she feared persecution if  returned
        to her country of origin as she has no social networks  in  Namibia
        and would find it difficult to find work.
     3. The appellant entered the United  Kingdom  lawfully  as  a  Working
        Holidaymaker in 2003 but only claimed asylum in January 2016.  That
        claim was refused on 24 January 2016.
     4.  There  is  no  challenge  to  the  rejection  of  the  appellant's
        protection claim to the Upper Tribunal, meaning that aspect of  the
        initial decision is preserved together with the  findings  relating
        thereto.
     5. The appellant gave birth in the United Kingdom to a son M  on  [  ]
        2008 and to a daughter F on [ ] 2016. Even though the children have
        separate fathers it is claimed they remain involved  with  children
        in relation to both contact and financial issues.
     6. The children have remained in the United Kingdom; which for M is  a
        period of nine years and in relation to F a period  of  two  years.
        The child M is therefore a qualifying child in  relation  to  which
        the issue is whether it is reasonable to expect the child to  leave
        the United Kingdom.
     7. It is not made out either of the children are British citizens.
     8. It was submitted on the appellant's behalf that the  children  have
        developed relationships and ties within the  community,  especially
        the appellant's son who is nearly 9 years of age.  Although  it  is
        claimed the children  do  not  speak  the  indigenous  language  of
        Namibia it was pointed out at the hearing that  the  official  main
        language of Namibia is English.
     9. It is not disputed the children have formed their  own  friendships
        and that the eldest son has been able to pursue  his  education  in
        the United Kingdom. It is stated they have cousins and  friends  in
        the United Kingdom and have put down roots here.
    10. On behalf of the appellant, Mr Jarro submitted there are  a  number
        of factors in the appellant's favour including:


                i. The age of M, at that time being 8 nearly 9.
               ii. The best interests of the children.
              iii. The length of time the children have been in  the  United
                   Kingdom; all their lives.
               iv. The fact M has been in education in  the  United  Kingdom
                   for three years.
                v. The fact M has undertaken primary level education.
               vi. The fact the children have never been to Namibia.
              vii. Linguistic  issues  and  that  the  children  only  speak
                   English and do not speak any other language.
             viii. There was no evidence that relatives could speak to  them
                   in English.
               ix. The children have never been to Namibia so would  not  be
                   sure how they would adapt to life in that country.
                x. They have family life with cousins, friends  and  private
                   life and their own network of friends and family.
               xi.  Although  the  parents  may  be  culpable,  it  is   not
                   appropriate to visit the sins of the parents upon  M  who
                   was born here and not here of his own making.
              xii. Whilst  the  appellant  may  have  a  flawed  immigration
                   history this is not the fault of the child.


    11. It is also argued that under paragraph 276 the mother  and  younger
        sister are  also  brought  into  consideration.  The  children  are
        totally dependent upon their mother. The appellant had claimed  she
        is distant from her family Namibia. She was brought up by her  aunt
        from an early age and her aunt's husband abused  her  over  a  long
        period of time.  These people are still alive. The appellant claims
        her father is angry with her but that she had lost contact with her
        elder brother and sister and other family in Namibia. It was argued
        that if the appellant was sent back  she  will  be  without  family
        support and that although she  indicated  she  has  a  sister,  her
        sister claims she cannot support the appellant in  Namibia  as  she
        has children of her own in the United Kingdom.
    12. The appellant's concern is that if she  works  she  would  have  to
        leave the children, including her  younger  daughter,  which  could
        expose the child  to  sexual  exploitation  and  violence.  It  was
        indicated at the hearing there was no country evidence  of  a  real
        risk arising from the  same  which  appears  to  be  based  upon  a
        subjective fear and desire of the appellant to avoid  her  daughter
        having the same experience she  did,  although  such  fear  is  not
        objectively made out.
    13. It was argued that the fathers of the children are  in  the  United
        Kingdom and that the children will  be  deprived  of  contact  with
        their fathers  and  the  role  of  fathers  have  to  play  in  the
        children's lives. Witness statements have been provided in relation
        to this aspect. It was argued that even if some  financial  support
        could be provided by the father's it would not be regular and  that
        no face-to-face contact could occur.
    14. Although there was no evidence of  communication  problems  between
        the United Kingdom and Namibia it was argued that the four-year-old
        child would not understand  communication  with  her  father  on  a
        screen and that indirect contact was not a  substitute  for  direct
        contact.
    15. It was argued the appellant did not  know  what  she  would  do  in
        Namibia as she is concerned about leaving the children to find work
        although it was accepted that it is speculation regarding what  may
        happen.
    16. It was argued the best interests of children  are  to  remain  with
        their mother in the United Kingdom. It  was  argued  there  was  no
        evidence of the willingness of the family in Namibia to  allow  the
        appellant and the children to  return  to  live  with  them  or  to
        provide for her. It is argued that the article 8  ground  has  been
        made out and that any interference with a protected right to family
        or private life will be disproportionate.
    17. On behalf of the respondent Mr  Bates  submitted  that  although  a
        letter had been provided, purportedly from M, on the morning of the
        hearing, concerns regarding identity of  signatures  and  questions
        regarding whether the statements that had been introduced were from
        the individuals concerned, arose.
    18. It was submitted by Mr Bates that although there had been reference
        to the fathers of the children there  have  been  no  findings  the
        fathers have a genuine subsisting relationship  with  the  children
        and no  evidence  the  fathers  have  ongoing  contact  with  their
        children.
    19. It  was  submitted  there  was  inadequate  background  information
        relating to Namibia provided by the appellant to support her claim;
        particularly the assertion that the use  of  the  English  language
        would not get the children by in Namibia. English is  the  official
        language of that country.
    20. It was submitted the protection findings are preserved and that the
        First-tier Tribunal found there are no problems  in  the  appellant
        returning as a lone parent.
    21. In relation to family support; it was found at [44] of  the  First-
        tier Tribunal decision, when considering risk from family members:

             44.  I am satisfied that the appellant is not at risk from her
                  immediate or extended family because there  have  been  no
                  threats made against her, according to her evidence  since
                  she was aged 9 � years old.  She  did  not  leave  Namibia
                  until May 2003 when she was 23 years old and her  evidence
                  is that there were no threats of  the  preceding  fourteen
                  years. I am satisfied that the appellant does have  family
                  to whom she can turn to for support in Namibia in the form
                  of the sister with whom she had contact  until  2014.  She
                  said that that sister accepted  that  what  she  had  said
                  about the abuse was true and was sorry for  not  believing
                  her. She said that they did not part on bad terms.

    22. The First-tier Tribunal Judge also found:

             45.  I am satisfied that the appellant was being  truthful  in
                  her asylum interview when she said that she did  not  fear
                  anyone or a group of people upon her  return  to  Namibia.
                  She just did not want to go back because she would have no
                  accommodation and would not be able to get a job.  I  note
                  that the grounds of appeal also reiterate this  reason  as
                  well as the fact that her son has been here for over seven
                  years. There was no mention of her fear of her family  and
                  no mention that the refusal letter was wrong to  say  that
                  her aunt and uncle were dead. I  am  satisfied  that  this
                  fear of her family and her denial of  the  deaths  of  her
                  aunt and uncle is a fabrication to bolster a  week  asylum
                  claim.


             46.  I am satisfied that even if the appellant did have a well-
                  founded  fear  of  her  family,  the  objective   evidence
                  supplied by her representatives at page 21 makes it  clear
                  that there are specialist Gender-based Violence Protection
                  Units staffed by police officers,  social  workers,  legal
                  advisers and medical personnel who are trained  to  assist
                  those in the position of the appellant. There are  special
                  courtrooms in the courts and shelters for those  who  need
                  accommodation, albeit on an as needed basis. The objective
                  evidence goes on to confirm that child abuse is a  serious
                  problem and crimes against  children  are  prosecuted  and
                  there are social workers throughout the country to address
                  these cases. There is nothing in  the  objective  evidence
                  supplied by the representatives to  demonstrate  that  the
                  appellant would not be able to seek the protection of  the
                  authorities if she was threatened by her  family.  Nor  is
                  there anything to say that she will not be able to  obtain
                  employment without qualifications. There  is  no  evidence
                  before me to say that the appellant will be at risk  as  a
                  lone woman or as an unmarried mother of two children.

Discussion


    23. Although the children do not appear to have relevant cultural  ties
        to Namibia, save through their mother, SKH grew up in that  country
        and will have a clear level of understanding of the cultural  norms
        of Namibia. To the extent the children have been exposed  to  their
        mother exercising such norms, but within  the  United  Kingdom,  or
        others living in the UK with connections to Namibia, it is possible
        the children have some level of understanding and awareness of  the
        same although not to the degree of a child who has grown up in that
        country living in that environment on a day-to-day basis.
    24. The fact the appellant wishes to remain in the United  Kingdom  was
        demonstrated by her argument in  support  of  the  language  issue.
        Although there are regional  dialects  in  parts  of  Namibian  the
        official language is English which all members of this family  unit
        speak, read, and write. It is not made  out  the  children  do  not
        possess the necessary language skills to enable  them  to  properly
        function within the education system or society of Namibia.
    25. Neither of the children have attended  education  in  Namibia.  The
        elder child has only been educated in the United Kingdom  where  he
        has commenced his primary education.  The other child is too  young
        to enter compulsory education.
    26. Neither party referred to country specific information that can  be
        said to be determinative.  Namibia  is  a  sparsely  populated  but
        stable country.
    27. The appellant has not adduced evidence to show that  removal  would
        give rise to a significant risk to the children's health. There  is
        no evidence that the children are undergoing a course of  treatment
        for a life threatening or serious illness and treatment will not be
        available in the country of return.
    28.  The  appellant  relies  on  the  differences  in  the  quality  of
        education, health and wider public  services  and  in  economic  or
        social opportunities between the UK and Namibia in addition to  the
        alleged family circumstances.  Whilst  it  is  accepted  there  are
        material differences it was not made out that  the  effect  of  the
        children having to adapt and live in such an environment would have
        any long term detrimental consequences. It was also  not  made  out
        that there is no available family  support  in  Namibia  who  could
        assist the appellant with  care  to  enable  her  to  work  without
        putting  the  children  at  any  danger.  Whilst  the   appellant's
        subjective fear is recorded this has not been shown to give rise to
        real risk to the children.
    29. It is accepted that during the time the child M has  lived  in  the
        United Kingdom he will have put down roots and integrated into life
        in the UK as this is his birth country. Significant weight must  be
        given to such a period of continuous residence. It is not  disputed
        that the longer the child has resided in the UK, and the older  the
        age at which they have done so, the more the balance will begin  to
        shift towards it being unreasonable to expect the  child  to  leave
        the UK, and strong reasons will be required in order  to  refuse  a
        case where the outcome will be removal of a child  with  continuous
        UK residence of seven years or more
    30. The respondent's guidance states that such strong reasons may arise
        where, for example, 'the child will be returning  with  the  family
        unit to the family's country of nationality, and the  parents  have
        deliberately sought to circumvent immigration control or abuse  the
        immigration process - for example, by entering or remaining in  the
        UK illegally or by using deception in an application for  leave  to
        enter or remain. The consideration of the  child's  best  interests
        must not be affected by the conduct or immigration history  of  the
        parent(s) or primary carer, but  these  will  be  relevant  to  the
        assessment  of  the  public  interest,  including  in   maintaining
        effective immigration control; whether this outweighs  the  child's
        best interests; and whether, in the  round,  it  is  reasonable  to
        expect the child to leave  the  UK.  In  other  circumstances,  the
        child's  best  interests  may  outweigh  the  public  interest   in
        maintaining effective immigration control, even where  the  parents
        have been guilty of deliberately seeking to circumvent  the  latter
        or abuse the immigration process. For example, such a situation may
        occur when the child has been resident  here  for  seven  years  or
        more, and is suffering from a serious  medical  condition  that  is
        being successfully managed in the UK, but could not be  so  managed
        in the country of proposed return'.
    31. In this case the appellant and two children  will  be  returned  to
        Namibia as a family unit. There is evidence of family in Namibia to
        assist. The appellant entered the UK lawfully but  overstayed.  The
        eldest child M wishes to remain in the UK. The  children's  fathers
        are in the UK and it is said maintain contact with them and provide
        some financial support.
    32. Having considered all the  evidence  in  the  round  including  the
        guidance from the Court of Appeal it is found that  notwithstanding
        the appellant's own poor immigration history the  elder  child  has
        been in the United Kingdom for nine years. It is not made out  that
        the  countervailing  factors  relied  upon  by  Mr  Bates  are   of
        sufficient strength to counter  the  position  that  after  such  a
        length of  time  with  the  extent  of  the  personal  integration,
        including between each of the children and their  father's,  it  is
        not reasonable in all the circumstances to expect the  elder  child
        to leave the United Kingdom. I find that to do so will be a  breach
        of a protected right pursuant to article 8 ECHR  on  the  basis  it
        would not be reasonable or in the child's best interests for him to
        leave the United Kingdom to re-establish a life in Namibia.
    33. I find that the eldest child's primary carer is the appellant, SKH.
        I find that the family life that exists between the  appellant  and
        her oldest son will be lost if the  child  remains  in  the  United
        Kingdom whilst his mother is removed. I find any such interference,
        in light of the loss of the child's primary carer  and  absence  of
        evidence of suitable alternative care, to be disproportionate.  The
        appellant's daughter, sibling of the appellant's son (albeit from a
        different father) is also reliant upon her mother for her care  and
        with whom she has family life recognised by article 8  in  addition
        to that with her brother. I find that separating the child from her
        brother will be a disproportionate interference  with  such  family
        life.
    34. It is also relevant to consider the appellants past. Even if  those
        who sexually abused her as a child are now dead, and  the  risk  to
        her children of experiencing similar abuse may not  be  objectively
        made out, the fact of the matter is  the  appellant  has  a  strong
        subjective fear which she portrays as being real. It  is  not  made
        out that it is in the children's best interest for them  to  be  in
        environment where their mothers  subjective  reaction  may  have  a
        detrimental impact upon their general wellbeing.
    35. Having looked at matters afresh I substitute a  decision  to  allow
        the appeal.


Decision

    36. I remake the decision as follows. This appeal is allowed




   Anonymity.


    37. The First-tier Tribunal made an order pursuant to rule 45(4)(i) of
        the Asylum and Immigration Tribunal (Procedure) Rules 2005.


        I make such order pursuant to rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure
        (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008






Signed.......................................................
Upper Tribunal Judge Hanson

Dated the 8 March 2018












