
                                    [pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07454/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Glasgow                              |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 August 2018                             |On 13 December 2018           |
|                                              |                              |


                                   Before

                      MR C M G OCKELTON, VICE PRESIDENT
                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MACLEMAN


                                   Between

                                   ALI [G]
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Stein, instructed by Quinn, Martin & Langan
Solicitors.
For the Respondent:    Mr Govan, Home Officer Presenting Officer.


                          DETERMINATION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a national of Iran.  He  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against the decision of the Secretary of State on 18 July 2007
    refusing  to  grant  him  asylum.   He  claims  to  have  converted  to
    Christianity whilst in  the  United  Kingdom  and  to  be  at  risk  of
    persecution in Iran as a Christian convert.

 2. Judge A M S Green dismissed his appeal.  His application to the  First-
    tier Tribunal for  permission  to  appeal  against  that  decision  was
    refused.  On renewal to the Upper Tribunal  permission  to  appeal  was
    granted on one point.  For the avoidance of doubt we record that  there
    was no attempt before us to enlarge the appeal to encompass any of  the
    other grounds submitted.

 3. It is part of the appellant's evidence that  he  took  an  interest  in
    Christianity when living in Aberdeen and started to  attend  St  Mark's
    Church, Aberdeen, a Parish Church of the Church of  Scotland.   He  was
    baptised by a Minister of that Church.  The Secretary of State contends
    that his claimed  conversion  to  Christianity  is  not  genuine.   The
    appellant, as might be expected,  seeks  to  prove  his  conversion  by
    evidence, including evidence of his baptism.

 4. The assertion made on his behalf and which forms the subject of  ground
    of permission  to  appeal  is  that  the  Tribunal  is  prevented  from
    considering the genuineness of his conversion to  Christianity  because
    its jurisdiction to do so is excluded by the  Church  of  Scotland  Act
    1921.  That  point  was  raised  before  the  First-tier  Tribunal  and
    rejected by Judge  Green:  it  now  falls  for  consideration  by  this
    Tribunal.

 5. The purpose of the Church of Scotland Act 1921 is to declare lawful the
    Articles Declaratory of the Constitution of the Church of  Scotland  in
    Matters Spiritual and to secure  the  independence  of  the  Church  of
    Scotland from secular interference in such matters.  Section 1  of  the
    Act provides that the Declaratory Articles are lawful; but s 3 provides
    that "nothing in this Act  contained  shall  affect  or  prejudice  the
    jurisdiction of the civil courts in any matter of a civil nature".

 6. The declaratory articles provide for the constitution of the Church and
    its independence of the State; at article IV is this:

         "This Church ... receives from [the Lord Jesus Christ]  alone,  the
         right and power subject to no civil authority to legislate, and  to
         adjudicate finally, in all matters of doctrine, worship, government
         and discipline in the Church, including the right to determine  all
         questions concerning membership and office in the Church ...."

 7. The argument is that the question whether the appellant is genuinely  a
    Christian convert is a matter  reserved  to  the  jurisdiction  of  the
    Church by article IV.

 8. Having heard the brief but comprehensive submissions of  Ms  Stein  and
    having considered the authorities, we  reject  that  assertion,  for  a
    number of reasons.  The first is that although there is  evidence  that
    the appellant has  been  baptised  by  a  Minister  of  the  Church  of
    Scotland, there is no evidence that he is a member  of  the  Church  of
    Scotland.  The second is that whether he is or is not a member  of  the
    Church of Scotland  is  irrelevant  to  the  present  proceedings:  the
    question is whether he is or is not a convert to Christianity  in  such
    circumstances as would expose him to  a  risk  of  persecution  in  his
    country of nationality.  The third is that the question whether  he  is
    at risk of persecution is a single composite question, to  be  answered
    on all the evidence and to be determined by the decision-maker on  that
    evidence: there is no scope in answering the secular  question  of  his
    refugee status for deferring part of the assessment to another Court.

 9. A similar question arose  in  Percy  v  Church  of  Scotland  Board  of
    National Mission [2005] UKHL 73.   The  issue  there  was  whether  the
    Church's  claim  to  have  exclusive  jurisdiction  in  a   matter   of
    discrimination in employment based on the same provisions of the Church
    of Scotland Act, should be upheld.   Much  of  the  discussion  in  the
    speeches related to the nature of the pursuer's  employment;  but  Lord
    Nichols, Lord  Hope  and  Lord  Scott  specifically  decided  that  the
    jurisdiction of the Secular Courts was not excluded by  the  1921  Act.
    As Lord Hope said at [132], "a claim of unlawful discrimination in  the
    employment field has nothing to do with matters of doctrine, worship or
    government or with  membership  in  the  Church".   The  same,  in  our
    judgment applies to a claim for refugee status, even where part of  the
    evidence supporting the claim is an assertion that the  claimant  is  a
    member of the Church.  The Tribunal does not purport to  determine  any
    issue relating to that membership.

10. We are fortified in our view that the 1921 Act  does  not  exclude  the
    jurisdiction of the Secular Court and Tribunals on this  issue  by  two
    further factors.  The first is that in Irfan Ali (P1266/17)  a  similar
    argument was raised before the Lord  Ordinary  on  an  application  for
    judicial review.  In refusing permission on  the  papers  Lord  Woolman
    said this:

         "The suggestion that the Church of Scotland  should  determine  the
         issue of religious conversion for immigration  purposes  is  wrong.
         If the F-tT Judge had received it in that  matter  she  would  have
         abrogated her duty."

11. On oral review Lord Pentland agreed, saying that the  argument  to  the
    contrary was  "fanciful".   Thus,  there  is  sound  Scottish  judicial
    opinion, albeit only  in  relation  to  a  permission  application,  in
    agreement with the view which  we  have  reached.   The  second  factor
    tending to confirm our view is that there has been no suggestion in the
    present case that the Church of Scotland itself asserts  any  right  of
    determination in this or any other similar case.

12. For the reasons we have given we conclude that the jurisdiction of  the
    secular courts in relation to the determination of whether a person has
    converted to Christianity is not excluded by the Church of Scotland Act
    1921 even in cases where the appellant has been baptised by a  Minister
    of that Church.  That being the only  ground  argued  before  us,  this
    appeal is accordingly dismissed.  The determination of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal stands as the decision on the appellant's appeal.


                                                           C. M. G. OCKELTON
                                        VICE PRESIDENT OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL
                                              IMMIGRATION AND ASYLUM CHAMBER
                                                      Date: 5 December 2018.
