
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07461/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Birmingham                  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 26 April 2019                     |On 9 May 2019                        |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                     S M
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Miss H Aboni, Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr M Azmi, instructed by Genesis Law Associates Ltd


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals with permission against the decision  of
    First-tier Tribunal Judge E M M Smith promulgated on 30 November  2017,
    allowing the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  made  by  the
    Secretary of State made on 26 July 2017 to refuse his human rights  and
    protection claim.

 2. I have anonymised this decision in order to protect the identity of the
    respondent's stepchild.

 3. The respondent is a citizen of Zimbabwe who entered the United  Kingdom
    in 2001.  His asylum claim made in 2008  was  refused  and  his  appeal
    dismissed  in  2009.   He  was,  however,  on  8  July  2012,   granted
    Discretionary Leave to Remain in the United Kingdom with  his  wife,  a
    Zimbabwean national resident born in the United  Kingdom.   The  couple
    have two children born in 2011 and 2013; there is also an  older  child
    who is the appellant's stepson.

 4. On 13 December 2013 the appellant was convicted  of  doing  an  act  of
    cruelty to his stepson  for  which  he  was  sentenced  to  two  years'
    imprisonment.

 5. There was at that time extensive involvement with social  services  and
    the children  were  placed  in  care.   That  situation  was,  however,
    resolved, and the children now live with the respondent and his wife as
    part of the family unit and there is  no  longer  any  social  services
    involvement.

 6. The Secretary of State made a deportation order against the  respondent
    in light of his conviction.  In response to that he made  a  claim  for
    asylum.  Representations were also made in response  to  an  invitation
    from the Secretary of State to rebut the presumptions of the conviction
    for which he was convicted excluded him from Convention protection.

 7. The judge heard evidence from the respondent and his wife; he also  had
    before him reports from social services including recommendations  from
    the family social worker.

 8. The judge noted the evidence that despite  what  had  occurred  in  the
    past, the stepson and the respondent see their relationship  as  father
    and son and that the  son  seeks  him  out  for  fatherly  advice,  the
    respondent participating in all aspects of family life  and  that  [27]
    there are a number of factors which showed a very  positive  change  in
    the situation since the conviction.  The judge concluded that [30] they
    are now a stable functioning family and that there  is  clear  evidence
    from the social worker that it is in the children's best interests that
    the respondent remains with them.  The judge noted also  [29]  that  if
    the  respondent  was  deported  to  Zimbabwe  that  contact   will   be
    effectively severed and that "if the father was deported to Zimbabwe it
    would be devastating to S and his siblings".

 9. The judge found the children could not go to  live  in  Zimbabwe  [32];
    and, having directed himself [33] in accordance  with  Section  55  and
    that he must have regard to Section 117C of the  2002  Act,  the  judge
    concluded that "to remove this respondent from the United Kingdom would
    be disproportionate".

10. The respondent sought permission to appeal  on  the  grounds  that  the
    judge had erred:-

      i)  in  failing  properly  to  apply  the  undue  harshness  test,  in
         particular  failing  properly  to  consider  Rule  399(a)  and  the
         prospect of the family remaining in the United Kingdom without  the
         respondent,  there  being  nothing  exceptional  about  the  family
         situation which would outweigh the compelling  public  interest  in
         the respondent's removal, the judge failing properly to explain why
         the circumstances are such that deportation would be unduly harsh;

     ii) in wrongly  attributing  significant  weight  to  the  respondent's
         rehabilitation and remorse, failing also to cite  any  evidence  of
         long-term effects on the family as a result  of  his  absence  when
         serving his prison sentence.

11. On 13 May 2018 Upper Tribunal Judge Bruce granted permission stating:-

         "The First-tier Tribunal was entitled to reach the  conclusions  it
         did in respect of paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) of the Immigration  Rules.
         Permission is however granted  because  it  is  arguable  that  the
         Tribunal  erred  in  omitting  to  squarely  address  the  test  in
         399(a)(i)(b)."

The Law

12. The Immigration Rules provide

    '399.    This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a)  the person has a genuine and subsisting parental  relationship
             with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

             (i)  the child is a British Citizen; or

             (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for  at  least
                  the  7  years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of   the
                  immigration decision; and in either case

                  (a)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to live in the
                      country to which the person is to be deported; and

                  (b)  it would be unduly harsh for the child to  remain  in
                      the UK without the person who is to be deported.'

13. The judge did not directly address this paragraph.  Nor  is  there  any
    indication that the judge applied the high threshold established by the
    phrase "undue harshness" - see KO (Nigeria) [2018] UKSC 53

14. That, in my view, is a significant error.  Whilst I accept that, as  Mr
    Azmi submitted, the judge appears  to  have  accepted  the  conclusions
    reached by the social worker, he does not say so and there is no proper
    attempt to relate that to the relevant test, that is  undue  harshness.
    I accept that the use of the word "devastating" is strong  but  equally
    there is, again, no attempt by  the  judge  to  consider  why  this  is
    different from the normal effects of deportation on  a  family.   There
    are no proper findings about what would happen to the children  if  the
    respondent were deported.

15. Similarly, the judge does not properly address  Section  117C  and  the
    focus appears to have been more on how the respondent has rehabilitated
    himself rather than on the test set out in the Immigration Rules and in
    Section 117C.

16. Accordingly, I  am  satisfied  that  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal did involve the making of an error of law as the judge  failed
    properly to address the relevant legal test and to make proper findings
    on material aspects necessary to that test.

17. Given the length of time that has elapsed since the  last  hearing  and
    given the ages of the children involved I conclude  that  although  the
    fact-finding error that needs to be  remade  is  relatively  small,  it
    would be appropriate to remit this appeal to  the  First-tier  Tribunal
    for a fresh decision on the issue of whether the respondent  meets  the
    requirements of paragraph 399(a)(i)(b) of the Immigration  Rules.   For
    the avoidance of any doubt I  make  it  clear  that  the  finding  that
    paragraph 399(a)(i)(a) is met is preserved.



Notice of Decision

 1) The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    of law and I set it aside insofar  as  it  relates  to  article  8  and
    paragraph 398 to 400 of the Immigration Rules. There is no challenge to
    the dismissal of the appeal  on  asylum,  article  3  and  humanitarian
    grounds, and those findings are preserved

 2) I remit the appeal to the First-tier Tribunal to be remade on the issue
    of  whether  the  respondent  meets  the  requirements   of   paragraph
    399(a)(i)(b) of the Immigration Rules  and/or,  having  had  regard  to
    Section 117C, there is public interest in  his  removal.   The  finding
    that paragraph 399 (a) (ii) (a) is satisfied is preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise,  the  respondent  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the respondent and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Date 3 May 2019
[pic]

Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
