
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07840/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Bradford                             |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 12 April 2019                              |On 29 April 2019              |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                          UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE LANE


                                   Between

                                     SF
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Hussain
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant was born in 2001 and  is  a  citizen  of  Bahrain.  By  a
    decision dated  17  May  2018,  the  Secretary  of  State  refused  the
    appellant's application for  international  protection.  The  appellant
    appealed to the First-tier Tribunal which, in a decision promulgated on
    10 September 2018, dismissed the appeal.  The  appellant  now  appeals,
    with permission, to the Upper Tribunal.

 2. At the initial hearing at Bradford, I was assisted by Mr  Diwnycz,  who
    appeared for the Secretary of State. He told me that the  Secretary  of
    State agreed that the judge had erred in law  such  that  his  decision
    fell to be set aside. I shall, in the circumstances, be brief in giving
    my reasons for setting aside the decision.

 3. The evidence of the appellant  (the  credibility  of  which  the  judge
    rejected) was supported by evidence from a cousin. The judge refers  to
    that evidence at [21] and  again  at  [26]  where  he  says  that  'the
    appellant's cousin has given evidence and confirmed that he was present
    when the appellant was shot in the leg.' The  judge  recorded  that  he
    asked at the hearing whether there was any medical  evidence  of  those
    injuries and he was told that there was  not.  Thereafter,  no  further
    assessment is made of the cousin's evidence. It may be  the  case  that
    the judge gave little weight to the  evidence  of  the  cousin  because
    there was no medical evidence to support the claimed  injuries  to  the
    appellant. However, a reader of the decision should not be left to fill
    in these gaps in the Tribunal's reasoning. The fact  remains  that  the
    judge has not evaluated the evidence of the cousin and, if he  rejected
    or gave little weight that evidence, he has not said why  he  has  done
    so. In consequence, the judge's reasons for rejecting  the  appellant's
    account remain unclear.

 4. There will need to be a  new  fact-finding  exercise  which  is  better
    conducted in the First-tier Tribunal. Since the error  in  the  judge's
    decision lies within his analysis of credibility, I have not  preserved
    any of the findings of the First-tier Tribunal.




Notice of Decision

The decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  which  was  promulgated  on  10
September 2018 is set aside. None of the findings of fact shall  stand.  The
appeal is returned to the First-tier Tribunal for that  Tribunal  to  remake
the decision.


Signed                              Date 22 April 2019

Upper Tribunal Judge Lane



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellants  are
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify them or any member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellants and to the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

