
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07680/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 2 April 2019                      |On 09 April 2019                     |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CHAPMAN


                                   Between

                                     mu
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr P Jorro, counsel instructed by Waterstone
Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Ms Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Appellant is a national of Bangladesh born on 30 August  1983.   He
    arrived in the UK on 7 January 2010 with a valid  student  visa,  which
    was subsequently extended.  He made an asylum claim on 3 February  2017
    when  he  was  given  a  screening  interview.   He   was   interviewed
    substantively on 19 July 2017 and subsequent representations were  made
    on 26 July 2017. In a decision dated 28 July 2017, his application  for
    asylum was refused.  He appealed against that decision and  his  appeal
    ultimately came before Judge of the  First-tier  Tribunal  Housego  for
    hearing on 19 December 2018.  In a decision and reasons promulgated  on
    10 January 2019, the judge dismissed the  appeal  having  rejected  the
    credibility of the claim.

 2. Permission to appeal was sought in time on the basis of three  grounds.



 3. Firstly, that the judge's credibility findings were flawed  and  unfair
    because they were substantially based on the failure by the  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge to take account of the Appellant's answers as a whole in
    the screening interview.

 4. Secondly, in failing to consider and make findings on  highly  material
    matters of risk to the Appellant on the basis of his ongoing sur  place
    activities as a Jamaat-e-Islami Party supporter and whether  this  will
    continue if returned to Bangladesh in light  of  the  judgments  of  HJ
    (Iran) [2010] UKSC 31 and MSM (Somalia) [2016] EWCA Civ 715, as well as
    the background evidence.

 5. Thirdly, that the judge's approach to the issue  of  corroboration  was
    erroneous  and  unfair  in  that  he  disregarded  and   rejected   the
    corroborative value of  documents  the  Appellant  did  produce,  while
    finding  against  his  credibility  on  the  basis  of  an  absence  of
    additional corroborative evidence.

 6. Permission to appeal was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge McWilliam in a
    decision dated 7 March 2019, on the basis that it is arguable the judge
    did not consider material matters, namely the answer the Appellant gave
    in his screening interview at 4.1 with reference to false  charges  and
    that all the grounds of appeal were arguable.

    Hearing

 7. At the hearing before the Upper Tribunal, Ms Everett on behalf  of  the
    Secretary of State accepted that the judge had clearly  overlooked  one
    of the Appellant's answers in the screening interview and  that  is  as
    follows

         "4.1 Please briefly explain all reasons why you  cannot  return  to
         your home country"

    to which the Appellant responded as follows:

         "If I return to Bangladesh now I will be killed by Awami League and
         Chattra League Party and present ruling party.  Many  times  I  was
         injured by the party and  four  of  my  family  members  died,  two
         nephews, one my father's sister one is my uncle.  This was 2013 and
         2012.  I cannot go back to  Bangladesh  because  of  fear  of  this
         party.  They brought false cases against me and my family members."



 8. At question 5.3 the Appellant was asked whether  he  has  ever  in  any
    country been accused of or have committed an offence for which  he  has
    been or could have been convicted (including traffic offences) to which
    the Appellant responded in the negative.  The  judge  took  this  point
    against the Appellant.

 9. As indicated above, Ms Everett accepted that the judge had  taken  that
    answer simply at face value and without, for example,  considering  the
    remainder  of  the  Appellant's  answers  as  given  in  the  screening
    interview in particular the answer to 4.1 cited  above.   She  accepted
    that it would be difficult for her to argue that this did not go to the
    heart  of  the  judge's  decision  and  findings  in  respect  of   the
    Appellant's credibility.

10. Mr Jorro, on behalf of the Appellant, submitted that it was quite clear
    that the Appellant was distinguishing between false and  genuine  cases
    being brought against him.  Mr Jorro agreed in light of the  concession
    it was not necessary to determine whether or not the judge made further
    material errors of law as the matter would have to be remitted for a de
    novo hearing.

    Findings and Reasons

11. In light of Ms Everett's helpful concession, I find that Judge  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal Housego did make a material error  of  law  in  his
    assessment of the Appellant's credibility, by failing to  consider  his
    answer as given in the screening interview in the context of his  other
    evidence  and  answers  in  particular  that  given  in  the  screening
    interview in response to question 4.1.

12. I accept the submission and find that this does go to the heart of  the
    case and the Appellant's credibility and that  fairness  requires  that
    the decision be set aside in order to be re-made.

    Decision

13. The decision of First tier Tribunal  Judge  Housego  contains  material
    errors of law. I set that decision aside and remit  the  appeal  for  a
    hearing de novo before a different Judge of the First-tier Tribunal.

    Directions

14. The appeal should be listed for three  hours  with  a  Bengali  Sylheti
    interpreter.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   Rebecca Chapman   Date 7 April 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Chapman
