
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07749/2016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 22nd March 2018                            |On 12th April 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR


                                   Between

                                amanullah [n]
                       (ANONYMITY DIRECTION not made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr David Jones, Counsel, instructed by Sutovic &
Hartigan
For the Respondent:    Mr E Tufan, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the decision  of  Judge  Hussain
    made following a hearing at Hatton Cross on 25th January 2017.

 2. The background to this  case  is  that  the  appellant,  a  citizen  of
    Afghanistan, born on 1st  August  1998,  arrived  in  the  UK  on  22nd
    September 2014 and claimed asylum.  His application was refused on 19th
    January 2015 but he was granted discretionary leave on the  basis  that
    he was an unaccompanied minor.  His  appeal  against  the  refusal  was
    dismissed by Judge Gillespie on 30th June  2015.   He  made  a  further
    application for leave on 1st February 2016 and was refused  again.   It
    was this refusal which was the  subject  of  the  appeal  before  Judge
    Hussain.

 3. Judge Gillespie had broadly accepted that the appellant  had  told  the
    truth about the circumstances which led him  to  leave  Afghanistan  in
    that  he  accepted  that  the  appellant  was  the  second  son  of   a
    moneychanger and that a series of kidnappings had caused his family  to
    fear that  a  threat  would  be  made  against  the  appellant.   Judge
    Gillespie however did not accept that the appellant would be threatened
    on return to Afghanistan.

 4. Judge Hussain recorded that the appellant had accepted that he  had  no
    new specific documents  to  support  his  claim  or  to  challenge  the
    findings of Judge Gillespie.

 5. The appellant sought permission to appeal inter  alia  on  the  grounds
    that he had in fact  provided  further  evidence  which  had  not  been
    considered by Judge Hussain. Permission was refused by  Judge  Ford  on
    4th May 2017 and again refused in the Upper Tribunal by Judge Rimington
    on 12th June 2017. The appellant then sought permission  to  apply  for
    judicial review challenging the decision of  Judge  Rimington  made  on
    12th June 2017.

 6. Permission was granted by Her Honour Judge Walden-Smith  sitting  as  a
    Judge of the High Court on 3rd October 2017, and on 7th  December  2017
    permission to appeal was granted by the Vice  President  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal Mr C M G Ockelton.

 7. On 7th February 2018 the respondent wrote to the Tribunal stating  that
    they were without documentation and therefore were unable to agree that
    there  was  an  error  of  law   which   rendered   the   determination
    unsustainable.  However, at the hearing  Mr  Tufan  accepted  that  the
    proper course in this case was that the appeal should be remitted to be
    heard by a First-tier Judge other than Judge Hussain.

 8. Judge Hussain's decision is set aside.  He erred in law in  failing  to
    take into account new evidence which could have been sufficient to make
    out the appellant's case.

 9. In view of the lengthy history of this matter Mr Jones  requested  that
    when the appeal is re-listed at Taylor House his availability should be
    taken into account.  There will have  to  be  liaison  with  Sutovic  &
    Hartigan Solicitors in any event because the appellant  has  a  witness
    from Germany whom he wishes to call and the solicitors  will  therefore
    need to be given sufficient notice in order to organise his travel.   A
    Dari interpreter will be needed.

No anonymity direction is made.

[pic]
Signed                              Date 7 April 2018
Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor
