
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07576/2018 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 5th October 2020                  |On 3rd November 2020                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     D S
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms B Jones, instructed by Krisinth Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr T Melvin, Home Office Presenting Officer

This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
a bundle of 218 pages, the contents of which I have recorded. The  order
made is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Sri  Lanka  born  in  1986.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Greasley,  dated  2
    January 2019, dismissing his protection claim on  asylum,  humanitarian
    protection and human rights grounds.

2.   The Appellant arrived in the UK in October/November 2012 as a  student.
    His leave was curtailed in April 2013 and he was served with notice  of
    liability to removal in June 2017. The Appellant claimed asylum  on  13
    November 2017. His application was refused and his appeal dismissed  in
    June 2019. This decision was set aside on the  ground  that  the  judge
    failed to fully engage with the medical evidence  and  the  Appellant's
    evidence. The appeal was remitted to the First-tier Tribunal  and  came
    before Judge Greasley on 23 December 2019.

3.   On 18 December 2019, the Appellant, through his  solicitors,  requested
    the appeal be decided on the papers. This request was refused  and  the
    appeal was listed for oral  hearing.  Neither  the  Appellant  nor  his
    solicitors attended the  hearing.  There  was  no  application  for  an
    adjournment and there is  no  challenge  to  the  judge's  decision  to
    proceed in the absence of the Appellant or his solicitors.

4.   It is the Appellant's claim that he would be persecuted  on  return  to
    Sri Lanka because he was an active supporter of the LTTE. In 2007,  the
    LTTE arranged for the Appellant to study in Malaysia  for  three  years
    where he distributed leaflets. On his return to Colombo in May 2010, he
    was detained on arrival for two days. He delivered parcels and medicine
    in Colombo. The Appellant claimed he  was  detained  for  six  days  in
    February 2011 and physically tortured. He was kicked, tied  up,  beaten
    with batons and his head was covered  with  a  plastic  bag  dipped  in
    petrol. In February 2012, he was detained for five  days  when  he  was
    verbally and psychologically tortured.

5.   Judge Greasley considered the Appellant's witness  statements  and  the
    medical report of Dr Dhumad. The Appellant suffered from low  mood  and
    anxiety. Dr Dhumad diagnosed PTSD and a moderate risk of  suicide.  The
    report, dated 8 March 2019, stated the  Appellant  was  fit  to  attend
    court and give oral evidence, although his concentration was likely  to
    be affected. The Appellant was not fit to fly.

6.   Judge Greasley made the following findings:

    (i)  the Appellant's account of training with the LTTE was particularly
         vague and lacking in important detail;

    (ii) he did not seek international protection until 2017;

    (iii)    he did not seek medical help in the UK  and  he  first  raised
         mental health issues in April 2018. This  was  the  first  time  he
         disclosed he had been tortured in Sri Lanka;

    (iv) he confirmed in his asylum interview (1 May 2018) that he  had  no
         suicidal ideations;

    (v)  the Appellant denied thoughts of self harm or suicide until he saw
         Dr Dhumad;

    (vi) Dr Dhumad accepted the Appellant's account  at  face  value  which
         limited the evidential value of the medical report;

    (vii)    the account of torture given by the Appellant in  the  medical
         report was inconsistent with his interview and statement;

    (viii)   the Appellant's credibility was damaged by his claim that  his
         passport had been tampered with;

    (ix) the Appellant did not fall within one of the  risk  categories  in
         GJ. He was not on a 'stop list' or 'watch list' and  would  not  be
         perceived as having a  significant  role  in  post  conflict  Tamil
         separatism;

    (x)  the Appellant's credibility was further damaged by his failure  to
         claim asylum prior to enforcement action and his  account  was  not
         subject to cross-examination;

7.   The Appellant applied for permission to appeal on the grounds that  the
    judge:

    (a)  failed to take into  account  the  Appellant's  mental  health  in
         determining credibility;

    (b)  failed to make a finding  that  the  Appellant  was  a  vulnerable
         witness and struggled to recall past events;

    (c)  misunderstood the role of the expert  and  misquoted  the  medical
         evidence;

    (d)  erred in law in attaching little weight to Dr Dhumad's report;

    (e)  misapplied GJ (country guidance) and section 8 (2004 Act);

    (f)  failed to consider Articles 3 and 8.

8.   Permission to appeal  was  granted  by  Resident  First-Tribunal  Judge
    Zucker on 27 January 2020 on all grounds. Judge Zucker  stated  it  was
    arguable the judge erred in his approach to the evidence of  Dr  Dhumad
    which affected his approach to credibility and to whether the Appellant
    fell within paragraph 7(a) of GJ.

Submissions

9.   Ms Jones relied on  her  written  submissions  dated  21  May  2020  at
    paragraphs 10 to 19. She submitted Dr Dhumad was  aware  the  Appellant
    had not sought medical  attention.  The  judge's  criticisms  were  not
    sustainable and his reasons for attaching little weight to the  medical
    evidence were inadequate. Dr Dhumad was aware of all the points made by
    the judge. He did not take the Appellant's account at  face  value.  Dr
    Dhumad had clearly made a mistake in recording the Appellant's  account
    of detention. It was not appropriate to rely  on  such  an  error.  The
    judge erred in law in his approach to Dr Dhumad's report and he  failed
    to give adequate reasons for rejecting it.

10.  The only criticism of the Appellant's account was that  it  was  vague.
    There were no inconsistencies. The Appellant was a  vulnerable  witness
    and was unable to answer some questions in interview. This was apparent
    from question 66 when the Appellant stated: "I can't remember anything.
    If I think deeply I will go mad." The medical evidence  was  consistent
    with the Appellant's account.  There  was  no  basis  for  the  judge's
    finding at [47] that the Appellant's account was inconsistent  and  not
    credible.

11.  At paragraph 275 of GJ the Tribunal found that it was possible to  exit
    Sri Lanka safely through  the  airport  on  payment  of  a  bribe.  The
    Appellant claimed that the passport he presented was not  his.  It  was
    not in his name and contained a photograph  of  someone  who  resembled
    him. The judge's finding at [41] was perverse and inconsistent with GJ.



12.  The Appellant was at risk of suicide and the medical facilities in  Sri
    Lanka were insufficient to mitigate against this risk. The judge  erred
    in law in his application of J and Y. Dr Dhumad gave  adequate  reasons
    for why the Appellant was not fit to fly. It was not open to the  judge
    to state otherwise.

13.  Mr Melvin relied on the written submissions dated 2 June 2020  and  his
    skeleton argument dated 2 October 2020. He  submitted  the  appeal  had
    been remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for a proper consideration  of
    Dr Dhumad's report and Judge Greasley properly  directed  himself  when
    considering that report. The Appellant and his advisors did not  attend
    the hearing and there was no evidence before the judge to suggest there
    was a mistake in the  report.  Dr  Dhumad  relied  on  the  Appellant's
    evidence of torture to support his finding of PTSD. It  was  reasonable
    to expect him to have considered the Appellant's account in the context
    of the refusal letter and to  address  any  conflicting  evidence.  The
    judge gave adequate reasons for attaching little weight to  the  report
    and made findings which were open to him on the evidence.

14.  The Appellant did not approach a doctor  until  five  years  after  his
    visa expired and some months after he claimed asylum. The report of  Dr
    Dhumad came one year later against the backdrop of very little  medical
    treatment.  The  Appellant  denied  suicide  in  interview.  The  judge
    considered the evidence of Dr Dhumad with the other  evidence  and  was
    entitled to attach little weight to it.

15.  The inconsistencies in the Appellant's account were apparent  from  the
    refusal letter and the Respondent's submissions before the  judge.  The
    Appellant's account was lacking in coherent detail.  It  was  difficult
    for the judge to make a finding on vulnerability in the absence of  the
    Appellant  and  without   the   benefit   of   submissions   from   his
    representative. There was no medical reason why the Appellant could not
    give evidence. There was insufficient  evidence  before  the  judge  to
    enable him to come to conclusions contrary to those  expressed  in  the
    refusal letter. The judge was entitled to reject the medical opinion of
    PTSD and suicide ideation and  the  judge  gave  adequate  reasons  for
    coming to that conclusion. The  judge's  finding  in  relation  to  the
    Appellant's passport were not relevant and his conclusions on Article 3
    were valid.

16.  Ms Jones submitted, although the  judge  was  making  findings  on  the
    papers,  there  were  multiple   allegations   of   torture   and   the
    inconsistencies were overplayed. At the time of interview the Appellant
    had been prescribed medication by his GP. He was clearly  mentally  ill
    and this affected his ability to give evidence.  There  was  sufficient
    evidence before the judge to establish vulnerability.  The  Appellant's
    exit from Sri Lanka was plausible and his account  was  only  vague  in
    relation to LTTE training. The  inconsistency  in  the  account  in  Dr
    Dhumad's report was trivial. There had  been  a  deterioration  in  the
    Appellant's mental health between the asylum interview and Dr  Dhumad's
    interview which was not uncommon. There were no sustainable grounds for
    rejecting the expert report.

Conclusions and reasons

17.  It is apparent when the decision is read as  a  whole  that  the  judge
    considered the Appellant's mental  health  issues  when  assessing  his
    evidence. He was aware the Appellant had  difficulty  recalling  events
    which happened five years before the Appellant was interviewed  in  May
    2017 [34]. The judge was entitled to take into  account  the  delay  in
    claiming asylum and he  gave  adequate  reasons  at  [35]  for  why  he
    rejected the Appellant's explanation for the delay. The judge was  also
    entitled to take into account the lack of medical  evidence  of  mental
    health issues before April 2018.

18.  The Appellant did not attend the hearing and was  not  represented.  He
    asked for the appeal to  be  determined  on  the  papers.  The  medical
    evidence demonstrated he was fit to attend court and give evidence. The
    Appellant has chosen not to participate in the proceedings.  There  was
    no  evidence  before  the  judge  that  the  Appellant's  vulnerability
    prevented him from putting forward his case. There were  no  issues  of
    vulnerability capable of affecting the outcome of the appeal.

19.  The judge did not misunderstand or misquote the  medical  evidence.  He
    assessed Dr  Dhumad's  evidence  in  the  context  of  the  Appellant's
    evidence in his interview and statement and the documentary evidence in
    the Appellant's and Respondent's bundles. The inconsistency in relation
    to when the Appellant was tortured was not trivial  and  there  was  no
    attempt to address any alleged mistake. The weight to  be  attached  to
    the medical evidence was a matter for the judge and  he  gave  adequate
    reasons for why he attached little weight to it at [35] to [40].

20.  The judge's finding that the Appellant's account of his departure  from
    Sri Lanka was not credible was open to him on the evidence and he  gave
    adequate reasons for coming that conclusion. The refusal letter  relied
    on evidence in GJ that "Passports of embarking passengers were scanned,
    checking details against DIE databases."  In  any  event,  the  judge's
    finding in relation to the Appellant's passport at [41] and any alleged
    misstatement of the evidence at [42] was not  material.  There  was  no
    misunderstanding in respect of paragraph 275 of GJ.

21.  The judge took into account all relevant  matters  and  considered  the
    totality of the evidence. The judge did not have the  benefit  of  oral
    evidence from the Appellant. His finding at [47] that the Appellant had
    failed to provide a consistent and credible account of  past  detention
    or involvement with the LTTE was open to him  on  the  evidence  before
    him. There was no misapplication of section 8.  The  Appellant  claimed
    asylum after he was served with notice of removal.

22.  There was no misapplication of  GJ.  There  was  insufficient  evidence
    before the judge to show that the Appellant was on  a  'stop  list'  or
    'watch list' or that he would be perceived to have a  significant  role
    in post conflict Tamil separatism.

23.  The judge properly directed himself on the risk of  suicide  and  there
    was no error of law in his finding that the Appellant's  removal  would
    not breach Article 3. The grounds and submissions fail to  disclose  on
    what basis the Appellant's Article 8 claim could succeed. Ms Jones,  in
    her written submissions, accepted there was no evidence of private life
    before the judge and this ground was not pursued further. The Appellant
    came to the UK as a student  and  remained  without  leave.  There  was
    insufficient evidence before the judge to  show  that  the  Appellant's
    private life outweighed the public interest.

24.  Accordingly, I find there was no material error of law in the  decision
    of dated 2 January 2019 and I dismiss the Appellant's appeal.



Notice of decision

Appeal dismissed

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 30 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances


TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

I have dismissed the appeal and therefore there can be no fee award.

     J Frances

Signed   Date: 30 October 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
