
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07958/2019 (V)


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard remotely at Field House        |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 7 August 2020                     |On 18 August 2020                    |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE FRANCES


                                   Between

                                     A H
                         (anonymity direction made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr E Wilford, instructed by Waterstone Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr S Walker, Home Office Presenting Officer


This has  been  a  remote  hearing  which  has  been  consented  to  by  the
parties. The form of remote hearing was video by Skype (V). A face to face
hearing was not held because it was not practicable and all issues could  be
determined in a remote hearing. The documents that I was referred to are in
the Respondent's bundle of 217 pages and the Appellant's bundles of 201  and
255  pages,  the  contents of which I  have  recorded. The  order  made
is described at the end of these reasons.


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.   The Appellant is a citizen of  Bangladesh  born  in  1984.  He  appeals
    against the decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge  Cockburn,  dated  18
    March 2020, dismissing his protection claim on asylum and human  rights
    grounds.

2.   Permission to appeal was granted by First-tier Tribunal Judge L  Murray
    on the grounds that it was arguable the judge did  not  engage  with  a
    material aspect of the Appellant's case in relation to his  brother-in-
    law and that  the  judge's  treatment  of  the  Facebook  evidence  was
    procedurally unfair.

3.   It was agreed by the parties that there was an error  of  law  and  the
    decision should be set aside in its  entirety  under  Rule  43  of  the
    Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008. The judge  had  clearly
    failed to engage with the content of the Facebook posts and to consider
    them in light of the background material and the high  profile  of  the
    Appellant's brother-in-law. The Respondent accepted the Facebook  posts
    were public and post-dated 2015.

4.   I find that the judge erred in law and I set aside the  decision  dated
    18 March 2020. None of the judge's findings are preserved.  The  appeal
    is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal for re-hearing.



Notice of decision

Appeal allowed



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances

TO THE RESPONDENT
FEE AWARD

No fee is paid or payable and therefore there can be no fee award.


              J Frances

Signed                                  Date: 11 August 2020
Upper Tribunal Judge Frances
