
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07066/2019


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Manchester Civil Justice    |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|Centre                               |                                     |
|On 10 January 2020                   |On 24 January 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE PICKUP


                                   Between

                                    A A-N
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mrs C Johnrose instructed by Broudie Jackson &
Canter Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr A Tan, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules
    2008, I make an anonymity direction.  Unless the Upper Tribunal or a
    court directs otherwise, no report of these proceedings or any form of
    publication thereof shall directly or indirectly identify the
    appellant.

 2. This is the appellant's  appeal  against  the  decision  of  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Handler promulgated on 12 September 2019  dismissing  on
    all grounds his appeal against the decision of the Secretary  of  State
    dated 4 July 2019 to refuse his protection claim made on  29  September
    2018 on the basis of a fear of persecution owing to his claimed  Baha'i
    faith.

 3. First-tier Tribunal Judge Easterman refused permission to appeal on  21
    October 2019, however when the application was  renewed  to  the  Upper
    Tribunal, Upper Tribunal Judge Kamara granted permission to  appeal  on
    15 November 2019.



Error of Law

 4. For the reasons set out below, I find that there was an error of law in
    the making of the decision  of  the  First-tier  Tribunal  such  as  to
    require it to be set aside and re-made by remitting the appeal  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.

 5. The appellant claims that, having been raised  as  a  Shia  Muslim,  on
    visiting the UK in 2018 his maternal uncle introduced him to the Baha'i
    faith and he was "evangelised" at two meetings.  On return to  Iran  he
    was detained and questioned on arrival  for  having  converted  to  the
    Baha'i faith.  After being released from prison on conditions,  he  did
    not in fact return home but went to the family's holiday home in Karaj.
     He was then informed by neighbours that the security forces had raided
    the home as a result of which he asked his mother-in-law to go  to  the
    house to retrieve his computers which contained incriminating material.
     That incriminating material was a means whereby people could evade the
    Iranian internet filters by using a VPN or proxy server.

 6. The  grounds  argue  that  the  judge's  approach  was  unfair  with  a
    propensity to disbelieve  the  appellant,  notwithstanding  significant
    corroborating evidence.  It is argued that the judge failed to refer to
    the skeleton argument of the appellant's representative addressing  the
    alleged discrepancies or inconsistencies, and it also argued  that  the
    judge was in error to give little weight to  the  independent  witness,
    RS, and that her reasons for doing so were wrong, that  she  failed  to
    consider  material  evidence,  effectively  rejecting  everything   the
    appellant said.

 7. In granting permission to appeal, Judge Kamara considered  it  arguable
    that the First-tier Tribunal  Judge  erred  in  failing  to  take  into
    consideration all the available evidence and that there was a  lack  of
    anxious scrutiny.  For the reasons set out  below  I  agree  with  that
    assessment, although I disagree with some of the points raised  in  the
    grounds.

 8. The according of weight to evidence is a matter for the judge.   It  is
    not an arguable error of law for a judge to give too little or too much
    weight to a relevant factor unless the exercise is irrational.  Nor  is
    it an error of law for a judge to fail to deal with every factual issue
    of argument. Disagreement  with  a  judge's  factual  conclusions,  the
    appraisal  of  the  evidence  or  assessment  of  credibility  or   the
    evaluation of risk does not give rise to an error of law. In Budhathoki
    [2014] UKUT 00341 (IAC) the Upper Tribunal stated that:

         "It is generally unnecessary and unhelpful for First-tier  Tribunal
         judgments to rehearse every detail or issue raised in a case.  This
         leads to judgments becoming overly long and confused and is  not  a
         proportionate approach to deciding cases.  It is however  necessary
         for judges to identify and resolve key conflicts  in  the  evidence
         and explain in clear and brief terms  their  reasons  so  that  the
         parties can understand why they have won or lost."

 9. When considering the appellant's factual  claim,  the  judge  correctly
    directed herself to apply the lower standard of proof.  At paragraph 22
    she explains  she  did  not  expect  the  appellant  to  give  a  fully
    consistent account but having considered the evidence as a  whole,  she
    could not find a reasonable explanation for the difficulties  with  his
    account as identified in the decision.  Similarly, the judge took  into
    account the evidence of the appellant's uncle and the explanation as to
    why this person did not attend the hearing.  It was open to  the  judge
    to observe that there was no evidence to support  the  claim  that  the
    uncle had developed Alzheimer's  disease  and  was  thereby  unable  to
    attend the hearing so that his evidence could be tested.  The judge was
    not obliged to accept the explanation and was  entitled  to  take  into
    account that the claim to have been converted to the Baha'i  faith  was
    unsupported by evidence from the uncle  about  those  first  visits  to
    meetings before the appellant returned to Iran.

10. Similarly, whilst a witness RS gave evidence in support of the  claimed
    conversion which was fully taken into account at paragraph  33  of  the
    decision, the judge was entitled to give limited weight to the  opinion
    of this person who, as the judge noted  at  paragraph  32,  was  not  a
    leader or person in authority with the faith and therefore  was  not  a
    Dorodian witness.  It was  reasonable  for  the  judge  to  expect  the
    appellant to support his claimed conversion to the  Baha'i  faith  with
    cogent evidence from a person in authority with the faith.

11. Neither was it necessary for the judge to set out the  content  of  the
    skeleton argument or even to acknowledge it, provided it was clear from
    the decision the judge had taken into account all relevant evidence and
    submissions.  Merely because the skeleton argument purported to  refute
    the assertion that there were inconsistencies or discrepancies  in  the
    appellant's account does not convert the skeleton  argument  or  indeed
    the oral submissions into evidence. To  some  degree  the  grounds  are
    little more than a  disagreement  with  the  decision  and  an  attempt
    thereby  to  reargue  the  appeal.   However,  having  heard  the  oral
    submissions of Mrs Johnrose, who took me to the  various  documents  in
    the case, I am satisfied that there are sufficient material  errors  in
    the decision as to infect all of the  findings  so  that  the  decision
    cannot stand and must be set aside.

12. The first ground of appeal is that in general terms  the  decision  was
    unfair in that the judge applied an unfair approach  to  the  evidence.
    Some of the points made, as I have said above, do  not  demonstrate  an
    unfair approach, for example at paragraph 26 of  the  refusal  decision
    the respondent raised a number of inconsistencies that were alleged  to
    be in the appellant's account.  For example, it is said  that  when  he
    returned to Iran he was arrested at passport control, held and detained
    and then taken to prison where he was questioned for converting to  the
    Baha'i faith. The skeleton argument demonstrates, and  I  am  satisfied
    that this is the case, that there were no inconsistencies.

13. The Secretary of State also relied upon alleged  discrepancies  between
    the appellant's accounts in the screening  interview.   It  was  stated
    that he had been inconsistent as to when and whether he  was  detained.
    However, it is clear from the screening interview that  the  appellant,
    within the same answer, corrected his account and said that he was  not
    questioned at the airport but taken to prison where he was  questioned.
    I am not satisfied there is any error of law in the decision in respect
    of that matter.

14. However, at paragraph 23 of the decision  the  judge  stated  that  the
    appellant had given inconsistent evidence about his religion. The judge
    said that he had stated he had attended two gatherings with  his  uncle
    during his visit to the  UK  in  August  and  September  2018  but  was
    inconsistent about the effect of his  attendances  at  those  meetings.
    The judge pointed out that in his initial screening  interview  he  had
    said he had no religion and then later in his  first  asylum  interview
    that he was not religious at the time of that screening  interview  but
    had later converted, in the UK.  The judge  pointed  out  that  in  the
    second interview he said  that  he  had  been  evangelised  during  his
    attendance at  those  first  gatherings  with  his  uncle.   The  judge
    considered this to be material going to the core of his claim and being
    an inconsistency.  However, I agree with the submissions that the judge
    has conflated evangelised with converted. The appellant's case is  that
    he only converted after returning to the UK for the  second  time.   He
    had attended two meetings with his uncle in about August  or  September
    2018 but makes clear that whilst he had been evangelised,  he  was  not
    converted and not in fact interested at that stage.  The point is  made
    at question 14 of the second interview where  he  agreed  he  had  been
    evangelised at those first two meetings but at question 18 of the  same
    interview, which was held in March 2019, that at that point in time  he
    had no interest in converting to the faith. He did not consider himself
    a Muslim but had no interest in other faiths.  In his  opinion  it  was
    just an interesting place to go, but at question 19 said he was curious
    to know more.  So even though he had said that he had been  evangelised
    he was not saying that he had been converted at that stage, during  his
    first visit to the UK.  In  question  97  of  the  first  interview  he
    confirmed that he is now of the Baha'i faith and explained that at  the
    time of his initial screening interview he was not converted, and  said
    he had been converted since he had been living  in  the  UK,  in  other
    words during his second visit to the UK.  It follows that the judge has
    taken what the appellant had said to be an inconsistency because he had
    used the word evangelised.  It may be  a  misunderstanding  but  it  is
    quite clear from the interviews that the appellant  was  consistent  in
    saying that whilst he had attended two meetings during his first  visit
    to the UK, he was not converted to the faith until  after  arriving  in
    the UK on his second visit.  The relevance of this is  that  the  judge
    has relied on this as a material inconsistency undermining his claim to
    be of the Baha'i faith which would therefore put him at risk on return.



15. At paragraph 25 of the decision the judge suggests that  the  appellant
    has given an inconsistent account of his detention on return to Iran on
    12 September 2018 and the conditions of  his  release.   In  the  first
    interview at question 80 he was asked was he released on bail.  He said
    'yes, they said I had to stay around and  when  required  go  back  and
    report to them, they did not set a date.'  He  was  not  asked  whether
    there were any conditions.  In the second interview  between  questions
    36 and 38 he was asked why he was released. He said, 'I cannot give you
    the reason why they released me, I placed house deeds for  my  release,
    they were  the  deeds  to  my  mother-in-law's  house  and  there  were
    conditions.'  Only then was he asked what  those  conditions  were,  to
    which he replied that 'the terms were I  should  return  wherever  they
    requested me and my phone to be switched on and also any contacts  that
    I have I should inform  them.   I  do  not  know  what  they  meant  by
    contacts.  I was accused of  being  Baha'i  but  this  was  not  true.'
    Properly read, the two  accounts  are  not  in  fact  inconsistent.  At
    paragraph 25 the judge relied on this inconsistency,  stating  that  if
    there had been conditions he could have  been  reasonably  expected  to
    have said so when first asked.  However,  he  was  not  actually  asked
    whether there were conditions  during  the  first  interview.   In  the
    circumstances,  I  find  that  the  judge  has  relied  on  an  alleged
    inconsistency which is not in fact an inconsistency.

16. Judge Handler also relied on  a  point  made  about  the  computers  at
    paragraph 27 of the  decision.  There  the  judge  said  there  was  no
    reasonable explanation, or the  appellant  had  offered  no  reasonable
    explanation, as to why his family did not bring  those  computers  with
    them when they came to pick him up from detention and take him  to  the
    holiday home in Karaj.  In the preceding paragraph,  at  paragraph  26,
    the  judge  stated  the  appellant  had  not  provided  a  satisfactory
    explanation regarding the computers he says were taken  when  his  home
    was raided.  The judge was entitled to make a generalised point that if
    he was conducting illegal activities on his computers he might well  be
    expected to be more cautious or take precautions to avoid the  computer
    content being discovered.  However, he had left them in the property in
    Tehran, from where the authorities seized them.

17. Mrs Johnrose points out that the appellant said that when he  travelled
    away  from  Iran  he  always  left  his  computers  behind.   That  was
    apparently in re-examination during the oral  evidence.   None  of  the
    circumstances of this account would explain why the family  would  know
    to bring the computers with them when they came to  pick  him  up  from
    detention; there is nothing to suggest  that  they  knew  that  he  was
    engaged in  illegal  activity  using  his  computers.  He  had  had  no
    opportunity to get the computers on his return from the UK, because  he
    was detained at the  airport  and  taken  to  prison  for  questioning.
    Having gone to the holiday home a wise person  might  have  thought  it
    would be better to get rid of or hide the computers.  It is  not  clear
    what the timeline was  but  the  next  event  that  happened  was  that
    neighbours informed him or the family that their home had been  raided.
    He then asked his mother-in-law to go to the property to  retrieve  his
    computers, but she was too late, they  had  already  been  taken.   The
    judge's reliance on this issue seems unfair because there is no  reason
    why the family would remove the computers unless they had been told  to
    do so by the appellant.

18. The second ground is that the judge made  a  material  misdirection  in
    failing to make  any  findings  in  respect  of  the  evidence  of  the
    additional witness as to the appellant's conversion in the UK.  This is
    addressed from paragraph 32 of the decision where the judge  notes  the
    witness RS had a handwritten statement and gave  oral  evidence.   This
    person stated that he was a  Baha'i  but  held  no  official  position.
    There  was  no  Dorodian  witness,  despite  the  appellant's   claimed
    conversion.  However, the witness statement  does  provide  information
    about the appellant's attendance at meetings as well as that  witness's
    opinion about the appellant's faith.  Whilst  little  weight  might  be
    given to the opinion, the judge should  have  taken  into  account  the
    supporting evidence that the appellant had  been  attending  the  faith
    meetings.  More significantly, it is not clear what the judge  made  of
    the evidence  of  this  witness.   No  conclusion  is  reached  between
    paragraphs 32 and 34 of the decision about his evidence.

19. The third ground  is  that  the  judge  omitted  to  consider  material
    evidence in relation to how the appellant left Iran.  At  paragraph  41
    the judge stated that the appellant's travel documents  are  consistent
    with the fact that he flew from Istanbul to Turkey but  that  does  not
    make any sense because Istanbul is in Turkey, so it is not  clear  what
    the judge meant. The judge went on to say, "however they do not offer a
    satisfactory explanation in  respect  of  the  inconsistencies  in  the
    evidence regarding the appellant's exit from Iran  set  out  above.   I
    accept that these are the documents under which  the  appellant  exited
    from Iran".

20. Mrs Johnrose took me to those documents,  which  comprise  two  tickets
    with translations and copies of the appellant's passport  with  stamps.
    It was accepted at the  hearing,  as  noted  at  paragraph  20  of  the
    decision, that when  the  refusal  decision  sought  to  rely  upon  an
    inconsistency as to which airport the appellant flew into there  was  a
    mistake.  The respondent had confused entry stamps  with  exit  stamps.
    What the documents show, if they  are  to  be  accepted,  is  that  the
    appellant left Iran at a border crossing on 23 September and is stamped
    as having entered Iraq  on  24  September.   There  is  then  a  flight
    document showing a flight from Baghdad in Iraq to Istanbul Turkey on 23
    September. The other document is dated 22 September, the day before. It
    is not clear whether this is a bus ride or a flight, but it appears  to
    be transport within Iran to Miran which is where the appellant  crossed
    the border into Iraq.  The judge accepted those  documents  but  stated
    that they did not provide a satisfactory explanation of inconsistencies
    in the evidence regarding the appellant's exit from Iran set out above.
     The only reference earlier in the decision to inconsistencies above is
    at paragraph 30 of the decision where the judge stated that there are a
    number of internal inconsistencies in the  appellant's  evidence  about
    how he left Iran which the judge considered he had  not  satisfactorily
    explained.  "In the circumstances where on the appellant's evidence the
    authorities have raided his home because they could not find him it  is
    inconsistent that he would be able to leave the country in  the  manner
    he describes".  To some extent the judge is entitled to  make  a  point
    that if the appellant is wanted by the authorities he might  have  some
    difficulty in exiting  the  country  through  recognised  and  official
    channels.   However,  it  is  not  clear  that  there   is   any   real
    inconsistency in the terms asserted by the judge.  The judge  does  not
    make clear what the inconsistencies are and why they are not  explained
    by the evidence.  In the circumstances, I cannot be satisfied the judge
    has made a proper assessment of the documentary evidence in  comparison
    with the appellant's claim as to how he left Iran.

21. In respect of the documentary evidence, Mrs Johnrose  makes  a  general
    point that the judge appears from paragraph 35 of the decision to  have
    discounted most of the documentary evidence.   The  judge  talks  about
    giving limited weight to various pieces of documentation but there does
    not appear to be any clear findings other than to say 'I attach limited
    weight to those documents.'  It is not clear what conclusions the judge
    had  reached  or  what  reasons  the  judge  was  relying  on  for  the
    conclusions set out  in  very  brief  terms  at  paragraph  42  of  the
    decision.

22. In his submissions Mr Tan accepted that the appellant's claim is in two
    overlapping strands, first whether he was detained on return to Iran on
    an allegation of having converted to the Baha'i faith and is thereby at
    risk on a further return, and,  secondly,  whether  he  is  in  fact  a
    genuine convert in the UK to that faith.  Mr Tan  found  difficulty  in
    justifying the Tribunal's  decision  and  agreed  that  the  judge  had
    conflated  evangelised  with  converted,  and  that  this  element  was
    fundamental to the decision, repeated within the decision so  that  all
    other findings are thereby infected by the error.

23. Mr Tan also had difficulties in relation to some of  the  other  points
    made by Mrs Johnrose as I have outlined above.  In the circumstances Mr
    Tan did not resist the appeal any  further,  having  heard  a  detailed
    exposition of the documentation and the evidence by Mrs Johnrose in her
    submissions.

24. In all the circumstances and for the reasons set out above, whilst I do
    not agree with all of the submissions or  all  of  the  grounds,  I  am
    satisfied that there are sufficient errors of law in this  decision  as
    to require it to be set aside and re-made. Given the centrality of  the
    errors to the findings, it is not possible or practical to preserve any
    of the findings and all must be remade.



Remittal

25. When a decision of the First-tier Tribunal has been set aside,  Section
    12(2) of the Tribunals, Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 requires either
    that the case is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal with directions or
    it must be re-made by the Upper Tribunal.  The scheme of the Tribunals,
    Courts and Enforcement Act 2007 does not assign the function of primary
    fact-finding to the Upper Tribunal.  The  findings  in  this  case  are
    unclear, the errors mean there has not been a  valid  determination  of
    the crucial issues in the appeal.  In all the circumstances and at  the
    invitation requested by both parties, I re-list this appeal for a fresh
    hearing in the First-tier Tribunal on the  basis  that  this  case  was
    squarely within the Senior President's Practice Statement at  paragraph
    7.2



Notice of Decision

26. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  involve  the
    making of an error on a point of law such that the decision must be set
    aside.

                    I set aside the decision.

                    I remit the appeal to be decided afresh  in  the  First-
                    tier Tribunal in accordance with the directions below.

                    An anonymity direction is made.


                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  20 January 2020
Consequential Directions

  .  The  appeal  is  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  sitting   at
    Manchester.

  . The appeal is to be decided afresh with no findings of fact preserved.

  . The estimated length of hearing is three hours.

  . The appeal may be listed before any First-tier Tribunal Judge with  the
    exception of Judges Easterman and Handler.

  . An interpreter in Farsi will be required.  It is  expected  that  there
    will be the appellant plus one other witness.

  . The First-tier Tribunal may give such further alternative directions as
    are deemed appropriate.

  . The appellant is to ensure that all  evidence  to  be  relied  upon  is
    contained within a single consolidated, indexed and paginated bundle of
    all objective  and  subjective  material  together  with  any  skeleton
    argument and copies of all case  authorities  to  be  relied  on.   The
    Tribunal is unlikely to accept material submitted on  the  day  of  the
    forthcoming appeal hearing.


                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  20 January 2020



To the Respondent
Fee Award

The outcome of the appeal remains to be decided.  In  the  circumstances,  I
can make no fee award.


                    [pic]
                    Signed
                    Upper Tribunal Judge Pickup


                    Dated  20 January 2020
