
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: pa/07617/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 20th February 2018                         |On 21st March 2018            |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                  DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE J G MACDONALD


                                   Between

                 Secretary of State for the Home Department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

                                  miss daj
                           (ANONYMITY order made)
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms A Everett, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer
For the Respondent:    Mr K Scott, Solicitor instructed by Pickup Scott
Solicitors


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. For ease of reference I shall continue to refer  to  Miss  DAJ  as  the
    Appellant.  She is a citizen of Nigeria who applied for asylum  in  the
    United Kingdom and her application was  refused  by  the  Secretary  of
    State but her appeal  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  Thomas  was
    successful in that her appeal was allowed in a decision promulgated  on
    16th October 2017.

 2. The Secretary of State appealed indicating it was not clear whether the
    judge had allowed the appeal on asylum grounds or just on human  rights
    grounds.  It was said that the  judge  gave  inadequate  reasoning  for
    finding that  there  was  not  a  sufficiency  of  protection  for  the
    Appellant in Nigeria and the Respondent's  refusal  letter  dealt  with
    this at length at paragraphs 56 to 65, with reference to the background
    material.   The  judge  had  failed  to  engage  with  this   evidence.
    Furthermore, the judge had found that if he was wrong and there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection, then it was necessary to  consider  internal
    relocation.  The grounds observe that if  there  is  a  sufficiency  of
    protection then there is no need to relocate.  It was  also  said  that
    the judge in any event gave  inadequate  reasons  for  the  Appellant's
    inability to relocate within Nigeria.

 3. The grounds of application were found to be arguable and permission  to
    appeal was therefore granted.  A Rule 24 notice was lodged,  indicating
    that the judge had acted appropriately and had stated in  paragraph  28
    of the decision that Kano state had not adopted child  protection  laws
    and the abuse suffered by the Appellant was seen as family matters.

 4. It was therefore submitted that the judge did consider  the  background
    evidence and had concluded that it would  not  be  reasonable  for  the
    Respondent to relocate because she  was  a  lone  female  girl  without
    family support.

 5. Thus, the appeal came before me on the above date.  For  the  Secretary
    of State Ms Everett relied on her grounds.  The issue of sufficiency of
    protection had not been properly addressed.  The  facts  had  therefore
    not been properly considered.  The judge's  findings  did  not  go  far
    enough.

 6. For the Appellant Mr Scott submitted that the judge had given  adequate
    reasons.  In particular, the judge had explained why there  was  not  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant and  the  appeal  had  been
    allowed on asylum as well as human rights grounds.

 7. I reserved my decision.

 Conclusions

 8. The judge  found  that  the  Appellant  was  a  credible  witness.   In
    particular in paragraph 26 he found the Appellant's evidence  that  her
    stepfather had sexually assaulted her by  touching  and  attempting  to
    touch her to be credible and not exaggerated.  She had given a detailed
    account of the various incidences in her interview.  The judge accepted
    the evidence of the witness that the Appellant had confided in her.  In
    terms of whether the judge considered the background material the judge
    found that whilst there were laws against  sexual  gender  violence  it
    continued to prevail in Nigeria.  The judge noted  that  Kano  had  not
    adopted child protection laws and that  such  abuse  is  also  seen  as
    family matters and therefore concluded that "it  is  reasonably  likely
    that the authorities in Kano  would  not  be  willing  to  protect  the
    Appellant against her paternal uncles".  It  therefore  seems  apparent
    that while not specifically referring to paragraphs  56  -  65  of  the
    refusal letter the judge did consider whether or not there would  be  a
    sufficiency of protection for the Appellant and decided there would not
    be - for clear and adequate reasons given.

 9. The judge went on to say that if he was wrong in that and there  was  a
    sufficiency of protection in Nigeria, then it was necessary to consider
    whether the Appellant could relocate.  As the grounds point  out,  this
    was an error because if there was a sufficiency of protection  for  the
    Appellant then there  was  no  need  for  the  Appellant  to  relocate.
    However it does not seem to me that this error is a material one.   The
    judge had already found that  there  would  not  be  a  sufficiency  of
    protection for the  Appellant  in  her  home  area  and  therefore  did
    properly go on to consider whether it was reasonable or unduly harsh to
    expect the Appellant to relocate.  In my view the judge's reasoning for
    concluding  that  the  Appellant  could  not  relocate  is  sound.   In
    particular, in paragraph 28 the judge  noted  that  the  Appellant  was
    still a child.  As he put it, she  was  a  lone  female  girl,  without
    family support or a home elsewhere in Nigeria and it would therefore be
    unduly harsh and unreasonable for her to relocate there.

10. The  judge's  reasoning  on  this  issue  is  clear  and  coherent  and
    particularly given that the Appellant was still a child without  family
    support cannot be considered to be an error  in  law.  It  is  safe  to
    conclude that he was allowing the appeal on  asylum  grounds  (category
    particular social group) and human rights grounds.

11. There is therefore no material error of law  in  the  judge's  decision
    which must stand.

Notice of Decision

12. The making of the decision of the First-tier Tribunal did  not  involve
    the making of an error on a point of law.

13. I do not set aside the decision.

14. I shall continue the anonymity order as requested by Mr Scott.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  Appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify her  or  any  member  of  her  family.   This  direction
applies both to the Appellant and to  the  Respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed   JG Macdonald                                 Date 20th March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge J G Macdonald
