
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07860/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields      |Determination & Reasons Promulgated  |
|On 1 March 2019             |On 05 March 2019                     |
|Prepared on 1 March 2019    |                                     |


                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE JM HOLMES


                                   Between

                                    D. D.
                          (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                 SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Caswell, Counsel, instructed by David Gray
                    Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr Diwnycz, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


      1. The Appellant, a  citizen  of  Iran,  entered  the  United  Kingdom
         illegally, and together with her sister  made  a  protection  claim
         based upon their sexuality that was  refused.  Their  appeals  were
         dismissed by decision of Immigration Judge  Fisher  promulgated  in
         October 2008.
      2. A fresh protection claim was made on the basis that  the  Appellant
         had become a chronic alcoholic, who also suffered from  mental  ill
         health. This was refused on 7 June  2018.  The  Appellant's  appeal
         against the refusal of this new  protection  claim  was  heard  and
         allowed by First Tier Tribunal Judge Cope in a decision promulgated
         on 29 August 2018.
      3. The Respondent's application for permission to appeal  was  granted
         by Designated First tier Tribunal Judge  Manuell  on  17  September
         2018 on the basis the Judge's logic was not  easy  to  follow,  but
         apparently  at  variance  with  the  available  country  background
         information.
      4. No Rule 24 Notice has been lodged  in  response  to  the  grant  of
         permission to appeal. Neither party has applied  pursuant  to  Rule
         15(2A) for permission to rely upon further evidence.
      5. Thus the matter came before me.


    The grounds
      6. As advanced by Mr Diwnycz, the grounds  advance  three  challenges.
         First [#6] a complaint that the Judge failed to take  into  account
         relevant material evidence that was before  him.  Second  [#2-5]  a
         complaint that the Judge  was  wrong  to  treat  alcoholism  as  an
         immutable  characteristic,  and  thus  wrong  to  accept  that  the
         Appellant was a member of a particular social group. Third  [#7]  a
         complaint that the Judge had failed to give  adequate  reasons  for
         his conclusions.
      7. There is no merit in the first complaint; the  evidence  which  the
         Judge was said to have overlooked is an article taken from the  New
         York Times of 11.9.17. That article is referred to specifically  by
         him [56]. Moreover, the content of that  article  is  discussed  at
         length in the course of the expert evidence of Dr Van Engelaand, to
         which the Judge also expressly referred.
      8. As to the second complaint, Mr Diwnycz  accepts  that  it  was  not
         disputed before the Judge that the Appellant was by the date of the
         hearing  recognised  by  the  medical  profession  as   a   chronic
         alcoholic, who had  twice  attempted,  and  failed,  to  break  her
         alcohol dependency with formal  alcohol  detoxification  treatment.
         Nor was it disputed that she continued to abuse alcohol as part  of
         her  dependency.  The  Judge  accepted  the   evidence   that   the
         Appellant's liver was now damaged through  her  abuse  of  alcohol,
         and, the Appellant's evidence that she preferred  wine,  and  would
         drink between one and three bottles a day.
      9. The Respondent offered no evidence to suggest that the diagnosis of
         the Appellant as an alcoholic meant that she should not be  treated
         at the date of the hearing as addicted to  alcohol,  or,  that  she
         could be "cured" of that addiction so that she could be placed in a
         position in which she had no longer had any appetite  for  it.  The
         Judge accepted that the reality was that her consumption of alcohol
         was not a voluntary act, but a feature of her  mental  health  [50,
         71].
     10. Thus, in my judgement, it was open to the Judge to conclude, as  he
         did,   that   the   Appellant's   alcoholism   was   an   immutable
         characteristic. Even if the Appellant were able to bring herself at
         some future date to a point of mental strength from which she could
         choose to abstain from alcohol, she would still need to continue to
         choose to do so on a daily basis in order  to  avoid  a  return  to
         alcohol dependency; but she would remain throughout an alcoholic as
         that term is commonly understood. From there it  was  but  a  short
         step to accept, as the Judge did, that  those  who  are  alcoholics
         would  be  viewed  as  a  distinct  social   group   within   Iran.
         Accordingly, the second challenge must also fail.
     11. The third complaint was not strongly advanced.  The  test  for  the
         adequacy of reasons was  restated  most  recently  in  MD  (Turkey)
         [2017] EWCA Civ 1958; adequacy in this context is not a counsel  of
         perfection. The obligation is simply to give  adequate  reasons  to
         allow the losing party to understand why they lost. In my judgement
         the Judge discharged that obligation. He noted that  the  Appellant
         suffered from chronic mental health illness, and  that  she  was  a
         chronic alcoholic. He correctly approached the question of the risk
         of harm she faced upon return to Iran  on  that  basis,  by  asking
         himself what would happen if she were to return. He concluded  (and
         it was open to him to do so) that there was a real  risk  that  she
         would seek to consume alcohol to such an extent that she  would  in
         turn face a real risk of arrest for  the  consumption  of  alcohol,
         and/or drunkenness [66]. Those findings were plainly open to him on
         the  evidence.  He  noted  the  consequences  by  way  of  corporal
         punishment, and the risk of the death penalty, that would follow in
         the event of such an arrest, and conviction [67-8].
     12. It is also plain from the decision that the Judge did  engage  with
         the evidence concerning the current attitudes of the Iranian  state
         towards alcohol consumption,  in  both  the  religious  and  socio-
         political contexts. The religious context  remains  clear,  Islamic
         law prohibits intoxication, and despite the growth in the levels of
         alcohol consumption within the Iranian  population,  the  religious
         and judicial  authorities  remain  intolerant  of  it.  The  socio-
         political context,  as  explained  by  Dr  Van  Engelaand,  is  the
         tensions that exist between Reformist Islamic clerics  on  the  one
         hand, and the Guards of the Revolution on the  other.  Elements  of
         the latter have become heavily involved in the smuggling and supply
         of alcohol on the black market, because of  the  financial  rewards
         available. The initiative of opening alcohol addiction centres  has
         not resulted from a  widespread  change  in  the  attitude  of  the
         Iranian authorities towards the  need  to  punish  those  consuming
         alcohol for their non Islamic behaviour, and the initiative has not
         been followed through in the way that was anticipated  in  the  New
         York Times article. The reality, as the Judge was entitled to find,
         is that alcohol addiction treatment would not be readily accessible
         to the Appellant, and is not part of  the  judicial  system,  which
         would still consider alcohol consumption as a reason for punishment
         as non Islamic. On the other hand, alcohol would be  accessible  by
         her.
     13. In my judgement the Judge was entitled  to  rely  upon  the  expert
         evidence of Dr Van Engelaand, and to prefer it to  the  content  of
         the New York Times article the Respondent had relied upon, and gave
         adequate reasons for so doing.
     14. Mr Diwnycz confirmed that he sought to advance  no  other  argument
         that might be capable of distillation from the grounds.
     15. It follows that in  my  judgement  the  Respondent  has  failed  to
         establish any error of law in the approach taken by  the  Judge  to
         the appeal that requires his decision to be set aside and remade.



    DECISION


    The Determination of the First Tier Tribunal which was  promulgated  on
    29 August 2018 contained no material error of law in  the  decision  to
    allow the Appellant's appeal which requires that  decision  to  be  set
    aside and remade, and it is accordingly confirmed.



Direction regarding anonymity - Rule 14 Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)
Rules 2008
    Unless and until  the  Tribunal  directs  otherwise  the  Appellant  is
    granted anonymity throughout these  proceedings.  No  report  of  these
    proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify her.  This  direction
    applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent. Failure to  comply
    with this  direction  could  lead  to  proceedings  being  brought  for
    contempt of court.


   Signed

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge JM Holmes

Dated 1 March 2019




