
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07072/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 19th January 2018, typed                   |On 7th February 2018          |
|corrected, signed and sent                    |                              |
|to Promulgation on 3rd                        |                              |
|February 2018.                                |                              |


                                   Before

                        Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


                                   Between

                                     b p
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Radford
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, a Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                     REASONS FOR FINDING AN ERROR OF LAW

1.   The appellant is a citizen of Afghanistan, who gives his date of  birth
    as [ ] 1999.  He claims to have arrived in the United  Kingdom  on  7th
    September 2011, at the age of 12 and later  applied  for  asylum.   The
    respondent refused that application in a letter dated 12th  July  2017.
    The appellant appealed to the First-tier Tribunal and  his  appeal  was
    heard by First-tier Tribunal Judge Geraint Jones QC.

2.   The judge recorded at  paragraph  9  of  his  determination,  that  the
    appellant was from Kundoz province.  In actual fact  the  appellant  is
    from Helmand province.  That was the first ground of challenge.   There
    were a total six grounds  of  challenge  in  the  lengthy  grounds  and
    permission was granted by Upper Tribunal Judge Allan, who was satisfied
    that the first two grounds raised arguable issues, but he did not  rule
    out the other grounds. I do not  need  to  deal  with  the  other  five
    grounds.

3.   Ms Radford having made her submissions, Mr Kotas  accepted  that  there
    did appear to be a material error of law in the judge's  determination,
    in that he did appear to  have  misunderstood  the  appellant's  claim.
    Because he misunderstood the basis of the appellant's claim he was  not
    in a position to properly assess the risk to the appellant, were he  to
    be returned to Kabul.

4.   Both representatives agreed  that  the  matter  needed  to  be  reheard
    afresh and clear fresh findings made.  I set aside the determination of
    the First Tier Tribunal Judge.

5.   Given the lengthy delays that will inevitably occur, were I  to  retain
    the appeal in the Upper Tribunal and hear it myself, I remit the appeal
    to be heard afresh by a judge  other  than  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
    Geraint Jones QC or First-tier Tribunal  Judge  Davidson.    Two  hours
    should be allowed for  the  hearing  of  the  appeal.   I  am  told  no
    interpreter is required.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Richard Chalkley

Upper Tribunal Judge Chalkley


