
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07386/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at RCJ Belfast                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 6 June 2019                       |On 5 July 2019                       |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE RINTOUL


                                   Between

                                     As
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Ms Cunha, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal Judge S T Fox sitting at Belfast on  29  May  2018.   The
    decision was not promulgated until 14 November 2018.  In  his  decision
    the judge dismissed the appellant's appeal against the decision of  the
    Secretary of State to refuse his asylum and human rights claim made  on
    28 July 2017.  In essence  the  appellant's  case  is  that  he  is  an
    Ethiopian national from the Gode area of Ogaden of Somali origin and  a
    supporter of the Ogaden National Liberation Front (ONLF).  His case  is
    that he is at risk of arrest on return to Ethiopia on  account  of  his
    activities in the past which is set out and summarised in the  decision
    at paragraphs 5 to 8.  No issue was taken  with  that  summary  of  the
    case.  The Secretary of State  did  not  accept  the  appellant's  case
    noting a number of reasons for doubting his credibility again these are
    set out in the refusal letter and there is no need to  read  them  into
    the record at this point.

 2. The judge directed himself in line with MB (OLF and MTA risk)  Ethiopia
    CG [2007] UKAIT 00030 and having  heard  evidence  from  the  appellant
    found him to not to be credible for a number of reasons set out over  a
    large part of the decision from 26 to 52.

 3. The appellant sought permission to appeal on three grounds:

      i) the judge had made an error of fact amounting to an error of law in
         that he had mistaken  the  appellant's  evidence  at  paragraph  26
         finding that the appellant had given contradicting evidence  as  to
         working and then further erred at paragraph 27 in noting  that  the
         appellant had said that he had been detained two or three times and
         then released which was not so;

     ii) the judge had not properly approached the document  confirming  the
         appellant's involvement with the OLF erring by not  simply  stating
         that the document could not be relied upon that by going further to
         reject it and then use this to doubt the appellant's credibility;

    iii) the judge's reasoning and findings of fact at paragraphs 43  to  48
         are less than clear and in and or  inadequate  in  particular  with
         regard to the judge saying at  paragraph  47  certain  issues  were
         impossible and making an unjustified expert  requirement  that  the
         appellant explained why there was no  motor  vehicle  used  by  the
         authorities, at paragraph 48 also said it is  unclear  whether  the
         judge accepts the appellant was indeed shot as claimed.

 4. Permission to appeal was granted on 20 February 2019 by Upper  Tribunal
    Judge Chalkley who said

         "I believe that the First-tier Tribunal Judge  may  have  erred  at
         paragraph 26 of the determination because what the  appellant  said
         in answer to question 76 of his asylum interview appears to be very
         much the same as what he said at paragraph  12  of  his  statement.
         The judge has regarded  this  as  having  a  minor  impact  on  the
         appellant's credibility but I am concerned that it was  an  only  a
         credibility finding and one which may therefore have been very much
         to the  judge's  approach  to  considering  other  aspects  of  the
         appellant's claim such as to taint the  determination  all  grounds
         may be argued."

 5. When the  matter  came  before  me  there  was  no  appearance  by  the
    appellant.  The appellant's representatives did however attend  briefly
    to explain that they were  without  instructions  and  were  unable  to
    proceed to support the appellant in his appeal.  I  am  satisfied  from
    this and from the court file that due notice  of  the  time,  date  and
    venue of the appeal has been given to the appellant  and  that  he  has
    provided no reason for his failure to attend.  In all the circumstances
    I am satisfied that it would be in the interests of justice for  me  to
    proceed to determine the appeal  in  his  absence  and  I  heard  brief
    submissions from Ms Cunha acting on behalf of the Secretary of State.

 6. Turning to the grounds in turn I accept that  there  may  have  been  a
    mistake of fact as identified at paragraph 26 of the decision but I  do
    not consider that any such error was material.  The judge said that the
    inconsistency has the capability of making an impact on his credibility
    when viewed alone but it is evident that he  was  only  at  that  point
    indicating a potential for it constituting a damage to credibility.  He
    correctly rightly said that it had to be taken cumulatively and  viewed
    in the round with all the other material factors and I am not satisfied
    that the judge took this inconsistency  as  very  much  weight  in  the
    overall assessment of the claim  which  he  then  proceeded  to  do  in
    significantly  greater  detail  and  relying  on  other  parts  of  the
    appellant's case.  Similarly, the apparent error at paragraph 27 is  an
    interpolation by the judge that the  appellant  appears  to  have  been
    detained two or three times in Nairobi when this is said not to be  the
    case.  But again, this is only relevant to his presence in Kenya  which
    is not the core of his claim which is he is a member of  the  ONLF  and
    the important point is in the context of the appellant's evidence  that
    the Kenyan authorities to put all  such  people  as  themselves  as  an
    Ethiopian and or Somali yet this did not  happen  to  him  despite  him
    living there was an indication of no adverse interest  in  him  by  the
    Kenyan authorities as such but again this is of  limited  relevance  in
    the case as a whole.

 7. Turning to the second ground of appeal  the  appellant  did  produce  a
    document relating to his membership of the ONLF which  is  referred  to
    first in detail at paragraph 31 of the decision.   The  judge  observed
    that it was written in English for the most part but that the appellant
    could not explain this, and it was noted  that he cannot read or write.
     But the appellant did say in oral evidence at  paragraph  32  that  he
    confirmed the document was read to him and he was told by those  around
    him that it may be useful to him in the future.  The  judge  identified
    discrepancies on it noting it had been handwritten and had been altered
    on at least two separate occasions and that the date of birth had  been
    altered and that the date of issue the document had  been  altered  and
    when the judge refers to little weight being  attached  to  a  document
    this is reference to a card which he had also produced.  The judge  had
    a significant evidence about how this document purporting to show  that
    the appellant was involved with the ONLF had been  obtained.   This  is
    set out in detail at paragraphs 35 to 40.

 8. It is in this context of a long and detailed  narrative  of  criticisms
    that it is said the judge had erred with respect to Tanveer Ahmed.   It
    is correct the judge said that the document has not been  explained  or
    verified in any way by the appellant.   That  is  correct  but  in  the
    context of a document which had so many difficulties with it and in the
    lack of a plausible explanation as to how it had been obtained set  out
    in the narrative in the preceding paragraphs it cannot be said that the
    judge's approach to this document was incorrect,  unlawful  or  unjust.
    It is that narrative as a whole which is said to be cast doubt  on  the
    credibility  not  the  document  and  that  was  a  finding  which  was
    manifestly open to the judge in the light of the evidence and it is  of
    note to the previous findings  and  observations  with  regard  to  the
    narrative do not form part of the challenge set out in the  grounds  at
    paragraph 3.

 9. The third ground is a reasons challenge.  The core of that challenge is
    directed at paragraphs 47 and 48.  These must be seen in  context.   It
    is not it is evident that at 47 the judge was improperly evaluating the
    plausibility of this  claim  when  saying  it  was  possible  that  the
    appellant's activities were frowned on by the authorities in regard  to
    fundraising.  But that is simply taking that phrase out of  context  of
    what follows in the rest of the paragraph.  As regards the challenge to
    the finding at paragraph 48, while it is correct  that  the  judge  did
    note that the appellant had not explained why the authorities had  come
    on foot as opposed to a motor vehicle when he was meeting in the field,
    the judge quite properly said that he would not expect him  to  have  a
    full knowledge of such things but that some  sort  of  explanation  may
    have been proffered or suggested.  This is in any event a minor  matter
    and it is not clear that this formed any  major  part  of  the  judge's
    decision making.

10. Turning next to the apparent acceptance by the judge that the appellant
    had been shot.  This  is  properly  understood  nothing  more  than  an
    observation that there could be many explanations for a gunshot  wound.
    It could have occurred on any number  of  occasions  and  it  would  of
    course as is always the case depend on the evidence as to  when,  where
    and by whom the gunshot was inflicted.   It  is  unfortunate  that  the
    judge refers this to as "innocently" but in the context of this appeal,
    I am sufficiently satisfied that what he meant was that there was  more
    than one explanation and it was for the appellant in effect to have  to
    show that any gunshot had been inflicted by armed forces  at  the  time
    and in the manner claimed.

11. Viewing the evidence as a whole I am satisfied that the decision of the
    First-tier Tribunal does adequately set out the reasons why  the  judge
    did not accept the appellant's account.  It is  sufficiently  clear  to
    the appellant why he lost and that is because the judge for a number of
    cogent reasons did not accept  the  appellant's  account  of  what  had
    happened to him and why he would be at  risk  on  return  to  Ethiopia.
    Accordingly for these reasons I conclude that the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal did not involve the making of an error of law capable  of
    affecting the outcome and I uphold it.

Notice of Decision

 1. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the making of
    an error of law and I uphold it

Signed                                  Date 24 June 2019

[pic]
Upper Tribunal Judge Rintoul
