
                                    [pic]
IAC-FH-LW-V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07173/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 3 February 2020 and 2 October 2020|On 07 October 2020                   |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GLEESON


                                   Between

                                    M E H
                           (anonymity order made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms Julia Lowis instructed by Duncan Lewis & Co
                    Solicitors (Harrow Office)
For the Respondent:    Mr Stephen Walker, a Senior Home Office Presenting
Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

Anonymity order


Pursuant to Rule 14 of the Tribunal Procedure (Upper  Tribunal)  Rules  2008
(SI 2008/269) The Tribunal has ORDERED that no one shall publish  or  reveal
the name or address of [initials] who is the subject  of  these  proceedings
or publish or reveal any information which would be likely to  lead  to  the
identification of him or of any member of  his  family  in  connection  with
these proceedings.


Any failure to comply with this direction could give  rise  to  contempt  of
court proceedings.


 1.  This  case  concerns  the  application  of  Article  8  ECHR  to   the
    circumstances of a foreign criminal, with reference to section 117C  of
    the Nationality, Immigration and  Asylum  Act  2002  (as  amended)  and
    paragraphs 398 and 399A of the Immigration Rules HC 395  (as  amended).
    The applicant is a Somali citizen from the minority Ashraf clan.

 2. The appellant appeals with permission against the decision of the First-
    tier Tribunal dismissing for the second time  his  appeal  against  the
    respondent's decision on 17 August 2017 to deport him to Somalia  as  a
    foreign criminal, which he challenged on protection  and  human  rights
    grounds.  The appellant has long standing drug and alcohol problems, as
    well as some mental  health  issues,  and  until  recently  was  street
    homeless and destitute, although sometimes he stays with his sister and
    her children here.  From June 2020, he has  been  accommodated  at  the
    [Wembley], in accordance with the government's pandemic  provision  for
    the housing of street homeless people.

Vulnerability adjustments

 3. The appellant is vulnerable.  He has post-traumatic stress disorder and
    depression, and he told me at the beginning of the hearing that he  had
    been having a bad week.  He was unable  to  access  treatment  for  his
    depression, because no general medical practitioner would register  him
    as he had no identity documents.

 4. In accordance with the Practice Direction of the  Senior  President  of
    Tribunals,  Lord  Justice  Carnwath,  entitled  First-tier  and   Upper
    Tribunal: Child, Vulnerable Adult and Sensitive  Witnesses  [2008]  and
    the Joint Presidential Guidance Note No 2 of 2010, issued by  the  then
    UTIAC President, Mr Justice Blake and the acting President of the First-
    tier Tribunal, Judge Arfon-Jones, and the judgment of the  then  Senior
    President of Tribunals, Lord  Justice  Ryder,  in  AM  (Afghanistan)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  1123,  I
    sought to establish whether the appellant was fit to testify  and  what
    adjustments the Tribunal should make to ensure he could  give  evidence
    as comfortably as possible.

 5. I asked Ms Lowis to explain what adjustments might be needed to  enable
    the appellant to cope with the hearing and  give  evidence.   Ms  Lowis
    said it was not the applicant's case that was unfit to testify: rather,
    he might need breaks and some flexibility during the hearing.

 6. I arranged for the appellant to have water available  and  we  had  two
    breaks during the hearing for him to go and have a walk and some  fresh
    air.  I also agreed that the appellant could get up and walk around the
    hearing room when he felt the need, but asked  him  to  remain  near  a
    microphone when giving evidence, and to stay in the room if  he  could,
    in order to be able to give instructions to his Counsel.

 7. The appellant coped adequately with the hearing in  that  way  and  the
    credibility of his evidence, and that  of  his  witness  Mr  Musa,  was
    accepted by Mr Walker at the end of the hearing.  I am  satisfied  that
    the applicant had a fair hearing.



Criminal history

 8. The appellant has four criminal convictions, in March  2008  for  false
    accounting (suspended sentence and supervision order with  unpaid  work
    requirement), in October 2009 for battery (12 months' community service
    and unpaid work requirement), in August 2013,  again  for  battery  (20
    weeks' imprisonment and a restraining order valid till 20 August  2015)
    and in August 2017 for possession of a  class  B  controlled  drug  (14
    weeks' imprisonment).

 9. The battery offences were in relation to the applicant's  former  wife.
    A reference in the applicant's witness statement to a fifth  conviction
    on 3 September 2013 for battery is an error  made  by  the  applicant's
    solicitors, as Mr  Walker  accepted  at  the  hearing.    That  phantom
    conviction does not appear in the respondent's decision letters.

Background

10. The appellant came to the United Kingdom in 2002 when he was  17  years
    old and made an unsuccessful asylum claim.   His  younger  sister  came
    too: she was granted asylum.  The  appellant  was  granted  exceptional
    leave to remain until 21 May 2003 and  discretionary  leave  thereafter
    until 4 December 2007.  The appellant then made  a  timely  application
    for further leave to remain and on 12 June 2010 was granted  indefinite
    leave to remain under the Legacy Exercise.

11. On 17 August 2017 the respondent served the appellant with  a  decision
    to deport and a section 120 notice. The notice of decision to deport on
    17 August 2017 ended his indefinite leave to remain by operation of law
    and therefore, since he arrived in the United Kingdom on 16 April  2002
    aged 17 years and (almost) 4 months, he had spent  only  15  years  and
    (just over) 4 months here and that does not  amount  to  'most  of  his
    life' (see Secretary of State for the Home Department  v  SC  (Jamaica)
    [2017] EWCA Civ 2112 at [53] in the judgment of the Senior President of
    Tribunals, Lord Justice Ryder).  If the period between his  application
    for  asylum  and  the  granting  of  exceptional  leave  to  remain  is
    discounted, the period of lawful residence is approximately  one  month
    shorter.

12. The appellant made a protection and human rights claim in January 2018,
    which was refused on 18 April 2018, and the appellant appealed  to  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  A decision made in  the  First-tier  Tribunal  in
    October 2018 was set aside and remade in the First-tier Tribunal  on  5
    September 2019.  The present appeal is against  that  second  decision.
    The protection claim is not pursued.

First-tier Tribunal Judge Beach's decision

13. The First-tier Judge found the appellant to be a  persistent  offender.
    She considered Article 8 ECHR at [79]-[84], finding as a fact that  the
    appellant had not been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for most
    of  his  life  and  that  he  was  unable  to  show  'very   compelling
    circumstances' over and above the Exceptions in  section  117C  of  the
    2002 Act.  she rejected the assertion of  Kugathas  dependency  between
    the appellant and his sister, finding that there was only private  life
    and not family life between him, his  sister,  and  her  children.  The
    Judge dismissed the appeal.

Permission to appeal

14. The appellant's grounds of appeal, in so far as they relate to  Article
    8 ECHR, dispute the finding of fact that the appellant  had  not  spent
    'most of his life' in the United Kingdom  and  assert  that  the  Judge
    erred  in  applying  section  117C(5)  rather  than  117C(4)   to   his
    circumstances.  The appellant contended that there were no findings  on
    whether  in  his  circumstances  there  would  be   'very   significant
    obstacles' to his integration  in  Sudan  now,  after  18  years  away,
    particularly as he is a vulnerable person, with past alcohol  and  drug
    dependency and present post-traumatic stress disorder and depression.

Upper Tribunal hearing

15. The appellant gave  evidence  at  the  hearing,  adopting  his  witness
    statements to date.  He acknowledged in cross-examination that  he  had
    previously had difficulty with both alcohol and drugs.  In  prison,  he
    had been in what he described as 'full rehab' and  had  worked  through
    the available programmes.  He no longer used either  drugs  or  alcohol
    and  had  committed  no  crimes  since  his  release  from  immigration
    detention in June 2018.   He  said  that  when  he  committed  the  two
    offences of battery against his former wife, he was temporarily  insane
    as he had been drinking: he now knew he could not handle alcohol.

16. The appellant said that he was a war child and had seen  many  terrible
    things in Somalia.   His father had been killed in front  of  him;  his
    mother had escaped to a displaced persons camp  in  Uganda,  where  she
    still lived.  His other two siblings had been killed in  Somalia  after
    the appellant and his sister escaped to the United  Kingdom.    He  had
    nobody in Somalia now and no clan protection as he came from a minority
    clan.

17. Since coming out of immigration detention in June 2018,  the  appellant
    had initially lived in Northampton, where he met Imam Musa,  who  would
    give evidence today.  Organisations in Northampton had helped him  stay
    away from alcohol and drugs, and  from  violence  and  gangs.   He  had
    previously enjoyed snooker very much, but he  did  not  go  to  snooker
    clubs any more as they were risky for him: there were gangs, drugs  and
    alcohol there to tempt him, so he avoided them.  Being street  homeless
    had really hurt him but it had taught him a lesson.

18. The applicant had slept in parks in the summer: he had  a  duvet  which
    kept him warm.  In the winter, he sometimes slept  at  the  mosque,  or
    stayed with kind, good friends.  He would go to church  for  food,  and
    the community had been a big help.

19. He had met Imam Musa in 2004 at the mosque in Northampton, when he  was
    taking drugs and drinking.  Mr Musa had  sought  to  encourage  him  to
    reform.  From 2006 onwards, Mr Musa had been the appellant's  emotional
    support and a good friend.  He had visited the appellant in prison  and
    been supportive when the appellant did not feel well.  In  return,  the
    appellant provided translation services for other people  who  came  to
    the mosque asking Mr  Musa  for  help  with  their  housing  and  other
    problems: whenever the Imam asked the appellant, he went  willingly  to
    help.   Mr Musa deeply understood where the appellant was  coming  from
    and his experiences.

20. Their connection continued after the appellant moved to east London  to
    stay with his sister.  He stayed with his sister and her  two  children
    for about three months, but she could not  cope  with  the  appellant's
    mental health problems and now she had a third child, so there  was  no
    room for the appellant in her accommodation.

21. In re-examination, the appellant explained that he was now working with
    a project in Acton which sought to support youths who  might  otherwise
    be in difficulty.  The appellant would explain his own life,  and  told
    them about knife crime, and what it felt like  to  be  in  prison.   He
    would play football with the young  people:  one  of  his  friends  had
    formal coaching qualifications.

22. The appellant said that he had been in the United Kingdom for 18 years,
    and that his whole life was basically street life.

23. The next witness was Imam Abdi Musa of the Northampton Islamic  Centre,
    72 Clare Street, Northampton NN1 3JA.  Mr Musa is a  postman  in  daily
    life and produced his Royal Mail identity document.  He is also an Imam
    at the Islamic Centre, and travelled from Northampton to give  evidence
    today.

24. Mr Musa adopted his letter of support of 24 September 2020:

         "I have known [the appellant] for several years.  As Imam religious
         leader I work  with  the  members  of  the  community.   During  my
         visitation, I met him twice in Woodhill Prison  in  Milton  Keynes,
         and  twice  in  Brookside  Detention  Centre  in  London.   In   my
         interactions he informed me that he  was  a  substance  abuser  and
         alcoholic and most of his problems emanated from the result of this
         and caused over time a mental health issue. ...I arranged a meeting
         in London to see how he was  doing  after  the  completion  of  his
         sentence in prison.

         Having seen him and the work he  is  doing  through  the  community
         engagements by helping young people in London, in issues related to
         knife crime, drugs and gangs involvement, with  his  experience  of
         being in prison life.  Arriving this country at a younger  age  and
         [living] nearly 20 years not knowing any other country.  Judging by
         his actions, I see a reformed offender who is willing to  integrate
         with the society and deserved to be given a second chance. ..."

25. In cross-examination, Mr Musa said that  he  had  known  the  appellant
    since 2004 or 2005, through the mosque  and  the  Somali  community  in
    Northampton.  He also knew the appellant's sister, who had children and
    now lived in London.

26. Northampton was a small town and had a fair number  of  Somalis  living
    there. He was aware of the  appellant's  drug  and  alcohol  abuse  and
    difficulties.  The appellant did have a home, when in Northampton,  but
    when he was arrested and detained for 5-6 months, the Council  took  it
    back.

27. He knew that the appellant had troubles and had visited  him  twice  in
    HMP Woodhill.  He saw the appellant in detention and took him  clothes.
    The appellant told Mr Musa that there  was  a  case  and  he  might  be
    deported, and asked for advice.

28. Mr Musa had lost touch with the appellant for a time when he  moved  to
    London but then contact was re-established.   The  appellant  told  him
    about his work with the Acton Youth Association, and a few months  ago,
    while visiting London, Mr Musa called the appellant and saw him working
    there with a few other youths.  The appellant said that  he  wanted  to
    help others who were in the same difficulty he had been in, a few years
    ago.

29. An email from the appellant's sister says simply that she cannot attend
    for childcare reasons.  She has a new, third child.  She says she lives
    in Essex and that her brother previously lived there  with  her,  which
    corroborates his evidence to that effect. Her earlier witness statement
    dated 3 July 2018  says  that  the  appellant  lived  at  her  home  on
    immigration bail from 12 May 2017 to 16 August 2017.  She  herself  had
    been in foster care, being younger, but had also found adjusting to the
    United Kingdom difficult. Her brother had not abused either alcohol  or
    drugs while living  with  her  and  had  complied  with  all  reporting
    restrictions.

30. The sister's elder child was 4 years old in 2018 and is autistic.   The
    uncle and nephew bonded  well  and  the  attachment  had  survived  the
    separation. Her sons did not get exposed to many people and she  valued
    the family contact her brother provided for them.  She would be worried
    for his welfare if he went back to Somalia as he would not be  able  to
    get the correct medication and could be vulnerable to harm.

31. A document purporting to be a statement from the appellant's mother  in
    her Ugandan refugee camp can bear little  weight,  because  it  is  not
    signed, dated, or sourced, but the copy of  her  Ugandan  refugee  card
    shows that she is indeed in Uganda and Mr Walker did not  dispute  that
    document's reliability.

32. An email from Mr Abdullahi Ali, manager of Acton Youth Association says
    that the appellant 'has been working with Acton Youth Association  from
    22 January 2019  till  the  present  day.   He  has  been  focusing  on
    mentoring our attending kids, with the use of workshops.'

Evidence of Dr Markus Hoehne

33. Dr Hoehne describes himself as a Somalia Expert at  the  University  of
    Leipzig, Germany  and  set  out  his  expertise,  which  has  not  been
    challenged, in the first three  pages  of  his  report.   The  passages
    concerning mental health difficulties are at pages 26-29 of his report.
     After setting out the difficulties, Dr Hoehne  concludes  that  mental
    health issues are not well understood and there is a 'massive  lack  of
    infrastructure and qualified personnel, and of drugs and  equipment  to
    adequately even treat the few mental health problems that are  somewhat
    recognised in Somalia, such  as  schizophrenia  (in  Somali,  it  would
    simply be called 'craziness').'  Persons with  mental  health  problems
    are stigmatised, and children and youngsters often throw stones at them
    in the street, while adults avoid them, regarding their ill health as a
    punishment for past actions.

34. At question 8 on page 31, the report deals with the position of IDPs in
    Somalia.  It makes for grim reading and is supported by a  report  from
    the Danish Refugee Council from 2015. At [74], Dr Hoehne observes  that
    Ashraf are  a  minority  throughout  Somalia,  such  that  no  internal
    relocation option would assist: 'I can at the moment  not  imagine  any
    place where he would be secure, get acceptable  medical  treatment  for
    his mental health issues and find a chance to make a living'.

35. In summary, at [75], Dr Hoehne says this:

         "75. [The appellant] suffers from  several  weaknesses,  which  all
         have a negative effect on his life  if  he  would  be  deported  to
         Somalia.  First, he likely is a minority group member; as such,  he
         would suffer structural discrimination in Somalia (regarding, e.g.,
         access to the job market).  Second, he is mentally disturbed, he is
         depressed and suffers from post-traumatic stress disorder; he  also
         has a history of alcohol and drug abuse.  All this points to a very
         unstable personality and unstable emotional  situation...  Back  in
         Somalia, there would be nobody and no institution that  could  help
         to stabilise him; to the contrary, the conditions, particularly the
         continued insecurity in much of southern  Somalia,  are  such  that
         they  would  most  likely  contribute  to  a  worsening  of   [his]
         condition.    Any  help  that  could  be   available   would   cost
         considerable money which neither [he] nor his sister have.   Third,
         the long absence from Somalia since 2002 and  the  lack  of  family
         support on the ground further would isolate [him] back  in  Somalia
         and would add to his disorientation and inability  to  establish  a
         living. ..."

UNHCR Report

36. The appellant also relies on a report from the UNHCR published in  2016
    entitled Culture, context and mental health of Somali  refugees,  which
    paints a cautiously improving situation for  mental  health  provision,
    but still overall, inadequate  and  expensive.   At  page  28  of  that
    report, the authors note that 'flight to refugee camps  may  put  those
    with pre-existing severe mental illness at particular risk of  neglect,
    abandonment or abuse.

Submissions

37. Mr Walker relied on his skeleton argument and on the  decision  letter.
    He accepted that Mr Musa had given very credible evidence, based on his
    long association with the appellant.   Mr Musa had been a  good  friend
    to the appellant.

38.  Mr  Musa's  evidence,  and  the  documents  in  the  hearing   bundle,
    corroborated the appellant's account.  The appellant was homeless until
    recently, but was striving to improve both himself and others.  He  had
    been frank about his previous issues with drink and drugs.

39. For the appellant, Ms Lowis also relied on her skeleton argument.   The
    decision whether this appellant remained a persistent offender was fact
    specific.  There had been four offences only,  with  sentences  at  the
    lower end of the scale for these kinds of cases.  There was no  pattern
    of similar offending, and the appellant's case was that these  offences
    came about as a result of circumstances, in particular his  drug  abuse
    and drinking.  Ms Lowis' primary contention was that  after  two  years
    without any further offence, despite very difficult  living  conditions
    (street homelessness and couch surfing) the appellant was no longer  to
    be regarded as a persistent offender.

40. The appellant would rely on the evidence from Mr Musa to establish  his
    social and cultural integration.   He  had  been  part  of  the  Somali
    community in  Northampton  from  about  2004,  helping  the  Imam  with
    translations at the mosque and relying on that community  for  support.
    He had now been working with the Acton Youth Association for  nearly  2
    years, as evidenced by the letter from its manager, Abdullahi  Ali  and
    Mr Musa's account of seeing him working with the youths there.

41. The appellant's serious mental health problems would cause him to  have
    very significant difficulty in  reintegrating  in  Somalia.   Ms  Lowis
    relied on the evidence of Dr Ruth Sagovsky,  whose  psychiatric  report
    emphasised the appellant's as  to  the  need  for  clan  support.   The
    appellant had produced a copy of his mother's refugee  card  confirming
    that she was in a refugee camp in Uganda.

42. The evidence of Dr Hoehne, and of the respondent's CPIN, was that post-
    traumatic stress disorder and  mental  health  problems  generally  are
    liable to be regarded as  demonic  possession,  leading  to  stigma  in
    Somalia,  and  that  there  are  very  few  specialised  mental  health
    services, and those which do exist  would  be  too  expensive  for  the
    appellant to access.  People with mental health problems such as  post-
    traumatic stress disorder would  not  be  able  to  get  employment  in
    Somalia.  The appellant was not an educated man, and absent good health
    and clan support, he would  be  likely  to  end  up  in  an  internally
    displaced persons camp, where he would suffer  maltreatment  and  human
    rights abuses.  There was a very high risk of severe mental or physical
    harm.

43. The appellant maintained  that  he  was  entitled  to  the  benefit  of
    Exception 1 in section 117C(4) of the 2002 Act and that  in  his  case,
    there were 'very compelling circumstances' as contemplated  by  section
    117C(6)  of  the  Act  which  would  make  his   removal   to   Somalia
    disproportionate.

44. Ms Lowis asked me to substitute a decision allowing the appeal.

45. I reserved my decision, which I now give.

Analysis

46. I am grateful to both Counsel and their instructing solicitors for  the
    documents and for their skeleton  arguments.   The  first  question  is
    whether this appellant remains  a  'persistent  offender'  and  thus  a
    foreign criminal as defined by the 2002 Act.  I am guided  in  this  by
    the decision of the Court of Appeal in SC  (Zimbabwe)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2018] EWCA Civ at [57]-[60]:

         "57.  In  order  to  answer  the  question  whether  someone  is  a
         persistent offender, the decision-maker (be it the Tribunal or  the
         Secretary  of  State)  must  consider  the  whole  history  of  the
         individual from the commission of the first offence up to the  date
         of the decision and ask  themselves  whether  he  can  properly  be
         described as someone who keeps  on  committing  criminal  offences.
         Factors to be taken into account will include the  overall  pattern
         of offending, the frequency of the offences,  their  nature,  their
         number, the period or periods over which they  are  committed,  and
         (where relevant) any reasons underlying the offending, such  as  an
         alcohol or drug dependency or  association  with  other  criminals.
         This is  in  line  with  the  guidance  given  in  the  Immigration
         Directorate Instructions, Chapter 13, version 5.0  (dated  28  July
         2014) to which Mr Malik referred, which states  that  a  persistent
         offender is "a repeat offender who shows  a  pattern  of  offending
         over a period of time". The guidance goes on to say "this can  mean
         a series of offences committed in  a  fairly  short  timeframe,  or
         which escalate in seriousness over time, or a long history of minor
         offences."

         58.  If the  person  concerned  has  been  out  of  trouble  for  a
         significant period or  periods  within  the  overall  period  under
         consideration, then the length of such periods and the reasons  for
         his keeping out of trouble may be important considerations,  though
         of course the decision maker is entitled to bear in mind  that  the
         mere fact that someone has not been convicted for  some  time  does
         not necessarily signify that he has seen the error of his ways.  It
         may simply mean that he has paused in  his  offending.  It  is  the
         overall picture of his behaviour that matters.

         59.  If during those periods of apparent good behaviour the  person
         concerned was serving the custodial part of a  short  sentence,  or
         was too unwell to go out and commit the kinds  of  offences  he  is
         generally prone to commit, there may  be  an  explanation  for  the
         hiatus in offending  which  is  not  inconsistent  with  his  being
         properly regarded as a persistent offender. Likewise, it he  had  a
         very strong incentive not to commit further offences, such as being
         subject to a community order, or a suspended sentence, or he is  on
         bail, or he has been served with a notice of deportation, the  fact
         that he has committed no further offences during that period may be
         of little significance in deciding whether, looking at his  history
         as a whole, he fits the description.

         60.  On the other hand, we agree  with  First-tier  Tribunal  Judge
         Whalan that  an  established  period  of  rehabilitation may lead
         properly to the conclusion  that  an  individual  is  no  longer  a
         persistent  offender.  Depending  on  the  particular   facts   and
         circumstances, a former drug addict who has ceased  shoplifting  to
         feed his habit after a period in rehabilitation, and who  has  been
         out of trouble for a significant period of time  thereafter,  might
         not be capable of being termed a "persistent offender" because when
         his history is looked at in the round, it can  no  longer  be  said
         that he is someone who keeps on offending."

47. That is a clear statement of what the  Upper  Tribunal  must  consider.
    The appellant here has been out of trouble for over two years.   He  no
    longer drinks or takes drugs, despite the  difficult  circumstances  of
    street homelessness in which he has lived for much of  that  time.   He
    helps young people to remain out  of  trouble  and  acts  as  a  living
    example to them of the effect on their lives if they join  gangs,  take
    drugs, carry knives,  or  drink  to  excess.     His  account  and  the
    supporting evidence provided is credible and  consistent.   My  primary
    finding, therefore, is that there is  in  this  appeal  an  established
    period of rehabilitation leading to the conclusion that  the  appellant
    is no longer to be characterised as a  persistent  offender.   That  is
    dispositive of the application of section 117C to his offending.

48. I consider, also, whether he can safely be returned to  Somalia,  given
    his accepted vulnerability  and  ill  health.   The  respondent's  most
    recent CPIN entitled Somalia: Majority Clans  and  Minority  Groups  in
    south and central Somalia, version 3.0 [January 2019] states  at  2.4.6
    that members of  minority  groups  which  become  internally  displaced
    persons and end up living in an IDP camp anywhere  in  Somalia  may  be
    particularly vulnerable and could face discrimination and various human
    rights abuses from state or non-state actors:  "Clan networks extend to
    IDP camps and there have been reports of minority groups  being  unable
    to access basic services and gatekeepers restricting  their  access  to
    aid. ...".  I bear in mind that this appellant is already vulnerable by
    reason of his post-traumatic stress disorder and mental health issues.

49. I have had regard to MOJ and others (return to  Mogadishu)  Somalia  CG
    [2014] UKUT 442 (IAC) and in particular to the following passages  from
    the judicial guidance there given:

         "(xi)    It will, therefore, only be those with no clan  or  family
             support who will not be in receipt of remittances from  abroad
             and who  have  no  real  prospect  of  securing  access  to  a
             livelihood on return who will face the prospect of  living  in
             circumstances  falling  below  that  which  is  acceptable  in
             humanitarian protection terms.

         (xii)    The evidence indicates clearly that it is not simply those
             who originate from Mogadishu that may now generally return  to
             live in the city without being subjected to an  Article  15(c)
             risk or facing a real risk of destitution. On the other  hand,
             relocation in Mogadishu for a person of a minority clan   with
             no former links to the city, no access to funds and  no  other
             form of clan, family or  social  support  is  unlikely  to  be
             realistic as, in the absence of means to establish a home  and
             some form of ongoing financial support there will  be  a  real
             risk of  having  no  alternative  but  to  live  in  makeshift
             accommodation within  an  IDP  camp  where  there  is  a  real
             possibility of having to live in conditions   that  will  fall
             below acceptable humanitarian standards."

50. Those paragraphs are relevant to this appellant's  circumstances.   The
    appellant has now been lawfully resident in the United Kingdom for more
    than half his life (19 of his 36 years) and is a member of  a  minority
    clan with no surviving relatives or friends in Somalia.  He is socially
    and  culturally  integrated  here,  despite  his  housing  difficulties
    (currently resolved by the government  street  homelessness  programme)
    and is making every effort to contribute socially, having rehabilitated
    himself. I am satisfied that there are  significant  obstacles  arising
    from his  history,  his  vulnerability,  and  his  ongoing  behavioural
    disturbances and mental health issues, which mean he is unlikely to  be
    able to access either employment or treatment in Somalia and  may  well
    end up in an internally displaced persons camp where  he  would  suffer
    abuse and discrimination, and there is a  'real  possibility  of  [his]
    having  to  live  in  conditions  that  will  fall   below   acceptable
    humanitarian standards'.

51. It follows  that  even  if  the  appellant  is  a  'foreign  criminal',
    notwithstanding my finding that he is no longer a persistent  offender,
    applying section 117C(3) and (4) of the 2002 Act, the  public  interest
    does not require his deportation.

Conclusions

52. For the foregoing reasons, my decision is as follows:




    The making of the previous decision involved the making of an error  on
    a point of law.

    I set aside the previous decision.  I remake the decision  by  allowing
    the appellant's appeal on human rights grounds.


Signed   Judith AJC Gleeson                      Date:     2 October 2020
         Upper Tribunal Judge Gleeson

