
[pic]


Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA076942016


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                       |Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 20th July 2017                          |On 03rd August 2017              |
|                                           |                                 |


                                   Before

                   DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE D E TAYLOR

                                   Between

                                     j u
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant

                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT

                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No Representative
For the Respondent:    Mr S Kotas, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


 1. This is the appellant's appeal against the  decision  of  Judge  Monson
    made following a hearing at Taylor House on 6th February 2017.

Background

 2. The appellant is a citizen of Bangladesh born on [ ] 1978.  He came  to
    the UK on a visit visa on 29th September 2010,  made an application for
    leave to remain on 29th February 2012 which was rejected on  invalidity
    grounds, and then made a further application on 8th January 2013  which
    was  refused.   Following  his  arrest  for  immigration  offences  the
    appellant claimed asylum on 13th January 2016.

 3. In a careful and well reasoned determination  the  judge  analysed  the
    appellant's asylum claim and concluded that there was no  truth  in  it
    whatsoever.  In particular he observed that the narrative disclosed  by
    the court documents produced by the appellant in support of  his  claim
    did not tally with what was known about his  whereabouts  and  was  not
    consistent with the account given by him in his asylum  interview.   He
    concluded that the appellant could not be the same  person  as  the  JU
    referred to in the documents. They referred to an arrest and  detention
    in 2009. However according to those documents he was still in detention
    at the time when he applied for a visit visa in August 2010 and  indeed
    when he arrived in the UK in September 2010.  He dismissed the appeal.

 4. The appellant sought permission to appeal on the grounds that the judge
    had failed to consider that the appellant had faxed  a  letter  to  the
    Tribunal on the day before the hearing  explaining  that  he  might  be
    unwell  and  requesting  an  adjournment.   He  also  provided  medical
    evidence which showed that he was at the hospital on  the  day  of  the
    hearing which he sent to the Tribunal on the day afterwards.

 5. Permission to appeal was granted by Judge Robertson on the grounds that
    it was arguable that the appellant had been denied a chance to put  his
    case before the judge.

The Hearing

 6.  The  appellant  represented  himself  with  the   assistance   of   an
    interpreter.  He  confirmed  at  the  start  of  the  hearing  that  he
    understood the interpretation.

 7. He gave evidence about  what  had  happened  to  him  on  5th  and  6th
    February.  He said that on the day of the hearing, 6th February he  had
    been in hospital for a long time, was thoroughly checked  and  observed
    and then allowed to go home.  He had started suffering chest  pains  on
    the day before, at 10pm and took medication hoping that the pains would
    go away.  He confirmed that the pains  started  around  10pm  and  then
    gradually increased.  He was then asked why in that case he  had  faxed
    an adjournment  request  some  hours  before  the  pain  started.   The
    appellant said that he contacted his solicitor telling her that he  had
    chest pains.  It was pointed out to him that in his grounds he had said
    that he had de-instructed his solicitor,  which  is  why  she  had  not
    appeared on his behalf.  The appellant was confused about when  he  had
    ceased to instruct her.  He said that she had been his solicitor for  a
    long time and he had de-instructed her recently but he did not know the
    date.  All he could remember was that he called her after 8 o'clock  in
    the morning but he could no remember when.

 8. Mr Kotas submitted that  the  claim  that  there  had  been  procedural
    unfairness in this case had not been  made  out.   There  were  serious
    anomalies in the evidence which cast doubt upon whether  the  appellant
    was actually unable to attend court because of illness.  In  any  event
    his statement of case was before the Tribunal and there  was  therefore
    no material unfairness to him as a consequence of his absence.

 9. The appellant said that he did not know why the Secretary of State  did
    not believe that he was unwell.  He repeated that he had  been  to  the
    hospital for chest pain and all he wanted was a chance to carry on  his
    case by using his solicitor. The medical evidence confirms that he told
    the doctor that he had had chest pain "since last night".

Findings and Conclusions

10. On 5th February at 18:08pm the appellant faxed a letter to the Tribunal
    asking for an adjournment of the hearing listed for the  following  day
    if he did not turn up because he had  been  suffering  from  consistent
    pains in his chest during the evening.  He initially denied having sent
    the letter, then said he had forgotten whether it was sent or  not  and
    then that he contacted his solicitor informing her that  he  had  chest
    pain.  However this is wholly  inconsistent  with  his  evidence  today
    which was that the chest pains did not start until 10pm that evening.

11. There is a further difficulty for the appellant.   He  sent  a  further
    letter, again clearly from  the  solicitors  since  it  used  the  same
    typeface as the letter of 5th February 2017 enclosing a medical report.
     However according to his Grounds of Appeal he  had  de-instructed  his
    solicitor.  In his oral evidence he was very vague about when  she  had
    stopped acting for him, at one  point  saying  that  he  had  only  de-
    instructed her recently.

12. Moreover  the  clinical  summary  sheet  provided  by  North  Middlesex
    University Hospital  states  that  no  procedures  were  necessary,  no
    investigations were made and he required no drugs to be sent home with.
     His blood was normal and his chest was clear on examination.   He  did
    not require any follow-up treatment.

13. I conclude that the  appellant  did  not  suffer  from  chest  pain  as
    claimed.  The evidence about when it started is inconsistent  with  his
    having written to the Tribunal earlier that  day  provisionally  asking
    for an adjournment. The letters, which he accepts were written  by  his
    solicitor are inconsistent with his stating  that  she  was  no  longer
    instructed and inconsistent with his evidence today  that  he  had  de-
    instructed her recently.  The medical evidence  makes  it  quite  clear
    that in the view of the hospital there was no medical issue and  indeed
    it would appear that he has not had to  visit  a  hospital  since  that
    particular date.

14. I conclude that the appellant chose  of  his  own  volition  to  absent
    himself from the  hearing  and  accordingly  there  was  no  procedural
    unfairness in the judge dealing with the appeal  on  the  papers  which
    were before him.  Those papers included a full witness  statement  from
    the appellant which set out his case and  which  was  analysed  by  the
    judge and dismissed for the reasons which he gave.

15. The decision stands.

Notice of Decision

The appellant's appeal is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed[pic]                             Date 2 August 2017


Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Taylor





