
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07340/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Liverpool and at Field House  |Decision & Reasons Promulgated      |
|On 25 January 2019                     |On 27 February 2019                 |
|                                             |                              |

                                   Before

                     DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MONSON


                                   Between

                 Secretary of state for the home department
                                                                   Appellant
                                     And

                                  ZO (IRAQ)
                         (anonymity direction MADE)
                                                         Respondent/Claimant


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr S Bates (23.07.18) and Ms A. Everett (25.01.19),
                    Senior Home Office Presenting Officers
For the Respondent/    Mr T Royston (23.07.18) and Ms K. McCarthy
(25.01.19), Counsel
Claimant:     instructed by Quality Solicitors (AZ Law)


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The Secretary of State appeals from  the  decision  of  the  First-tier
    Tribunal (Judge Malik sitting at Manchester on 8 January 2018) allowing
    the claimant's appeal on humanitarian protection  grounds  against  the
    decision of the Secretary of State to refuse his protection claim which
    he had brought on the basis that he was a Kurd from  the  town  of  Tuz
    Khormato in Saladin  (aka  "Salah  Al-Din")  Governate,  who  had  been
    personally targeted by members of ISIL, and who also feared the  Hashdi
    Shaabi (aka "PMF").  The Judge rejected the claimant's account of  past
    persecution and future risk in his home area, but he allowed his appeal
    on humanitarian protection grounds because he found that  the  claimant
    would be unable to obtain a CSID on account  of  his  home  area  being
    contested; and that the claimant would be at risk in travelling to  his
    home area from Baghdad.

The Reasons for Granting Permission to Appeal

 2.  On  6  March  2018  First  -tier  Tribunal  Judge  Hodgkinson  granted
    permission to appeal for the following reasons: "The grounds argue that
    the Judge fell  into  error:  first,  inadequately  reasoning  why  the
    appellant was entitled  to  humanitarian  protection  and,  second,  in
    making contradictory findings, having concluded  that  the  appellant's
    core account  lacked  credibility.   The  grounds  as  pleaded  display
    arguable errors of law."

Relevant Background Facts

 3. The claimant is a national of Iraq, whose date of birth is 5 May  1996.
    He arrived in the UK hidden in the back of a lorry in January 2017, and
    he is recorded as having claimed asylum on the same day.

 4. His claim was that he had worked for his paternal uncle,  who  owned  a
    car mechanic shop and garage in Tuz Khormato.  His uncle was approached
    by members of ISIL on 26 December 2016 as they wanted him to  work  for
    them.  Specifically, they wanted him to give them the use of his garage
    to fit bombs to their vehicles.  His uncle asked for some time to think
    about the proposal.  The ISIL members returned to the garage seven days
    later, on 2 January 2017, and his uncle gave his answer,  which  was  a
    refusal.

 5. As the result of  his  refusing  to  work  with  ISIL,  his  uncle  was
    abducted.  After his uncle disappeared, the claimant went to stay  with
    his maternal uncle who also lived in the same town. Several days later,
    his mother asked him to go and open up the shop as at this  point  they
    were not certain that his uncle had in fact been taken by ISIL.  Around
    midday, the claimant was approached in the shop  by  three  people  who
    identified themselves as being members of ISIL.  They asked him to work
    for them and to give them the use of the garage.  He said that he would
    need to get his mother's permission.  He was allowed to leave the  shop
    for this purpose, but he was told  that  they  would  kill  him  if  he
    refused.  With the help of his maternal uncle, the claimant  left  Iraq
    immediately afterwards.  This was on 8 or 9 January 2017.

 6. On 20 July 2017 the Secretary of State gave her  reasons  for  refusing
    the claimant's protection claim.  It was not accepted  that  his  uncle
    was abducted by ISIL, and it was also not accepted  that  he  had  been
    approached and threatened by members of ISIL.  In any event, he had the
    option of internal relocation away from the people he claimed to  fear,
    and sufficiency of protection was provided by  the  Iraqi  authorities.
    He had failed to demonstrate that either ISIL or PMF had the  power  or
    influence to locate him throughout Iraq.

 7. On the issue of the practicalities of his return  to  Iraq,  the  case-
    worker cited paragraph [170] of AA Iraq [2015] UKUT 544  in  which  the
    Upper Tribunal held that  an  application  for  a  laisser  passer  was
    considered on a case-by-case basis by the Iraqi Embassy in London.  The
    applicant needed to produce a CSID, national identity card or photocopy
    of a previous passport, and a report confirming that it had  been  lost
    or stolen.  If a person did not have any of those documents, they could
    not obtain a laisser passer, and therefore could not be returned.

 8. It was noted that, during his asylum interview, he had stated  that  he
    had had a CSID, and also a passport at the point he left Iraq, but they
    had been taken by the agent.  It was also noted that he had  family  in
    Tuz Khormato who had helped him  to  leave  Iraq.   Therefore,  it  was
    considered that he would be able to obtain replacements, or at least  a
    copy of these documents, with his family's assistance.  This  would  in
    turn facilitate his return to Iraq.

 9. On the issue of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification  Directive,  at
    paragraph [81] the case-worker noted the guidance  given  on  contested
    areas in AA  (Iraq),  but  asserted  that  since  AA  (Iraq)  had  been
    promulgated, the security situation had changed in the contested areas.
     In particular, ISIL had lost territory  and  the  Government  of  Iraq
    ("Gol") and/or associated forces had regained control  of  some  areas.
    The level of violence had declined, and  internally  displaced  persons
    were  returning  to  their  areas  of  origin.    Therefore,   internal
    relocation was in general possible to all areas of Iraq except, amongst
    other areas, those parts of the  Baghdad  belts  that  bordered  Anbar,
    Diyala and Saladin.

10. Since Erbil was not one of the contested areas in  Iraq  considered  to
    trigger the Article 15C  threshold,  it  was  considered  that  it  was
    reasonable for him to relocate to Erbil, which was located  within  the
    KRI, and which was approximately 175 kilometres away and about 2  hours
    and 50 minutes by car from Tuz Khormato.  It was reasonable for him  to
    relocate to Erbil if he did not wish to return to Tuz Khormato  due  to
    any subjective fear that he might hold, and as such he did not  qualify
    for international protection.

The Hearing Before, and the Decision of, the First-tier Tribunal

11. Both parties were legally represented before Judge  Malik.   The  Judge
    received oral evidence from the claimant, who was cross-examined by the
    Presenting Officer.

12. In  his  subsequent  decision,  the  Judge  set  out  his  findings  at
    paragraphs [26] to [41].  He found that the claimant's account  of  the
    reasons why he claimed  to  have  left  Iraq  with  his  mother  lacked
    credibility. He found that the claimant had given an incredible account
    of being at risk  from  ISIL  for  the  reasons  claimed  by  him,  and
    accordingly he found that neither he nor his mother would have had  any
    reason to leave Iraq in the manner claimed and  at  the  time  that  he
    claimed.  It was not reasonably likely that his mother had in fact left
    Iraq.  He found that the appellant  had  fabricated  the  core  of  his
    claim.

13. The Judge turned to consider the  issue  of  risk  on  return  and  the
    viability of internal relocation.   At paragraph  [37],  he  considered
    the findings in AA (Iraq) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 944 where the Court of
    Appeal had held (amending the 2015 Country Guidance by consent) that  a
    CSID was not simply a return document.  It was  feasible  that  someone
    could acquire a passport or a  laisser  passer  without  possessing  or
    being able to obtain a CSID.  Regardless  of  the  feasibility  of  P's
    return, it was necessary to decide whether P had a CSID,  or  would  be
    able to obtain one reasonably soon after arrival in Iraq.   CSIDs  were
    generally required in order for an Iraqi to access financial assistance
    from the  authorities;  employment;  education;  housing;  and  medical
    treatment.  If P showed that there were no family or others  likely  to
    be able to provide a means of support, then P was in general likely  to
    face a real risk of destitution, amounting to serious harm, if, by  the
    time any funds provided to P by the SSHD or her agents  to  assist  P's
    return had been exhausted, it was reasonably likely that P would  still
    have no CSID.

14. At paragraph [38], the  Judge  found  that  it  was  feasible  for  the
    claimant to acquire a passport or a laisser passer.  He found  that  it
    was not reasonably likely that he was no longer  in  contact  with  his
    maternal and paternal uncles or his mother in Iraq.   Therefore,  there
    was no reason to suggest that he could not  seek  their  assistance  in
    obtaining the necessary information required to prove his identity  and
    obtain the required documents.   As  such,  he  found  that  return  to
    Baghdad was feasible.

15. At paragraph [39], the Judge said that he was now  required  to  assess
    what harm, if any, would arise from  the  absence  of  a  CSID  and  an
    inability on the claimant's part to obtain a  CSID  in  Iraq.   As  the
    claimant had family in Iraq, he would be able to obtain from  them  the
    page and volume number of the book holding this information  (and  that
    of his family).  He found that they would also be able to  assist  him,
    if required, in persuading officials that he was the  person  named  on
    the relevant page.

16. However, the Judge continued, in paragraph [40], the claimant's ability
    to obtain a CSID was likely to be severely hampered if he was unable to
    go to the Civil Status Affairs Office of his Governate because  it  was
    in an area  where  Article  15(c)  serious  harm  was  occurring.   The
    Secretary of State contended that there were grounds to depart from the
    assessment of Article 15(c) risk in AA. But,  as  the  claimant  was  a
    Kurd, and claimed  not  to  speak  Arabic,  then,  notwithstanding  his
    finding that return was feasible and that he  had  family  members  who
    could assist him, there was no cogent evidence  before  him  to  depart
    from the findings in AA: "On this basis I find the [claimant] would  be
    unable to obtain a CSID as his home area is contested and he  would  be
    at risk in travelling there from Baghdad."

17. Consequently, while he found that the claimant had not  discharged  the
    burden of proving that he had a well-founded fear  of  persecution,  he
    was allowing his appeal on humanitarian protection grounds.

The Error Law Hearing in Liverpool

18. At the hearing before me to determine whether an error of law was  made
    out, Mr Bates developed the arguments advanced in the grounds of appeal
    to the Upper Tribunal.

19. On the topic of whether Saladin Governate was  no  longer  a  contested
    area, he acknowledged that the CPIN of  September  2017  cited  in  the
    grounds of appeal did not appear to have been placed before the  First-
    tier Tribunal.  However, the March 2017  CPIN,  which  was  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal, conveyed the same information at paragraph  3.2.2.
    It specifically stated that Saladin Governate no longer met the Article
    15(c) threshold.

20. However, the central flaw in the  Judge's  decision  was  that,  having
    found that he was in contact with his family members in  Tuz  Khormato,
    the Judge had not given adequate reasons  as  to  why  they  could  not
    provide him with the necessary information or documentation to obtain a
    replacement CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in London.

21. On behalf of the claimant,  Mr  Royston  (who  did  not  appear  below)
    submitted that the First-tier  Tribunal  Judge  had  not  rejected  all
    aspects of the claimant's  account.   He  accepted  that  the  claimant
    originated from Tuz Khormato, and he did not err in  holding  that  his
    home town continued to be in  a  contested  area.   In  AA  (Iraq)  -v-
    Secretary of  State  for  the  Home  Department  [2017]  EWCA  Civ  944
    published on 11 July 2017, the Court of Appeal had affirmed the country
    guidance given by the Upper Tribunal in 2015, inter alia as follows:

         "1.  There is at present a state  of  internal  armed  conflict  in
         certain  parts  of  Iraq,  involving  Government  security  forces,
         religions of various kinds, and the Islamist group known  as  ISIL.
         The intensity of this armed conflict  in  the  so-called  contested
         areas, comprising the governates of Anbar Diyala,  Kirkuk,  Ninewah
         and Salah Al-Din is such that,  as  a  general  matter,  there  are
         substantial grounds for believing that any civilian returned there,
         solely on account of his or her presence there, faces a  real  risk
         of being subjected to indiscriminate violence amounting to  serious
         harm within  the  scope  of  Article  15(c)  of  the  Qualification
         Directive.  ....

         10.  Where a return is feasible but P does not to have  a  CSID,  P
         should as a general matter be able to obtain  one  from  the  Civil
         Status Affairs Office  for  P's  home  Governate,  using  an  Iraqi
         passport (whether current or expired), if P has one ...

         11.  P's ability to obtain a CSID is likely to be severely hampered
         if P is unable to go to the Civil  Status  Affairs  Office  at  P's
         Governate because it is in an area where Article 15(c) serious harm
         is occurring."

22. Accordingly, notwithstanding the Judge's adverse  credibility  findings
    against the claimant, he was right to find that there was a  real  risk
    of the claimant not being able to obtain a replacement  CSID  from  the
    Civil Status Affairs Office in his home Governate.

23. He acknowledged that, in paragraph [37] of his decision, the Judge  had
    cited the following guidance from AA (Iraq): "If P shows that there are
    no family or other members likely  to  be  able  to  provide  means  of
    support, P is in general likely to face a  real  risk  of  destitution,
    amounting to serious harm, if, by the time any funds provided to  P  by
    the Secretary of  State  or  agents  to  assist  P's  return  had  been
    exhausted, it is reasonably likely that P will still have no CSID." But
    he submitted that the Judge had not erred in  failing  to  ask  himself
    whether,  notwithstanding  the  absence  of  a  replacement  CSID,  the
    claimant nonetheless did not face a real risk  of  destitution  because
    there were family members in Iraq who were likely to be able to provide
    him with a means of support.  The Judge had not erred in  this  regard,
    he submitted, because the Secretary of State had not argued this  point
    below.



Reasons for Finding an Error of Law

24. The essential premise which underlies the Secretary of State's error of
    law challenge is encapsulated in paragraph 2.4.10 of the CPIN September
    2017, to which reference is made in the grounds of appeal to the  Upper
    Tribunal.  This paragraph provides as follows: "It is likely that  most
    people who do not possess a CSID, and whose return  is  feasible  (i.e.
    they possess a current or expired passport, or a laisser  passer)  will
    be able to obtain a CSID from the Iraqi Embassy in London,  or  through
    proxies in Iraq." This is not a novel proposition.  It is  also  to  be
    found in earlier Policy Guidance documents, such as the documents which
    were cited in the refusal decision.

25. I consider that the Judge's fundamental error was to focus  exclusively
    on the prospects of the claimant obtaining a replacement CSID from  the
    Civil Status Affairs Office in his home Governate, while  ignoring  the
    easier route of the claimant obtaining  a  replacement  CSID  from  the
    Iraqi Embassy in London.  On the face of it, the  Judge's  findings  at
    paragraph [39] invite the conclusion that the claimant should  be  able
    to obtain a replacement CSID by this route.

26. Moreover, the Judge did not make a finding on  the  discrete  issue  of
    whether the claimant had in fact handed over his CSID to the agent  who
    had brought him to Europe.  If in fact the claimant had left  his  CSID
    behind, then there was the simple solution of his  family  sending  him
    his CSID so that he could take it to the  Iraqi  Embassy  to  obtain  a
    passport.

27. In conclusion, having found that the claimant was in contact  with  the
    family members that he left behind in Tuz Khormato, the Judge  did  not
    give adequate reasons for concluding that there was a real risk of  him
    being returned to Baghdad without a CSID; and, in  broader  terms,  the
    Judge did not give adequate reasons for finding that the  claimant  was
    likely to face a real risk of destitution, amounting  to  serious  harm
    such as to qualify for humanitarian protection.

Directions for Remaking

28. Mr Royston submitted that, in the event that an error of law  was  made
    out,  the  appeal  should  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier  Tribunal.
    Conversely, Mr Bates submitted  that  this  was  a  suitable  case  for
    retention by the Upper Tribunal.  As there had been no cross-appeal  to
    the adverse credibility findings of the Judge, including his  rejection
    of the claimant's evidence that he has lost contact with family members
    in his home area, I considered that the Judge's findings on this  issue
    should be preserved.  Accordingly, this was not  a  suitable  case  for
    remittal to the First-tier Tribunal.

29. I directed that there should be a further hearing before me  to  remake
    the decision on the viability of internal relocation and/or whether the
    appellant's appeal should be allowed on humanitarian protection/Article
    3 ECHR (real risk of destitution) grounds.

30. I envisaged that this would be primarily  a  submissions-only  hearing,
    taking into account the latest Country Guidance authority of AAH (Iraqi
    Kurds - internal relocation) Iraq CG UKUT 00212 (IAC).  But I give  the
    claimant's representatives permission to adduce further  oral  evidence
    on the discrete issue of what he said happened  to  his  CSID,  as  the
    Judge below did not make a clear finding of fact on whether he accepted
    or rejected this aspect of the claimant's evidence.

The Resumed Hearing at Field House

31. For the purposes of remaking the decision on the  issues  which  I  had
    identified as being outstanding, Ms McCarthy relied  on  the  following
    additional evidence that was not before the  First-tier  Tribunal:  two
    letters from the British Red Cross relating  to  an  inquiry  into  the
    whereabouts of the claimant's mother which the claimant said he had put
    in train; and a supplementary report on the security situation in  Iraq
    and Kurdistan from Professor Joffe dated 20 March 2018 contained  in  a
    supplementary bundle served in July 2018; and a  further  supplementary
    bundle  served  in  November  2018  containing  an  additional  witness
    statement from the appellant; a witness statement from Farhad  Ibrahim;
    and photographs evidencing the  attendance  of  the  appellant  and  Mr
    Ibrahim at the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester on 30 August 2018.

32. My attention was also directed to the  Home  Office  Country  Policy  &
    Information Note on "Iraq: Internal relocation, civil documentation and
    returns" (dated 20 October 2018); and to the Home Office Country Policy
    & Information Note  on  "Iraq:  Security  and  humanitarian  situation"
    (dated November 2018).

33. The claimant was called as a witness, and he spoke  through  a  Kurdish
    Sorani Interpreter who  he  clearly  understood.   He  adopted  as  his
    evidence in chief his witness statement dated 17 September 2018.

34. Since his arrival in the UK on 29 January 2017, he had been desperately
    trying to find his mother and to contact his maternal uncle,  Ali.   He
    tried to call his uncle's number, but some man answered in Arabic,  and
    when he asked for his uncle, he said something in Arabic  and  cut  off
    the line.  He called again, and "he" disconnected  the  line.   He  had
    contacted the British Red Cross for help in finding his mother.  He had
    provided two letters to the Tribunal from the British Red Cross that he
    had received in response to his request.

35. On 16 October 2017 the PMF had taken control of the Tuz Khormato  area,
    where his family and that of his maternal uncle had lived.   Dozens  of
    Kurds had been killed by the PMF, and others had fled the area.   Prior
    to the fighting in October 2017, Tuz Khormato had about 50%  Kurds  and
    the rest of the population was made up of Turkmen and Arabs.

36. He had had his ID document and passport until they had arrived  at  the
    Turkish border.   At  the  border,  their  agent  had  taken  their  ID
    documents.  In order to obtain proof of his ID from Iraq, someone would
    have to obtain copies from the Iraqi Internal Ministry.  Only a  father
    or brother could obtain ID documents if a person himself was unable  to
    do so.  So, even if he could find  his  maternal  uncle,  it  would  be
    impossible for his maternal  uncle  to  obtain  any  documents  on  his
    behalf.

37. Despite not having enough information to prove  his  identity,  he  had
    approached the Iraqi Consulate in Manchester on 30 August 2018 at  1pm,
    and had asked them to issue him with a passport and Iraqi ID.  However,
    they said that they could  not  document  him.   He  had  attended  the
    Consulate with  his  friend  Farhad  Ibrahim.   As  well  as  providing
    photographs to show their attendance at  the  Consulate,  he  was  also
    providing a list of documents required by the Consulate for them to re-
    issue a passport, or a replacement ID, or a nationality certificate.

38. He had no way of providing the necessary ID documents to the  Consulate
    to document him, as he had lost touch with his family.  He feared  that
    he would be at grave risk if he returned to Iraq undocumented.

39. The  claimant  was  cross-examined  by  Ms  Everett,  and  he  answered
    questions for clarification purposes from me.  He knew that Uncle Ali's
    phone was switched off, as he had received a message in Kurdish  saying
    that it was turned off.  Later, another person had answered the  phone,
    and had talked in a different language.  This person had then hung  up.
    He had not tried to contact anyone else  in  Tuz  Khormato.   This  was
    because the only person he had ever had contact with in his  home  town
    was his maternal uncle.  He did not have any friends in his home  town.
    He just went to work at the garage and came straight  home  from  work.
    He had not tried to find his uncle or his mother by using the  internet
    or social media.

40. They had travelled to the border between Iraq and Turkey by car and  on
    foot.  This had taken 12 hours.  They had not needed to show  their  ID
    cards at any point.  They crossed the border into Turkey illegally.  He
    had not seen a checkpoint, and he had not seen  any  border  guards  or
    soldiers.  The agent had spoken to people, but  these  people  were  in
    plain clothes.  Before they crossed the border, the agent had taken his
    ID card, and the ID cards of the others who were  with  him,  including
    his mother.  When they crossed the border, he had asked for his ID card
    to be returned.   The  agent  had  refused  to  return  it  -  for  his
    protection.  He said that if he gave it back, he (the  claimant)  would
    be deported.

41. Farhad Ibrahim was called as a witness, and he confirmed his attendance
    at the Iraqi Consulate with the claimant.  He had been recognised as  a
    refugee  from  Iraq,  and  was  now  a  British  national.   In  cross-
    examination, he said that he came from an area between Mosul and Erbil.
     He was in touch with people in Iraq. The claimant had told him that he
    had tried to contact his family back home in Iraq without success.   It
    was  his  understanding  that  the  claimant's  former  home  area  was
    dangerous, and that there was no means of communicating with people  in
    that area.

Discussion and Findings on Remaking

42. According to the background evidence provided in the main bundle ("AB")
    for  the  hearing  in  the  First-tier  Tribunal,  Tuz  Khormato   (aka
    "Khurmatu") is  the  central  city  of  the  Tuz  District  in  Saladin
    Province, Iraq, located 55 miles south of Kirkuk.  The town  is  multi-
    ethnic, with a  majority  of  Shia  Turkmen  and  minorities  of  Sunni
    Turkmen, Arabs and Kurds.

43. From a series of news articles in the main bundle  it  is  possible  to
    reconstruct the following broad picture. ISIL never took control of the
    city, but between June 2014 and January 2016 more than  700  civilians,
    presumably from the Sunni Arab minority population,  joined  ISIL;  and
    security forces in the city conducted several operations to detect ISIL
    sleeper cells (AB 91). In  June  2015  Kurdish  Peshmerga  forces  took
    control of the city (AB 75). From October 2015,  Kurdish  armed  groups
    and Shia Turkmen armed groups repeatedly clashed in and round the  city
    (AB 77). An article dated 18 April 2016 (AB 75) reported that the  city
    had witnessed increased  tensions  between  Shia  Turkmen  and  Kurdish
    residents, resulting in division of the city (population  60,000)  into
    Turkmen and Kurdish quarters.  According to local media,  an  agreement
    between Peshmerga forces, local administration and  the  PMF  had  been
    reached earlier in 2016: the PMF were to withdraw from  the  centre  of
    the city, and a joint military force would share control over the city.
    In an article dated 7 July 2017 (AB 70) - which is  the  latest  I  can
    find - it was reported that the security  situation  in  the  city  was
    stable after deadly clashes between Kurdish and PMF forces "last year".
     The same article stated that the PMF jointly provided security in  the
    town along with the Kurdish Peshmerga.

44. The claimant says that the PMF took complete control  of  the  area  in
    October 2017, precipitating a further exodus of Kurds. But I  can  find
    nothing in the background and expert evidence provided by the appellant
    which supports this claim, with the arguable exception of a passage  in
    Professor Joffe's supplementary report which I discuss below.

45. The implication of the latest CPIN on the security situation in Iraq is
    that generally there has been a vast improvement in  Saladin  Governate
    and other formerly contested areas  as  reflected  in  the  much  lower
    statistics  for  civilian  deaths  and  the  large  number  of   people
    returning. The number of returnees to the  Saladin  Governate  is  over
    500,000.

46. Having carefully considered both Professor Joffe's report of  19  March
    2017 and his supplementary report of 20 March 2018, I  do  not  discern
    any support from him for the proposition that  an  Article  15(c)  risk
    continues to exist in Saladin Governate.

47. In paragraph 14 of his supplementary report, he makes reference to  the
    Iraqi Federal authorities retaking control of  Tuz  Khormato,  "forcing
    thousands of Kurdish families to flee."  But he does not  give  a  date
    for when this occurred, and the only source identified in the footnotes
    for the information given in paragraph 14 is an article published on  2
    August 2017.  This article was published only a month after the article
    at AB 70 was published, reporting a stable  power-sharing  arrangement.
    So Professor Joffe may be referring back to an earlier event,  such  as
    that alluded to in the news article of 15 February 2017 at AB 73, which
    reported that 2,500 Kurds had fled the city due to atrocities committed
    by the PMF.

48. But even if I am wrong about this, the claimant does  not  assert  past
    persecution by  the  PMF  (AIR  Q&A  86).  A  notable  feature  of  the
    claimant's  account  is  that  even  though  he  resided  in  the  city
    throughout the highly turbulent years of 2015  and  2016,  he  and  his
    family were not prevented from leading a relatively normal life by  the
    power struggle between the Kurdish  Peshmerga  and  the  PMF,  and  the
    consequential  sectarian  violence.  The  claimant  complained  in  his
    interview about harassment by the PMF, but not  persecution,  and  this
    was in the context of him asserting that there  used  to  be  Peshmerga
    forces in the city, but they were kicked out, and so the only  security
    force was the PMF (Q&A 123). So there is no reason to suppose that  the
    retaking of control of the city  by  Iraqi  Federal  authorities,  thus
    restoring the status quo ante, would  have  precipitated  his  family's
    flight from the city.

49. Ms McCarthy submits that the  general  security  situation  in  Saladin
    Governate has deteriorated over the past  year.   At  8.1.2,  the  CPIN
    states that, as of October 2018, Iraqi security operations were ongoing
    in a number of provinces, including Saladin, against IS (aka "ISIL"  or
    "ISIS")  fighters.   These  operations  were  intended  to  disrupt  IS
    fighters' efforts to re-establish themselves and  keep  them  separated
    from population centres.  At paragraph 8.1.5, a  report  in  July  2018
    said that IS had lost all of its urban strongholds in  Iraq,  including
    Mosul.  However, the recent surge in IS  activity  indicated  that  the
    group was now pursuing its old 'hit and run' tactics in Iraq.  Although
    most recent attacks had been on relatively small  targets,  IS  carried
    out a number  of  larger  operations  against  Iraqi  forces  and  Shia
    militias in Saladin Province in May and June  2018.   These  challenged
    the Iraqi authorities' claim that the situation in Iraq was stable  and
    back under their control.

50. However, what is said at section 8 of the CPIN needs to  be  set  in  a
    broader context.  At section 2, it  is  said  that  since  2015  ISIL's
    territorial control has collapsed and  their  operational  capabilities
    has been  significantly  degraded.   The  Iraqi  Government  officially
    declared victory against ISIL in December 2017.  The threat  from  ISIL
    has not disappeared entirely, but the  group  were  confined  to  small
    pockets and the conflict has changed in nature from  open  conflict  to
    periodic asymmetric attacks by ISIL against Iraqi security forces,  the
    Shia militia PMF and the Kurdish Peshmerga  re-established  control  of
    most of Iraq's territory.  Since 2014, security  incidents,  fatalities
    and injuries had significantly declined  across  all  governates.   The
    number of security incidents was at its lowest for 15  years.   Saladin
    Province is identified as one of a number which have shown a consistent
    and significant decline in security incidents and  civilian  fatalities
    and injuries.  Current numbers are said to be typically tens  of  times
    lower  than  they  were  in  mid-2014.   Since  2015  displacement  had
    significantly declined, and there has been a  significant  increase  in
    people returning to their homes.

51. Following SG (Iraq) -v- SSHD [2012] EWCA Civ 940, decision  makers  and
    Tribunal Judges are required to take  Country  Guidance  determinations
    into account, and to follow them unless there are very  strong  grounds
    supported by cogent evidence, are adduced justifying that they are  not
    doing so.  I consider that there are very strong grounds  supported  by
    the cogent evidence in the CPIN to depart  from  the  country  guidance
    assessment made in March 2015 that Saladin Governate engages  the  high
    threshold of Article 15(c).  I consider that there is no longer such  a
    high level of indiscriminate violence in Saladin  Governate  such  that
    substantial grounds exist for believing that the claimant would, solely
    by being present in Tuz Khormato or anywhere else in the province, face
    a serious and individual threat to his life or person.

52. Accordingly, in theory at least, the claimant can safely return to  his
    former home area of Iraq, and does not need to internally  relocate  to
    the KRI.  But the claimant needs his CSID, or a replacement,  in  order
    to travel safely from Baghdad to  his  home  area.  So,  the  issue  is
    whether there are substantial grounds for believing that  the  claimant
    genuinely does not have access to his CSID; and, if  not,  that  he  is
    genuinely unable to call upon family members in  Iraq  to  provide  the
    assistance that is required to obtain a replacement CSID.

53. The claimant's evidence about the  whereabouts  of  his  CSID  and  his
    professed inability to contact family members  in  his  home  area  (or
    elsewhere) was the same in the First-tier Tribunal as it is now, namely
    that he had handed over his passport and CSID to  the  agent  while  in
    transit; and that, after arriving in the UK, he tried  to  contact  his
    maternal uncle by telephone without  success,  and  that  he  had  lost
    contact with his mother who did  not  have  her  own  mobile  telephone
    anyway.   However,  this  evidence  was  rejected  by  the   First-tier
    Tribunal.  Judge Malik did not accept that the claimant had  left  Iraq
    with his mother, and he found that there was nothing to suggest that he
    could not resume contact  with  his  family  in  Iraq  and  seek  their
    assistance in obtaining the necessary information  required  to  obtain
    the documents to prove his identity.  As he rejected the  core  of  the
    claimant's claim, he did not accept that the claimant's paternal  uncle
    and stepfather (he had married the  claimant's  mother  after  she  was
    widowed) had disappeared from the city, and hence was not  contactable.
    Similarly, he did not accept that the claimant could  not  contact  his
    maternal uncle or mother in Tuz Khormato.

54. The Judge did not make a specific finding on  the  claimant's  evidence
    that he was not currently in possession of a passport or CSID as he had
    handed over these documents to the agent  before  crossing  the  border
    into Turkey.  Ms Everett invited me to disbelieve this evidence. On the
    detailed account of his journey which he  gave  in  his  oral  evidence
    before me, the claimant did not need his passport - and still less  his
    CSID - in order to undertake his journey to the West, including  making
    an illegal and clandestine crossing of  the  border  into  Turkey;  and
    having these documents in his possession  was  going  to  constitute  a
    significant impediment to the claimant making a  successful  protection
    claim down the line, as the claimant is likely to have known  -  or  at
    least he is likely to have known that it was going to  be  advantageous
    to be undocumented.  I also note that in his  screening  interview  the
    claimant said that he had lost his passport in Turkey, not that he  had
    given it to the agent. He also did not mention parting company with  an
    ID card at this  juncture.  Having  regard  to  the  preserved  adverse
    credibility findings made by Judge Malik, I am  not  persuaded  to  the
    lower standard of proof that it is true that the claimant took his CSID
    with him, rather than leaving it behind in the family home.

55. The claimant has also not discharged the burden of proving to the lower
    standard of proof that he is genuinely unable  to  contact  the  family
    members he left behind in the city, with the consequence that they  are
    unable to send him his CSID or to provide him with accommodation on his
    return.

56. I do not consider that the claimant's correspondence with the Red Cross
    has any probative value since it is not suggested that he has asked the
    Red Cross to find his mother in his former home area. On the  topic  of
    contacting his maternal uncle, the claimant has not given a  consistent
    account. In his witness statement dated 22 August 2017 he said  he  had
    tried to contact him, "but the number  is  switched  off".  He  gave  a
    different account  in  his  statement  dated  17  September  2018.  The
    implication of this latest version of events is that the telephone  was
    not switched off, but had been commandeered by another person who spoke
    in Arabic. It is also highly significant that  the  claimant  does  not
    profess to have tried to contact his paternal uncle and stepfather, who
    ran a garage on the outskirts of Tuz Khormato on the  motorway  running
    towards Kirkuk.  Of course it is implicit in the claimant's core  claim
    that his paternal uncle is uncontactable, as he was kidnapped by  ISIL.
    But, since the First-tier Tribunal rejected the core claim, it  follows
    that the claimant has not discharged the burden of proving to the lower
    standard of proof that he does  not  have  a  contactable  male  family
    member in Tuz Khormato who can send him the CSID which he left behind.

Notice of Decision

The decision of the First-tier Tribunal  contained  an  error  of  law,  and
accordingly the  decision  is  set  aside  and  the  following  decision  is
substituted: this appeal is dismissed on all grounds raised.

Direction Regarding Anonymity

Unless and until a tribunal or court  directs  otherwise,  the  claimant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the claimant and to the  Secretary  of  State.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed                              Date 29 January 2019

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge Monson
