
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07974/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at North Shields               |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On the 25th September 2019           |On 2nd December 2019                 |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE REEDS


                                   Between

                                     D J
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr Adewoye, Solicitor Advocate
For the Respondent:    Ms Petterson, Senior Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant appeals, with permission, against  the  decision  of  the
    First-tier Tribunal (hereinafter referred to as the "FtTJ") promulgated
    on the 15th January 2019, in which the Tribunal dismissed the appeal of
    DJ against the decision  of  the  Secretary  of  State  to  refuse  his
    protection and his human  rights  claim  and  in  the  context  of  the
    respondent having made a deportation order against him.

 2. I make a direction regarding anonymity under Rule 14  of  the  Tribunal
    Procedure (Upper Tribunal Rules) Rules 2008 as this appeal involves the
    interest of minor children.  Unless  and  until  a  Tribunal  or  court
    directs otherwise the appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of
    these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him or  members
    of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant and to the
    respondent.  Failure to  comply  with  this  direction  could  lead  to
    contempt of court proceedings.

The Background:

 3. There is a long background history which it is necessary  to  summarise
    to consider the legal issues that are identified in this appeal.

 4. The appellant is a citizen of Jamaica. He entered the United Kingdom on
    19 March 2002 and was granted leave to enter as a student until 30 June
    2003. That leave was further extended until 28 June 2004.

 5. On 28 May 2004 he married a British citizen, KB, and on 16  June  2004,
    the appellant applied for leave to remain as a spouse and  was  granted
    leave until 22 June 2006.

 6. In December 2004 he was convicted of having an  article  with  a  blade
    which was sharply pointed in a public place to plead guilty was given a
    conditional discharge for 12 months.

 7. In May 2005 he was convicted of the Magistrate's Court for a number  of
    offences relating to driving  was  insured  for  which  he  received  a
    community punishment order. In November 2005 he was  convicted  at  the
    Magistrate's Court of criminal damage and was conditionally  discharged
    for six months.

 8. On 31 May 2006, the appellant made an application for further leave  to
    remain as a spouse but that was subsequently refused.

 9. In September 2006 he  was  convicted  of  resisting  or  obstructing  a
    constable for which he received a conditional discharge of 18 months.

10. On 6 October 2006 the appellant was convicted at the Magistrate's Court
    on six counts of supplying class A drugs and was committed for sentence
    at the Crown Court. On 13 November 2006 he was sentenced to a  term  of
    four years imprisonment concurrent on each of the eight counts.

11. On 21 November 2007, the Secretary of State made a decision to  make  a
    deportation order under section 5(1) of the immigration act 1971 on the
    basis of his deportation was conducive to the public good. It  is  also
    recorded that his application for indefinite  leave  as  a  spouse  was
    refused on the  21  November  2007  in  light  of  his  conviction  and
    paragraph 322 (5) of the Immigration Rules.

12. The appellant appealed that, and following  a  hearing  on  23  January
    2008, the Tribunal dismissed the appellant's appeal.

13. Following that, the appellant sought and was granted reconsideration of
    that decision which was set aside by Senior Immigration  Judge  Perkins
    on 5 June 2008 on the basis that the AIT had materially erred in law in
    reaching its decision.

14. In a decision promulgated on 19 November 2008, the AIT substituted  its
    decision dismissing the appeal.

15. Further litigation followed and on the  21  July  2009,  the  Court  of
    Appeal allowed the appeal by consent and remitted it for  rehearing  to
    the AIT.

16. The appeal then came  before  Senior  Immigration  Judge  Grubb  on  24
    November 2010. In a  decision  promulgated  on  30  December  2010,  he
    allowed the appeal. During  the  appeal  he  heard  evidence  from  the
    appellant, his sister and her husband.  The  judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant relied exclusively upon Article 8 of the ECHR  based  on  his
    family life with his wife K and the  two  children,  K1  child  of  the
    family) and A. The appellant's wife suffered from  mental  illness  and
    had been at times detained under the Mental  Health  Act.  The  judge's
    assessment of the evidence was set out  at  paragraphs  [48]-[79].  The
    judge found that there was a close family life between  the  appellant,
    his stepson (age 9) and his daughter and that the appellant  had  taken
    full parental responsibility and care for both children when  his  wife
    had been hospitalised both prior to  his  imprisonment  and  since  his
    release. Whilst  there  was  a  relationship  between  the  appellant's
    cousins, it was not a relationship that engaged the aspect  of  "family
    life" but it was part of the children's private life.

17. As to the circumstances of the appellant,  the  judge  found  that  the
    appellant had been in the UK since 2002. He had been married to British
    citizen since 2004 and had a stepson age 9 and  a  daughter  almost  6.
    They are British citizens.

18. The judge set out the evidence relating to the appellant's wife and him
    mental health and at [70] recorded  the  evidence  that  she  had  been
    assisted with her condition with the support of her husband and that at
    the date of the hearing she had become hospitalised. The appellant  had
    been caring for the children at the  home  of  his  sister.  The  judge
    reached the conclusion at [73] the effect of  the  offence  deportation
    would be to split up the family and that it would not be  realistic  to
    suggest that he could maintain family relationships with  the  children
    in the UK.

19. As to  the  offences  themselves,  the  judge  made  reference  to  the
    sentencing remarks in which the offences were described  as  "extremely
    serious" and acknowledging the appellant's explanation that he supplied
    the drugs in order to pay off debts to illegal money  lenders,  as  the
    judge pointed out, the appellant continued to supply  the  drugs  as  a
    source of income for himself and his family even the debt had  come  to
    an end. It was noted that the offending was not  a  "one-off"  but  was
    "over a period of time" between March and June (at  [55]).  As  to  the
    risk of future reoffending, the  risk  of  reconviction  was  "medium".
    Whilst in prison he had two disciplinary adjudications. The judge found
    that he remained a medium risk of reconviction at a  low  risk  to  the
    public (at [57)).

20. In his assessment of proportionality, the judge weighed in the  balance
    the due weight given to the public interest in his deportation based on
    the appellants offending history and that he remained a "medium risk of
    offending and a low risk of causing harm" but found  that  it  was  not
    reasonable at present for the family to relocate to  Jamaica  and  that
    the interests of the appellant's  wife  and  children  were  that  they
    should remain as a family. The appellant's presence in the  UK  was  an
    integral part of the support required by his children and his  wife  to
    in respect of her mental health  problems  and  did  not  find  it  was
    reasonable to expect the appellant's family to leave with the appellant
    and therefore he was satisfied that the appellant's  deportation  would
    not be a proportionate interference with his and his family  rights  to
    respect for "private and family life" under article 8.

21.  The judge therefore allowed the appeal. The Secretary of State did not
    seek permission to appeal that decision.

22. Following  this,  on  7  September  2011,  the  appellant  was  granted
    discretionary leave in the UK for six months until 6 March 2012.

23. It is recorded that on the 16th February 2012  the  appellant  made  an
    asylum claim in the UK following his visit to Jamaica in December 2005.
    It was asserted that he was in fear of return to Jamaica.

24. On 23 April 2012 he applied for extension of stay in the UK,  but  this
    was refused. The reasons given was that it was on the wrong form and no
    fee was received.

25. On 8 May 2012 the appellant applied for further discretionary leave  to
    remain in the UK. He provided  evidence  of  his  family  situation  in
    support of the application filed with a covering letter of  the  4  May
    2012.

26. On 4 February 2013 at Crown Court, he was convicted of  two  counts  of
    common assault and battery and was given a suspended sentence  of  four
    months imprisonment 24 months wholly suspended, a 12-month  supervision
    order and a 140 hours unpaid work requirements.

27. On 30 May 2013, the appellant was granted discretionary leave in the UK
    until 30 November 2013.

28. On 21 January 2014, the appellant  applied  for  further  discretionary
    leave to remain in the UK. He provided evidence of his family situation
    in support of the application (covering letter dated 8 November 2013).

29. On 13 March 2014, the appellant was granted discretionary leave in  the
    UK until 13th September 2014.

30. On 7 August 2014 the appellant submitted  an  application  for  further
    leave to remain via his representatives the IAC Ltd.

31. On 26 August 2016 the  appellant's  representatives  submitted  a  pre-
    action protocol due to the length of time elapsed since the application
    was made. A holding letter was sent on the 26 September  2016  advising
    that the application was under consideration.

32. On 26 May 2017 further information was requested from  the  appellant's
    representatives including further evidence of his situation, given  the
    time that had lapsed since the application was received.  The  response
    was received on 13 June 2017.

Deportation proceedings:

33. On 17 July 2017, the appellant was served with  a  decision  to  deport
    (ICD. 4936).

34. On 24 July 2017,  the  appellant's  representatives  responded  to  the
    decision letter with supporting evidence as to why  he  should  not  be
    deported from the UK on article 8 grounds.

35. On 3 October 2017 the representatives  requested  a  decision  for  the
    application for further leave to remain that was made on the  7  August
    2014. They also requested an update as to when a decision would be made
    on that application on 14 March 2018.

36. On 19 March 2018 the appellant was served  with  a  fresh  decision  to
    deport (ICD;4936). It is recorded in the respondents material  that  "a
    new decision  was  required  as  the  decision  of  17  July  2017  was
    considered under the Immigration Act 1971, not under the UK Borders act
    2007 and did not include a decision for the  appellant's  asylum  claim
    from 16  February 2012."

37.  Part  one  entitled  "deportation  decision"  made  reference  to  the
    appellant's  offending  history  and  that  applying  section  32  (4),
    deportation of foreign criminals was conducive to the public  good  and
    that the public interest in his deportation was  "further  strengthened
    because  of  your  previous  and  subsequent  convictions  as  follows"
    reference then being made  to  his  offending  history,  including  the
    offences in 2006 and 2013.

38. On 27 March 2018 the appellant's new representatives advised that  they
    would submit further representations  and  on  16  April  2018  further
    representations were made on his behalf.

39. On 3 May 2008 a preliminary information form and a  section  72  notice
    was sent to the representatives requesting further information relation
    to his asylum claim from 2012. His response was sent on 18 May 2018.

40. On 11 June 2018 that the appellant was served with  the  refusal  of  a
    protection human rights  claim.  The  decision  letter  considered  the
    protection claim advanced on behalf of the appellant at paragraphs 59 -
    115. It is common ground that that protection  claim  was  not  pursued
    before the FtTJ. The decision letter considered article 8 in the  light
    of the material provided and set out paragraph 119.  At  paragraph  121
    -128,  the  decision  made  reference  to  whether  there  were   "very
    compelling circumstances", making reference to his  offending  history,
    the conviction in 2006 and the judges sentencing remarks, and reference
    to the change of circumstances at paragraph 127. The  circumstances  of
    the children were considered individually as was his relationship  with
    his former partner and his relationships with his sister and niece. The
    decision went on to consider his private life at paragraphs 172  -  190
    and  concluded  at  paragraphs  191  -  193  that  his  conviction  was
    considered to be one that  was  regarded  as  very  serious  and  which
    compelled the respondent to give significant weight to the question  of
    protecting society against crime and the health and morale  of  others.
    In  order  to  outweigh  the  very  significant  public   interest   in
    deportation he would have to provide evidence of a very strong  article
    8 claim over about the circumstances described in  the  exceptions  are
    deportation  and  that  had  not  been  demonstrated  on  the  evidence
    provided.

41. On 20 August 2018 a case management review  hearing  was  held  by  the
    First-tier Tribunal. There is  a  note  written  by  the  FtTJ  in  the
    Tribunal papers. It is recorded that Mr  Adewoye  was  present  at  the
    hearing along with a presenting officer. The judge  recorded  that  the
    appellant had appealed against the respondent's decision made under  UK
    Borders Act 2007 and that he had raised the question  of  what  matters
    would be at issue at the substantive appeal  hearing.  It  is  recorded
    that Mr Adewoye indicated that  it  would  be  article  8  (family  and
    private life) and that consideration was given to not  proceeding  with
    the asylum appeal. The judge's note makes reference to  the  chronology
    and the reference to  having  been  granted  leave  to  remain  on  two
    occasions in May 2013 and March 2014 after his  last  conviction  which
    was in February 2013 and that despite the  chronology,  a  decision  to
    deport him in July 2017, followed by a  fresh  decision  to  deport  in
    March 2018 and been made. It is recorded that  the  presenting  officer
    accepted that this required a clarification.

42. A further point noted by the FtTJ was that  the  decision  letter  made
    reference to the respondent deeming the deportation of the appellant as
    "conducive  to  the  public  good  in  accordance  with  the  automatic
    deportation provisions" but he considered that the statutory  "trigger"
    at s 32(2) of the 2007 Act, that a person concerned has been  sentenced
    to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months, would appear not  to
    apply to the appellant given that his last. Imprisonment  was  a  four-
    month suspended sentence imposed in February 2013. On the  other  hand,
    if relying on a conviction from 2006 of four years imprisonment,  there
    had been a hearing which had allowed his appeal on  article  8  grounds
    against the deportation order and the respondent had granted him  leave
    to remain in September 2011.

43. The  FtTJ  therefore  adjourned  the  hearing  and  made  a  number  of
    directions which included for the appellant's solicitors  to  write  to
    the IAC and the Home Office to confirm what issues would be  argued  at
    the substantive hearing but also that the respondent  was  directed  to
    undertake a "comprehensive review of the  decision  that  an  automatic
    deportation order under section 32 (5) of the 2007 Act "should be  made
    and the reason for making that decision in the light of the appellant's
    offending  history,  his   immigration   history   and   the   judicial
    proceedings. The respondent was directed to write to the  IAC  and  the
    appellant solicitors by 18 September 2018 to confirm whether  he  still
    maintained that an automatic deportation order should be  made  and  to
    provide full reasons for making that decision.

44. On 8 October 2018 a response was issued by the Secretary of State ( see
    decision of the FtTJ at [34 ].

Decision of the FtTJ:

45. In a decision promulgated on 15 January 2019  the  FtTJ  dismissed  the
    appellant's appeal. The FtTJ set out the  immigration  history  of  the
    appellant at paragraphs 1-11 and at paragraph  12  recorded  the  basis
    upon which the appellant advanced his appeal namely that he relied upon
    his family life with his youngest child C (born in 2012) who lived with
    his wife K and with whom he has contact and his recent contact with his
    eldest daughter A. He relied on evidence relating to  his  relationship
    with his wife K and the support he provided for her and  also  evidence
    provided by his sister and niece.

46. Under a heading entitled "the law", the judge  made  reference  to  the
    notice of deportation dated 13 July 2017 which had  set  out  that  the
    legal basis for removal of the appellant was under section 32(5) of the
    2007 Act was "conducive to the public good for the purposes of  section
    3 (5) (a) of the Immigration  Act  1971  and  the  decision  relied  on
    paragraph 399C of the immigration rules which states:

         "where a foreign criminal who has previously been granted a  period
         of limited leave  under  this  Part  applies  a  further  leave  or
         indefinite leave to remain his deportation remains conducive to the
         public good and in the public interest notwithstanding the previous
         grant of leave."

47. The judge made reference to the same decision acknowledging  that  "the
    appellant was not  granted  leave  to  remain  under  part  13  of  the
    Immigration Rules but that it was stated there continued to be a public
    interest in the appellant's deportation". The judge also  recorded  the
    reference made to chapter 13 of the IDI's at section 7.4 which stated:

         "where a foreign criminal has previous to be granted limited  leave
         on the basis of article 8, he will only be granted further leave if
         he qualifies under the article 8 provisions set  out  in  paragraph
         398 -399A, even if his first period of  leave  was  granted  before
         those provisions came into force or before the previous private and
         family life rules were introduced on 9 July 2012".

48. The judge then recorded at [14] that this decision was then  stated  to
    be incorrect  and  an  amended  notice  of  intention  to  deport  with
    reference to the UK Borders Act 2007 was made on 19 March 2018 and that
    the respondent relied upon the "automatic deportation provisions" found
    at section 32 of the 2007 Act. The decision referred to the  conviction
    of 2006 and relied on section 32(4) of the 2007 Act. The decision  then
    referred to the appellant's previous and subsequent convictions  as  to
    the  reason  why  public  interest  in  the   appellant   was   further
    strengthened. The judge also records that "no reference is made to part
    13 of the immigration rules. No reference is made to  part  5A  of  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002".

49. At [16] the FtTJ made reference  to  the  refusal  of  the  appellant's
    protection of human rights claim which was made on 11 June  2018  which
    referred to the appellant's family life and made general  reference  to
    Part 13 of the Immigration Rules and part 5A of the 2002 Act. The judge
    noted that the appellant relied upon the exceptions regarding the Human
    Rights Act 1988 but was not relying on the Refugee Convention.

50. At paragraphs 17 - 18, the FTTJ  set  out  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
    ("Article 8; the public interest considerations") and also Part  13  of
    the Immigration Rules "deportation and Article 8"  paragraphs  398  and
    399.

51. It is plain from reading the decision of the FtTJ that there  was  some
    discussion with the advocates  concerning  the  decision  made  by  the
    respondent on the basis that the Tribunal had allowed  his  deportation
    appeal in 2010 and that the decision to deport  relied  upon  the  same
    offence as a trigger for further deportation taken with  the  grant  of
    two further periods of leave after he had committed a  further  offence
    in 2013 (see 23]).

52. The FtTJ's discussion of the and the issue which she described  as  the
    "so-called trigger" position was set out at paragraphs [31]-[42].

53. The FtTJ began her consideration by observing that the  respondent  had
    initially made a decision to deport the appellant which was  agreed  by
    the Secretary of State to have  been  defective  which  resulted  in  a
    second  deportation  decision  being  issued  which   highlighted   the
    appellant's conviction in October 2006 and the prison sentence of  four
    years as the basis of the deportation. The  decision  referred  to  his
    previous convictions  and  the  subsequent  conviction  (for  which  he
    received a suspended sentence). The judge recorded  at  [32]  that  the
    respondent by the date of the final deportation  decision  had  granted
    several periods of leave to remain on  the  basis  of  the  appellant's
    family life and a grant of leave made after the 2013  conviction.   The
    judge also made  reference  to  the  CMRH  and  that  contrary  to  the
    directions  made,  no  letter  was  sent  to  the  IAC  (undertaking  a
    comprehensive  review)  but  a  letter  was  sent  to  the   appellants
    representatives. The judge records that the letter of  8  October  2018
    did not appear to be a comprehensive review  as  agreed  and  that  the
    decision-maker referred to the  directions  of  the  FT  TJ  not  being
    attached to the letter. The judge recorded "my enquiries at the hearing
    did not lead to a clear explanation".

54. At [34] the FtTJ set out the contents of the letter  and  at  [35]  the
    view of the appellant's representatives who had taken  issue  with  the
    reference made to the application going to the  criminal  casework  and
    referring to  the  applications  for  further  leave  to  remain  which
    included details of his previous convictions and  relied  on  the  fact
    that he been granted only six months leave otherwise he would have been
    granted "the normal 2 � or three years". It also was noted  that  there
    appeared to be no  trigger  for  the  deportation  decision  under  the
    automatic provisions of the 2007 Act.

55. At [36] the judge recorded that the respondent had the "opportunity  to
    fully expand/review the reasons the deportation decision of March  2018
    with reference to the statutory provisions, this  does  not  appear  to
    have been done and the respondent are presented simply stated that  the
    decision was relied upon."

56. As the judge observed at [37] she was not provided with  any  case  law
    concerning the applicable legal framework from either  of  the  parties
    nor any case law dealing with what  she  described  as  the  "so-called
    trigger" and whether the "statutory presumption remains in perpetuity".
    The judge also observed the law had changed since the appeal  had  been
    allowed in 2010 and the current law is that  set  out  in  YM  (Uganda)
    [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

57. The judge then directed herself to the decision of Johnson (deportation
    - four years imprisonment) [2016] UKUT 00282., In  which  it  was  held
    that when a foreign offender has been convicted of an offence for which
    he has been sentenced to imprisonment of at least four  years  and  has
    successfully appealed on human rights grounds, this  does  not  prevent
    the Secretary of State from relying on the conviction for the  purposes
    of paragraph 398 (a) of the immigration rules and section 117C  of  the
    2002 Act if and when he reoffend is, even if the later offence  results
    in less than four years imprisonment or, indeed, less  than  12  months
    imprisonment. The judge then set out  paragraphs  27  and  28  of  that
    decision and stated, "I note here that there is a  reference  again  to
    the issue of a later "trigger" offence which led  to  the  decision  to
    deport". The judge then made reference to the same  decision  where  it
    was stated;

         "any individual imprisoned for such a significant  period  of  time
         must have it in his mind that he is living on borrowed time, as  it
         were, and that any further offending may have the consequence  that
         the tribunal revisits an earlier appeal at  which  he  successfully
         resisted deportation. Finally, the appellant contention  that,  for
         the purposes  of  paragraph  398  (a)  the  offence  that  triggers
         deportation can only be the most recent offending is nowhere to  be
         found in the words of the paragraph and the expression  "they  have
         been sentence". Had it been the intention to limit the operation of
         the subparagraph in the manner suggested, it would require  drastic
         rewriting."

58. At [39] the judge then stated:

         "again, there is a reference  here  to  a  later  offence  being  a
         trigger. In the facts of the current case there was no link made to
         the later 2013 offence being a trigger which led to the deportation
         proceedings. The trigger appears to have been  the  change  in  the
         appellant's  family  circumstances  which  at  the  date   of   the
         deportation  decision  was  still  subject  to  consideration  with
         reference to the  appellant's  application  for  further  leave  to
         remain. I note that the respondent made the decision after  earlier
         deciding that the appellant should be given further  leave  because
         of his relationship with his daughter."

59. At [40] the judge observed the appellant had not  sought  to  challenge
    the basis of the decision to deport him by way of judicial  review  and
    concluded that this would have been the "proper route  to  challenge  a
    decision to deport him".

60. Having set out those issues, the judge considered that the  appellant's
    appeal was "based on his claim that deportation would  be  contrary  to
    the U.K.'s obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR notwithstanding that
    is a deportation of the person from the UK is conducive to  the  public
    good because they have been convicted of an offence for which they have
    been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years."  At
    [42] the judge made reference to Part 5A of the 2002  Act  and  section
    117C. Although the judge did not expressly say so, it is plain from her
    decision that given his previous conviction which resulted in a  period
    of  imprisonment  for  4  years,  the  public  interest  required   his
    deportation unless there were "very compelling circumstances  over  and
    above those described in Exceptions 1 and 2."

61. The FtTJ's findings and conclusions were set out at paragraphs 44  -66.
    It is plain from reading those paragraphs that the evidence before  the
    FtTJ was incomplete and there were a number of  questions  raised  from
    the evidence. This included  the  change  in  circumstances  since  the
    decision was made in 2010 to allow his appeal and  that  there  was  no
    clear chronology outlining the events that occurred from 2013 until the
    present date (see [46]), that the appellant's  wife  had  not  attended
    court and her  evidence  was  important  and  it  was  unclear  why  an
    adjournment had not been requested (see [47-48]), his contact with  his
    younger daughter had not been explained properly (at [50-[51]).

62. The findings made can be summarised as follows:

          1) Following the decision of the Tribunal in 2010, where it  been
             decided that it was in the interests of the children  and  the
             appellant's wife for the family to remain  together  and  that
             the appellant's presence in the UK was an integral part of the
             support required by his children and his wife  in  respect  of
             her mental health  problems,  circumstances  changed  and  the
             family were split. The eldest children were  taken  into  care
             and in 2013 the appellant was convicted of a further offence.

          2) The appellant was no  longer  living  with  his  wife  or  his
             youngest child. His relationship with his wife has  been  long
             and on occasion very troubled but that the appellant stated he
             now had a  stable  relationship  with  his  former  wife.  The
             appellant has had no contact with  his  stepson  K  since  the
             children were taken into care by the social services ([49]).

          3) The  appellant  has  had  indirect  contact  with  his  eldest
             daughter A since 2010 and she has requested direct contact and
             he has seen her on one occasion. The FtTJ referred to evidence
             from the social  worker  (correspondence  in  November  2018),
             which made reference to A being removed from the care of  both
             of her parents for "various issues" but did not  go  into  any
             detail  on  the  judge  noted  that  there  was  "no  detailed
             information on what led to children  being  in  care  and  the
             reasons for the level of contact allowed between them and  the
             appellant". Therefore based  on  that  information  the  judge
             found that the appellant did not have  a  subsisting  parental
             relationship with A and that whilst  the  SW  appeared  to  be
             suggesting that it was  in  her  best  interests  to  continue
             contact with her father, the personal contact was in the  very
             early stages. The judge recorded that while she recognised  it
             was in A's best interests at present to continue  her  contact
             with the father, "I would not regard the  evidence  itself  as
             being very compelling circumstances given the  limitations  of
             the relationship" (at [50]).

          4) As to his relationship with C, the judge set out the differing
             evidence at [51]-[59]. There was evidence in an  email  relied
             upon by the respondent setting out the mother's  position  and
             that  the  email  referred  to  little  contact  between   the
             appellant and C when the final assessment took place  in  June
             2016 and that her mother had been assessed to meet  her  needs
             and to continue to care for her as a single parent. The  judge
             referred to the appellant's evidence which did  not  refer  to
             any breaks in contact between the appellant  and  C  but  that
             there was contact on Tuesdays and Saturdays and he helped  his
             wife with childcare, provided  financial  support.  The  judge
             made reference  to  their  being  a  gap  in  the  information
             concerning the resumed contact with C when it began (at [54]).
             And evidence from the Head Teacher of C which  made  reference
             to him  assisting  with  her  reading  and  attending  parents
             consultation (at [55]).

          5) The FtTJ made reference to the ISW report in relation  to  the
             appellant and C but noted that there was a difference  in  the
             evidence provided in the email from social  services  and  the
             reference made to the Child Arrangements Order in January 2016
             and the email was not referred to  in  the  ISW's  report  (at
             57]). The evidence of the ISW was that C and  her  father  had
             formed a secure attachment.

          6) The FtTJ noted the gap in the chronology but accepted that the
             date of the appeal he had been having regular contact  with  C
             and a genuine and subsisting parental relationship albeit  she
             lives with her mother. The judge accepted that it was  in  her
             best interests that he is present as an active and  supportive
             parent (see [59]).

          7) The FtTJ made reference to the  position  of  the  appellant's
             wife and her vulnerability and the basis upon which the  first
             appeal was allowed but given the conflicting  information  the
             judge did not appear to make any particular  finding  on  this
             issue and whether C or his wife would benefit from  any  input
             from the appellant (at [60]).

          8) The FtTJ found that K had no intention to relocate to Jamaica,
             she  was  not  in  a  relationship  with   A   (save   current
             arrangements to care for C  and  appellant's  assistance  with
             that childcare) and that there was no suggestion that C  could
             live with her father in Jamaica (at [61]).

          9) The judge accepted that the appellant's sister and  his  niece
             had a close relationship and they see him in person about once
             or twice a year (at [63]). The judge  made  reference  to  the
             circumstances where the appellant's niece was the  complainant
             in 2013 at paragraph 63 and 64 but it is not clear whether the
             judge made any particular  finding  other  than  stating  "the
             evidence given by the appellant sister and niece  in  personal
             supportive but did not contribute to a finding  of  compelling
             circumstances." It is unclear what finding was made or how  or
             on what basis it was said to support a finding of  "compelling
             circumstances".

         10) As to his private life, the judge recorded that he had been in
             the United Kingdom for appeared over 16 years  and  had  close
             family a and friends. There were letters of support  but  none
             of those people had attended court.  It  was  noted  that  the
             appellant had been financially independent and had  worked  to
             support his wife and was in employment. No other  findings  or
             assessment was made as to the strength  of  his  private  life
             (either in terms of length of residence, integration  and  any
             ties to Jamaica).

         11) The judge concluded her assessment at [66].  She  stated  that
             the appellant could not be said to be  a  persistent  offender
             and not been convicted of any further offences since 2013. She
             further stated that the  respondent  appeared  to  regard  his
             relationship with C as a reason to allow him  further  periods
             of leave to remain prior to the decision to deport. The  judge
             also recorded that the circumstances in  the  email  from  the
             social services appear to be the trigger which had led to  the
             deportation proceedings, but it appeared to be out of date  as
             they had not had contact with the appellant's wife  and  child
             since 2016. The judge therefore considered that there had been
             an inadequate consideration of "family life" and were "factors
             which  are  weighed  in  his  favour."  The  judge  concluded,
             "however the requirement set by paragraph  117C  (6)  is  that
             there must be very compelling circumstances over and above his
             genuine and subsisting relationship with his child  who  is  a
             British citizen is a qualifying child. My  overall  conclusion
             is that the appellant cannot taking into account  his  current
             circumstances are whole and the factors  I  have  referred  to
             provide sufficient evidence of very  compelling  circumstances
             over and above the exception listed in S117C of Part 5A of the
             2002 Act."

63. The appellant sought permission to appeal that decision, but permission
    was refused on the 7 February 2019 by the FtT. The grounds were renewed
    and on reconsideration permission was granted by UTJ Chalkley on the 13
    March 2019.

The appellant's grounds of challenge:

64.  Mr Adewoye has represented the appellant throughout his appeal and was
    the author of the grounds. He has at times  helpfully  represented  the
    appellant on a pro-bono basis and  has  now  secured  funding  for  his
    representation.

65. Ground 1 states that the FtTJ erred in law to have proceeded  with  the
    case as a deportation appeal under the  2007  Act  when  there  was  no
    trigger for automatic deportation provisions under the UK  Borders  Act
    and that the trigger as stated in the decision to deport was the change
    in circumstances of the family composition  since  the  last  grant  of
    leave which is now found to be incorrect and not his  reoffending  (see
    [66]). The judge therefore could  not  identify  which  aspect  of  the
    public interest the deportation of the appellant would seek to  protect
    since there was no offence which triggered the deportation  proceedings
    following a successful appeal  against  deportation  in  2010  and  for
    granted  further  leave  to  remain  two  after  another  offence   was
    committed.

66. It was asserted that the judge erred in law to have  applied  S117C  of
    the 2002 act because it contravened the provisions of  S117C(7)   which
    provides that the considerations and subsections (1) to (6) are  to  be
    taken into account where a court or tribunal is considering a  decision
    to deport foreign criminal only to the extent that the reason  for  the
    decision was the offence or offences for which the  criminal  has  been
    convicted."  It was therefore asserted  that  it  was  clear  from  the
    decision that the reason for the deportation was not solely because  of
    the offences but because of the alleged change in family  circumstances
    since the last grant of  discretionary  leave  in  2014  therefore  the
    provisions were not applicable.

67. In the alternative it was argued that the judge erred in her conclusion
    that  the  appellant's  circumstances  did  not   present   "compelling
    circumstances" far above the ordinary relationship with  his  daughter.
    The judge gave inadequate reasons  and  failed  to  take  into  account
    relevant evidence which showed that the appellant had a strong  Article
    8 case to displace the public interest in deporting  foreign  criminals
    when one of the exceptions applied.

68. It  was  submitted  that  the  appellant  did  not  only  rely  on  his
    relationship  with  his  child  but  advanced   other   considerations,
    including the welfare of the child being affected in the event  of  the
    relapse of the wife's medical condition  as  set  out  in  the  medical
    evidence, that the wife and child could not relocate  to  Jamaica,  the
    issue of delay in making a decision on his application, the  fact  that
    he is not a danger to the  public,  that  he  had  supported  his  wife
    financially  and  the  effect  of  his  absence  on  the  family,  that
    deportation would prevent the continuous contact with A  and  that  the
    FtTJ erred in an assessment of whether there was a subsisting  parental
    relationship with A and that there had been grants of leave made in his
    favour since the last offence was committed and also made  no  findings
    on the evidence of the appellant's niece.

69. It was therefore submitted that the judge gave inadequate  reasons  why
    those factors, if taken into account) could not be  compelling  (taking
    into account RF (Jamaica) v SSHD [2017] EWCA Civ 124).

70. Finally it was submitted that the  judge  should  have  given  adequate
    reasons for rejecting the relevant factors if she was to reject them as
    not compelling enough to be far above 399A or 399B and  the  judge  had
    not highlighted any strong countervailing points to support the  public
    interest in the deportation of the appellant. The judge was an error by
    failing to address the factors in detail when reaching a decision as to
    whether there were compelling circumstances.

71. There was no written Rule 24 response on behalf of the  respondent.  At
    the initial  hearing  before  the  Upper  Tribunal  the  appellant  was
    represented by Mr Adewoye and the respondent by the  senior  presenting
    officer Mr McVeety. Neither advocate had provided a  skeleton  argument
    with reference to the relevant legal  framework  or  case  law  or  any
    pleading directed to the issues  that  the  Tribunal  had  to  consider
    beyond the appellant's grounds.

72. I heard submissions from each of the advocates. Mr Adewoye relied  upon
    the written grounds and in particular he submitted the main ground  was
    that set out at ground one that the judge had  misdirected  herself  in
    law by treating this appeal as an automatic deportation appeal. He made
    reference to the  appellant's  immigration  history  and  referred  the
    Tribunal to the decision letter made on 11 June 2018. In particular, he
    submitted that  the  later  offence  committed  in  2013  was  not  the
    "triggering offence" for the proceedings and  no  link  had  been  made
    between that offence and the  consequent  deportation  proceedings.  Th
    respondent was put on notice  by  the  appellant  solicitors  that  the
    automatic deportation provisions did not apply because he had not  been
    sentenced to a period  of  12  months  (reference  being  made  to  the
    response of the Secretary of State dated 8 August 2018 maintaining  the
    decision).

73.  Mr Adewoye made reference to the decision in Johnson (which  had  been
    cited by the judge) and that the present appeal could be  distinguished
    from this is the appellant was not a persistent offender. This also had
    to be seen in the light of the finding made at [39] that the respondent
    had not linked the subsequent offending to any trigger offence but  the
    change in the families circumstances. He submitted that  the  appellant
    was not a foreign criminal under the 2007 Act because of the nature  of
    the offence committed in 2013 and therefore  the  decision  to  proceed
    without the appropriate "trigger" was fatal to the decision made by the
    FtTJ. He submitted that the judge should have said that  there  was  no
    appeal before the Tribunal.

74. In his submissions he made to an application made a  further  leave  to
    remain in August 2014 and that decision was subsumed  in  the  decision
    letter made in June 2018 at paragraph 196 (p45) and the application was
    refused under paragraph 322(5) as a result of his criminality.

75. When asked by the Tribunal  to  outline  his  submissions  as  to  what
    correct legal framework was applicable, Mr Adewoye submitted that  this
    was a refusal of human rights claim and that the appellant  would  only
    need to satisfy S117B(6). As the subsequent events did not make  him  a
    persistent offender the automatic deportation provisions were therefore
    not triggered.

76. As to the substance of the decision, as set out in the written grounds,
    Mr Adewoye submitted that the FtTJ had made no findings of fact  as  to
    the impact of deportation upon the appellant's child C  and  whilst  at
    [59] the FTT J made some reference to  best  interests  there  were  no
    findings on the impact upon the child  of  the  appellant  deportation.
    Furthermore, in relation to the child A, the FTT J at [50]  found  that
    he did not have a subsisting parental relationship and  her  assessment
    here was also vitiated by legal error.

77.  He submitted that the basis of the assessment made by  the  respondent
    was wrong as the appellant did have "family life"  with  C  and  relied
    upon out of date evidence in the circumstances presented  in  2016  and
    they respondent did not consider evidence such  as  financial  payments
    made by the applicant. The FtTJ did find that  he  was  having  regular
    contact with C, but the conclusion reached at [66]  was  an  irrational
    one.

78. Additionally the FtTJ failed to take into account as a relevant  factor
    the appellant's wife's medical condition  and  did  not  put  into  the
    balance and number of factors which could  be  considered  "compelling"
    and the decision was not adequately reasoned and  her  conclusion  that
    his circumstances did not form "compelling circumstances" under section
    117C(6) was not correct in law.

79. In his submissions, he  stated  that  a  number  of  factors  were  not
    considered by the FtTJ which included  the  issue  of  relocation,  the
    impact on the two children, when assessing risk  after  2013  had  been
    granted discretionary leave twice, the issue of delay between 2014  and
    2018, and that all of the factors were "exceptional" but did  not  form
    part of the judges assessment.

80.  Mr  McVeety  on  behalf  of  the  respondent  made  reference  to  the
    immigration history of the appellant and that he  had  previously  been
    granted limited discretionary  leave  which  had  come  to  an  end  in
    September 2014 and he made an entire application.  The  respondent  was
    also aware that he had made an asylum claim in 2012 although no  formal
    proceedings had started and no interview taken place. Therefore in 2014
    had been an application made a further leave to  remain  in  Article  8
    grounds  and  the  respondent  therefore   reassessed   the   appellant
    circumstances from those that had formed the basis of the  decision  of
    UTJ Grubb in 2010. The respondent considered  that  the  basis  of  the
    grant of leave had changed and the  respondent  reviewed  the  position
    following contact with the social services. Therefore he submitted  the
    respondent had evidence to suggest  that  the  reasons  why  have  been
    granted discretionary leave were no longer applicable thus, even it was
    not necessary for the 2013 offence to be the "trigger".

81. As to the submissions  made  concerning  lack  of  reasoning,  he  made
    reference to the decision letter at paragraphs 147 - 150 and that there
    was no evidence to show that the needs of C would not be met solely  by
    her  mother.  However,  whilst  not  making  a  formal  concession,  he
    recognised that the judge did not look at the unduly  harsh  test  when
    reaching any decision,  whether  under  the  rules  or  when  assessing
    whether there were any "compelling circumstances".

82. During their  respective  submissions  it  became  plain  that  neither
    advocate agreed as to the applicable legal framework which should  have
    been applied by the FtTJ.  Mr  Adewoye  submitted  that  the  automatic
    deportation provisions did not apply and if that  was  the  case  as  a
    human rights claim S 117B(6) would apply.  Therefore I made  directions
    for the advocates to file skeleton arguments to set out any  issues  of
    law they wish  to  raise  by  reference  to  the  legislation  and  any
    applicable case law.  I  also  made  a  direction  that  following  the
    exchange of skeleton arguments, the parties should inform the  Tribunal
    whether further hearing would be necessary.

83. The respondent did not file a skeleton argument but provided  a  letter
    to the Tribunal (dated 20 June 2019). The letter directed the  Tribunal
    to the UK Borders Act (commencement No 3 and  Transitional  Provisions)
    Order 2008. The letter  stated  that  whilst  the  respondent  did  not
    accept, in line with paragraph 3 (1) of  the  transitional  provisions,
    that the fact that the appellant's index offence was committed prior to
    the introduction of the 2007 act prevented the respondent from  seeking
    the deportation of DJ under section 32 of  that  Act.  However  it  was
    accepted that he been served with a deportation order under  section  5
    (1) of the 1971 Act on 21 November 2007. As such in line with paragraph
    3 (2) of the transitional provisions it is accepted that  the  decision
    to consider DJ under the automatic deportation provisions and the  2007
    Act was not a lawful decision. The letter went on  to  state  that  the
    respondent sought permission of the Upper Tribunal, with the consent of
    the appellant to withdraw the decision dated 19 March 2018  to  make  a
    fresh decision in respect of  his  application  for  further  leave  to
    remain.

84. A skeleton argument was filed in behalf of the appellant and was sent 3
    July 2019. As to the issue  of  withdrawal  of  the  decision,  it  was
    submitted that the appellant opposed the  request  for  withdrawal  and
    that the matter could  be  dealt  with  notwithstanding  the  error  in
    issuing deportation proceedings under the 2007 Act  because  the  error
    did not affect the consideration of  whether  Para  399  of  the  rules
    applied  whether  it  was  a  conducive  deportation  or  an  automatic
    deportation decision. The skeleton argument at paragraphs 31 -  39  set
    out the reasons why the appellant rejected the offer of the  withdrawal
    of the decision. In summary, the respondent's delay from  2014  to  the
    decision made in 2018 and had withdrawn a decision in 2017 to  issue  a
    further decision on 19 March 2018. The respondent did not engage at the
    CMR hearing and  at  the  hearing  before  the  FtTJ  maintained  their
    position as proceeding under the 2007 Act. There are children  involved
    in the application and there is a  likelihood  that  a  fresh  decision
    would take a while to make.

85. The skeleton argument made reference  to  the  decision  of  Terrelonge
    (paragraph 399(b) UKUT 00653, but that it did not address the  relevant
    questions in the present appeal as to what a statutory framework  would
    be if the triggering offence attracts less than 12 months imprisonment.
    Further it did not address the  point  upon  which  concession  of  the
    respondent is now being made, if the notice of intention to deport  was
    served before 1 August 2008 as it happened in the present case and upon
    which the respondent seemed to seek to withdraw the decision.

86. At paragraph 10 of  the  skeleton  argument  it  was  argued  that  the
    decision under the 2007 Act was unlawful and that if the error not been
    made he should not have been regarded as a foreign  prisoner  and  that
    section 32 defined a foreign criminal is someone who is convicted of  a
    crime and sentenced to 12 months imprisonment. The latest  offence  did
    not attract a sentence of  imprisonment  of  at  least  12  months  and
    therefore section 32 did not apply. It was also inapplicable because of
    the date of the service of the notice  of  intention  to  deport  which
    predated the commencement of the Act. Furthermore, there was  no  power
    granted to the respondent under section 117 D to  issue  a  deportation
    order and therefore it was not validly before the court.

87. At paragraph 15 of the skeleton  argument  the  arguments  advanced  on
    behalf of the appellant were summarised; namely that the appellant  was
    not a foreign criminal and the 2007 act did not apply  to  him  because
    section 117 of the  2002  act  only  applied  to  cases  involving  the
    deportation of foreign criminals. In bold it was stated "The SSHD could
    not apply the 2002 Act definition to classify him as a foreign criminal
    because that is for the courts to have regards to not the SSHD". It was
    therefore submitted that the only appeal before the court was a "simple
    human rights appeal and not a deportation  appeal"  and  therefore  the
    correct approach was to apply S117B(6) .

88. He sought to distinguish the decision in  Johnson  (as  cited)  on  the
    basis that the appellant was not a persistent offender which  triggered
    the Home Office to issue liability to deport notice and also the notice
    under the 2007 Act was not unlawfully issued. On the facts of  Johnson,
    the appellant had about 15 offences in a spate of  one  year  following
    the successful appeal whilst the appellant in the present  case  had  a
    suspended sentence of four months which was non-custodial.

89. In the alternative, it was argued that if the Tribunal  rejected  those
    submissions  then  the  FtTJ  erred  in  her  assessment  of  what  was
    compelling and that the judge  failed  to  give  adequate  reasons  for
    rejecting the factors which are found to be compelling and relied  upon
    the written grounds as originally pleaded. In particular, the judge did
    not evaluate the additional factors  in  a  rational  or  proportionate
    manner.

90. It was submitted that the human rights  claim  should  be  assessed  on
    proportionality and not the presumptions in favour  of  deportation  is
    contained in S117C and that the issues in the case when taken  together
    irrespective of whether he is a foreign criminal or not,  as  it  is  a
    human  rights  appeal  the  issue  relates  to  whether  it  would   be
    disproportionate to refuse the application and should be decided on the
    evidence before it. The skeleton  argument  submitted  that  the  Upper
    Tribunal should allow the appeal on human rights grounds on  the  basis
    that he qualifies for further leave to remain on the basis that he  has
    a parental relationship  with  a  British  citizen,  and  it  would  be
    unreasonable for the qualifying child to leave the United Kingdom. Thus
    it was submitted that the public interest  questions  in  section  117C
    would not apply and once the relationship with the qualifying child had
    been established, and the deportation notice  is  invalid,  his  appeal
    should be allowed (see JG (s117B(6): "reasonable to leave  UK")  [2019]
    UKUT 00072).

91. In the light of the issues raised by both written  submissions  and  in
    the light of the appellant's representative indicating his agreement to
    an oral hearing the matter was set  down  before  myself.  Furthermore,
    there was also a relevant  decision  of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in  MA
    (Pakistan) v SSHD [2019] EWCA Civ 1252 handed down on 18 July 2019.

92. At that hearing the respondent was represented by Ms Petterson and  not
    the previous presenting officer. That did not assist  the  Tribunal  as
    she had not been privy to the previous submissions which I have set out
    above. The letter that had been sent to the  respondent  did  not  deal
    with all of the issues either. At the hearing Mr Adewoye confirmed that
    he maintained his position as set out in the written  submissions  that
    this was a human rights appeal only and  that  the  appellant  was  not
    liable to deportation because the decision to deport was made under the
    2007 Act. He submitted that the Tribunal had no power to  give  consent
    to withdraw and that the UT retained the jurisdiction to decide whether
    the determination should be set aside for the error of  law.   He  made
    reference to the previous submissions which I have set out  earlier  in
    this decision and the reference made at the presenting officer accepted
    that there was a lack of reasoning.

93. Mr Adewoye  made  reference  to  the  letter  sent  on  behalf  of  the
    respondent and that the appellant was convicted before October 2007 and
    on this basis  automatic  deportation  would  not  be  applicable.   He
    summarised the position that there was no lawful decision that  brought
    the appellant within the ambit of deportation and that paragraph 398 or
    399 did not give power  to  issue  a  deportation  order.  Neither  did
    section 117 of 2002 Act. He therefore submitted that this was  a  human
    rights appeal only. Whilst the issue of lack of reasoning was  accepted
    (or appear to be accepted on behalf the respondent) that related to the
    compelling circumstances however the  reasoning  in  the  decision  was
    sufficient to satisfy the issue of S117B(6) as the only requirement was
    that the appellant was in a relationship with a qualifying child and it
    was unreasonable for the child to  leave  the  UK.  He  submitted  that
    considerations set out in S117C did not apply.

94. As to the decision in MA  (Pakistan),  the  proceedings  were  properly
    brought by the Secretary of State under the conducive  deportation  and
    the decision was not issued under the 2007 Act.  On the facts  of  this
    appeal the respondent made an incorrect decision. He submitted that the
    Tribunal could make up its own mind as to the issue of  proportionality
    on the facts and allow the appeal on Article 8 grounds.

95. Ms Petterson provided short written submissions on the 10 October 2019.
    As a preliminary issue, she submitted that the respondent had sought to
    withdraw the decision in the  Upper  Tribunal  and  the  appellant  has
    already had his appeal heard in the FTT and it was notable  that  prior
    to the hearing, the appellant argued that the decision now sought to be
    withdrawn was incorrect. Thus it was submitted that the respondent  had
    the decision appealed against and that the matter ended there.

96. As to the substantive submissions, it was submitted  that  the  written
    submissions and those relied upon orally went far beyond the  issue  of
    error of law now seeking to argue that the case should  be  decided  by
    the Upper Tribunal itself. It was submitted that two errors  were  made
    arguing on  one  hand  the  detriment  to  the  appellant  having  been
    "wrongly" categorised as a foreign criminal and secondly  that  the  UT
    should become the primary decision-maker as to  whether  the  appellant
    qualified for further leave to remain under the immigration rules. None
    of those arguments are legally sustainable.

Discussion:

97. I am grateful to the applicants for their submissions and  I  begin  by
    addressing the issue of withdrawal of the decision and whether in  fact
    the decision has been withdrawn. The submissions originally provided by
    Mr McVeety made reference  to  seeking  the  permission  of  the  Upper
    Tribunal, with the consent of the appellant to withdraw  the  decision.
    Mr Adewoye on behalf of the  appellant  communicated  that  no  consent
    would be given for the reasons he set out despite his submissions  that
    the decision was an unlawful one and failed to address the issues.  The
    submission made by Ms Petterson, who later appeared on  behalf  of  the
    respondent, referred  to  the  letter  he  wrote  as  "withdrawing  the
    decision" although that is not what Mr McVeety's  letter  stated  which
    referred to seeking permission to  later  withdraw  the  decision.  The
    letter of 10 October 2019 at paragraph 3 refers to  the  decision  "now
    sought to be withdrawn".

98.  I  have  not  been  provided  with  any  correspondence  which  states
    unequivocally that the decision has been withdrawn in any  formal  way.
    It has not been stated at  the  hearing  that  the  decision  had  been
    withdrawn and I have not been told on behalf the appellant that he  has
    received any formal communication to that effect. I  therefore  proceed
    on the basis that the decision has not been withdrawn. I do so  on  the
    basis bearing in mind that the request for a withdrawal was made in the
    light of the issues raised in the appellant's grounds in which  it  was
    asserted that  the  FtTJ  had  applied  the  wrong  framework  and  the
    respondent  subsequent  reference  to  the   transitional   provisions.
    However, this was before the skeleton argument filed on behalf  of  the
    appellant setting out reasons why the appeal should  proceed  and  also
    before the decision made by the Court of Appeal in MA(Pakistan) v  SSHD
    [2019] EWCA Civ 1252.

99. Insofar as Mr Adewoye refers to the contents of that letter in terms of
    a "concession", in my judgement if the  legal  basis  upon  which  that
    concession was made was erroneous it does  not  bind  the  Tribunal  in
    reaching a different view on consideration of the applicable law.

100. With those preliminary matters in mind, I now  turn  to  the  issue  of
    whether the FtTJ was in error in applying S117C(6) on  the  basis  that
    the appellant was a "foreign criminal "who  had  been  sentenced  to  a
    period of imprisonment at least four years and that the public interest
    required  his   deportation   unless   there   were   very   compelling
    circumstances over and above that described in Exceptions 1 and 2.

101. As I have set out in the summary of the  proceedings  before  the  FtT,
    both before the hearing and at the time of the hearing,  the  issue  of
    what legal framework applied in this appeal had  been  raised.  Despite
    holding a Case Management review hearing, it did not  appear  that  any
    real progress had been made in light of the non-compliance on the  part
    of the respondent as reflected in the FtTJ's decision at paragraphs [31-
    38].

102. I therefore set out the relevant legal framework.

103. When a person who is not a British citizen is convicted in  the  UK  of
    an offence for which he is sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
    least 12 months, section 32(5) of the UK Borders Act 2007 requires  the
    Secretary of State to make a  deportation  order  in  respect  of  that
    person (referred to  in  the  legislation  as  a  "foreign  criminal"),
    subject to section 33.  Section  33  of  the  Act  establishes  certain
    exceptions, one of which is that "removal of the  foreign  criminal  in
    pursuance  of  the  deportation  order  would  breach...   a   person's
    Convention rights": see section 33(2)(a). The appellant relies on  this
    exception, arguing that his  deportation  would  breach  his  right  to
    respect for his private life guaranteed  by  article  8  of  the  Human
    Rights Convention.

104. The right protected by article  8  is  a  qualified  right  with  which
    interference may be justified on the basis of various  legitimate  aims
    which include the prevention of disorder or crime. The way in which the
    question of  justification  should  be  approached  where  a  court  or
    tribunal is required to determine whether a  decision  made  under  the
    Immigration Acts breaches article 8 is governed by  Part  5A  (sections
    117A-117D)  of  the  Nationality,  Immigration  and  Asylum  Act   2002
    (inserted by amendment in 2014).

105. The parties have referred to  Part  5A  which  was  inserted  into  the
    Nationality, Immigration and Asylum Act 2002 with effect from the  28th
    July 2014 (see YM (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292 at [38]).

106. The material parts provide as follows:

         117A Application of this Part

         (1)  This Part applies where a court or  tribunal  is  required  to
             determine whether a decision made under the Immigration Acts-

             (a)  breaches a person's right  to  respect  for  private  and
                  family life under Article 8, and

             (b)  as a result would be unlawful  under  section  6  of  the
                  Human Rights Act 1998.

         (2)  In considering the public  interest  question,  the  court  or
             tribunal must (in particular) have regard-

             (a)  in all cases, to the  considerations  listed  in  section
                  117B, and

             (b)  in cases concerning the deportation of foreign criminals,
                  to the considerations listed in section 117C.

         (3)  In subsection (2), 'the public interest  question'  means  the
             question of whether an interference with a person's  right  to
             respect for private and family life is justified under Article
             8(2).

         ...

         117C  Article  8:  additional  considerations  in  cases  involving
         foreign criminals

         (1)   The  deportation  of  foreign  criminals  is  in  the  public
             interest.

         (2)  The more serious the offence committed by a foreign  criminal,
             the greater is the  public  interest  in  deportation  of  the
             criminal.

         (3)  In the case of a foreign  criminal  ('C')  who  has  not  been
             sentenced to a period of imprisonment of four years  or  more,
             the public interest requires C's deportation unless  Exception
             1 or Exception 2 applies.

         (4)  Exception 1 applies where-

             (a)  C has been lawfully resident in the  United  Kingdom  for
                  most of C's life,

             (b)  C is socially and culturally  integrated  in  the  United
                  Kingdom, and

             (c)   there  would  be  very  significant  obstacles  to   C's
                  integration into the country to which C is proposed to  be
                  deported.

         (5)  Exception 2 applies where  C  has  a  genuine  and  subsisting
             relationship with a  qualifying  partner,  or  a  genuine  and
             subsisting parental relationship with a qualifying child,  and
             the effect of C's deportation on the partner or child would be
             unduly harsh.

         (6)  In the case of a foreign criminal who has been sentenced to  a
             period of imprisonment of at  least  four  years,  the  public
             interest requires deportation unless there are very compelling
             circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1
             and 2.

         (7)  The considerations in subsections (1) to (6) are to  be  taken
             into account where  a  court  or  tribunal  is  considering  a
             decision to deport a foreign criminal only to the extent  that
             the reason for the decision was the offence  or  offences  for
             which the criminal has been convicted.

         117D Interpretation of this Part

         (1)  ...

         (2)  In this Part, 'foreign criminal' means a person-

             (a)  who is not a British citizen,

             (b)  who has been  convicted  in  the  United  Kingdom  of  an
                  offence, and

             (c)  who-

                  (i)  has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  at
                      least 12 months,

                  (ii) has been convicted of  an  offence  that  has  caused
                      serious harm, or

                  (iii)    is a persistent offender.

         (3)  ...

         (4)  In this Part, references to a person who has been sentenced to
             a period of imprisonment of a certain length of time-

             (a)  do not include a person  who  has  received  a  suspended
                  sentence (unless a  court  subsequently  orders  that  the
                  sentence or any part of it (of whatever length) is to take
                  effect);

             (b)  do not include a person  who  has  been  sentenced  to  a
                  period of imprisonment of that  length  of  time  only  by
                  virtue  of  being  sentenced  to   consecutive   sentences
                  amounting in aggregate to that length of time;"

107. Immigration Rules A362-400

         A362: Where Article 8 is raised in the context of deportation under
         Part 13 of these Rules, the claim under Article 8 will only succeed
         where the requirements of these rules as at 28 July 2014  are  met,
         regardless of when  the  notice  of  intention  to  deport  or  the
         deportation order, as appropriate, was served.

         363. The circumstances in which a person is liable  to  deportation
         include:

           (i) where the Secretary of State deems the person's  deportation
           to be conducive to the public good;

           ...

         A398. These rules apply where:

         (a) a foreign  criminal  liable  to  deportation  claims  that  his
         deportation would be contrary to the United  Kingdom's  obligations
         under Article 8 of the Human Rights Convention

         (b) a foreign criminal applies for a deportation order made against
         him to be revoked.

         398. Where a person claims that their deportation would be contrary
         to the UK's  obligations  under  Article  8  of  the  Human  Rights
         Convention, and

         (a) the deportation of the person from the UK is conducive  to  the
         public good and in the  public  interest  because  they  have  been
         convicted of an offence for which they have  been  sentenced  to  a
         period of imprisonment of at least 4 years;

         ...

         (c) ... the  Secretary  of  State  in  assessing  that  claim  will
         consider whether paragraph 399 or 399A applies and, if it does not,
         the public interest in deportation will only be outweighed by other
         factors where there are  very  compelling  circumstances  over  and
         above those described in paragraphs 399 and 399A.

         399. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398 (b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has a genuine and subsisting  parental  relationship
         with a child under the age of 18 years who is in the UK, and

           (i) the child is a British Citizen; or

           (ii) the child has lived in the UK continuously for at least the
           7 years  immediately  preceding  the  date  of  the  immigration
           decision; and in either case

           (a) it would be unduly harsh  for  the  child  to  live  in  the
           country to which the person is to be deported; and

           (b) it would be unduly harsh for the child to remain in  the  UK
           without the person who is to be deported; or

         (b) the person has a genuine and  subsisting  relationship  with  a
         partner who is in the UK and is a British Citizen or settled in the
         UK, and

           (i) the relationship was  formed  at  a  time  when  the  person
           (deportee) was in the UK lawfully and their  immigration  status
           was not precarious; and

           (ii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to  live  in  the
           country to which the  person  is  to  be  deported,  because  of
           compelling circumstances  over  and  above  those  described  in
           paragraph EX.2. of Appendix FM; and

           (iii) it would be unduly harsh for that partner to remain in the
           UK without the person who is to be deported.

         399A. This paragraph applies where paragraph 398(b) or (c)  applies
         if -

         (a) the person has been lawfully resident in the UK for most of his
         life; and

         (b) he is socially and culturally integrated in the UK; and

         (c) there would be very significant obstacles  to  his  integration
         into the country to which it is proposed he is deported.

         399B.  Where  an  article  8  claim  from  a  foreign  criminal  is
         successful:

         (a) in the case of a person who is in the UK  unlawfully  or  whose
         leave to enter or remain has been cancelled by a deportation order,
         limited leave may be granted for periods not  exceeding  30  months
         and subject to such conditions as the Secretary of State  considers
         appropriate;

         (b) in the case of  a  person  who  has  not  been  served  with  a
         deportation order, any limited leave to  enter  or  remain  may  be
         curtailed to a period not exceeding 30 months and conditions may be
         varied to such conditions  as  the  Secretary  of  State  considers
         appropriate;

         (c) indefinite leave to  enter  or  remain  may  be  revoked  under
         section 76 of the 2002 Act and limited leave to enter or remain for
         a period not exceeding 30 months subject to such conditions as  the
         Secretary of State considers appropriate;

         (d) revocation  of  a  deportation  order  does  not  confer  entry
         clearance or leave to remain or re-instate any previous leave.

         399C. Where a foreign criminal who has previously  been  granted  a
         period of limited leave under this Part applies for further limited
         leave  or  indefinite  leave  to  remain  his  deportation  remains
         conducive  to  the  public  good  and  in   the   public   interest
         notwithstanding the previous grant of leave.

108. As the Court of Appeal pointed out in NE-A  (Nigeria)  v  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department [2017] EWCA Civ 239,  para  14,  although
    the Immigration Rules are relevant because they reflect the responsible
    minister's assessment, endorsed by Parliament, of  the  general  public
    interest, they are not legislation; by contrast, Part 5A  of  the  2002
    Act is primary legislation which directly  governs  decision-making  by
    courts and tribunals in cases where a decision made by the Secretary of
    State under the Immigration Acts is challenged on article 8 grounds.

109. The original written  grounds  advanced  on  behalf  of  the  appellant
    argued that the FtTJ erred in law by proceeding  with  the  case  as  a
    deportation appeal under the 2007 Act where there was "no trigger  "for
    the automatic deportation provisions on the basis that the  trigger  in
    the decision letter was the change in the family circumstances and this
    had been incorrect. Thus it is argued the judge could not identify  the
    facet of the public interest the deportation  of  the  appellant  would
    seek to protect and on the basis that there was  no  offending  on  his
    part which would trigger the deportation proceedings.

110. The original grounds were changed somewhat in the  subsequent  skeleton
    argument and the oral submissions made by Mr  Adewoye  which  submitted
    that the appellant was not liable to deportation for those reasons  and
    as this was a human rights application to which S117B(6)  applied,  the
    evidence satisfied this paragraph as the appellant had  a  genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with a qualifying child and  it  would  not  be
    reasonable for that child to leave the  United  Kingdom.  Therefore  he
    submitted this was a human rights claim, and proportionality should  be
    assessed on the basis of the factors set out in  S117B  and  not  S117C
    which only apply to foreign criminals and that the  appellant  did  not
    fall within that category.

111. I have given careful consideration  to  the  submissions  made  by  the
    respective advocates. There  is  no  dispute  that  the  appellant  was
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least four years; this  was
    the conviction in 2006 for the offences of  supplying  class  A  drugs.
    There is also no dispute that following that  decision,  the  appellant
    had been granted periods of discretionary leave and such leave had been
    granted even after he had reoffended in 2013, which did not  result  in
    an  immediate  custodial  sentence  but  a  suspended   sentence   with
    conditions attached to that sentence. I could not find any findings  of
    fact in the decision of the FtTJ as to the factual circumstances of the
    offending in 2013 or in the respondent's evidence.

112. The argument advanced on behalf of the appellant relies on a number  of
    factors taking into account the chronology of the events including  the
    grants of leave provided since the original conviction in 2006, and the
    appeal being allowed in 2010 and that there was no  "trigger"  for  the
    deportation proceedings in 2017.

113. I have considered  the  arguments  advanced  but  I  have  reached  the
    conclusion that they are not correct in law. As set out in the decision
    of MA (Pakistan) (as cited) at [32], there are two  material  questions
    that arise.  Firstly,  whether  the  deportation  of  the  offender  is
    conducive to the public good? And if so,  the  offender  is  liable  to
    deportation under section 3(5) (a) of the  Immigration  Act  1971?  The
    second question relates to the circumstances in which it is open to the
    respondent to make a deportation order. In this  respect  the  decision
    refers to legal obstacles to  the  deportation  of  the  offender,  for
    example, because the decision would  infringe  Convention  rights.  But
    that the bar to deportation does not alter the fact that  the  offender
    is a person whose presence is not conducive to the  public  good.  When
    reading the decision letter of 16 March 2018, in which  the  respondent
    set out the reasons for deportation, that decision  made  reference  to
    section 32(4) that the deportation of a foreign criminal  is  conducive
    to the public good and goes on to state "the public  interest  in  your
    deportation is  further  strengthened  because  of  your  previous  and
    subsequent convictions". The  respondent  then  sets  out  all  of  the
    appellant's offending history including those prior to the  offence  in
    2006, the offence in 2006 and the later conviction in  2013.  Thus  the
    respondent expressly set out that in the case  of  this  appellant  his
    deportation was conducive to the public good and  it  was  strengthened
    because of not only his previous convictions (that is, 2004 - 2006) but
    also his subsequent conviction (that in 2013). This was also set out in
    the decision to refuse protection and human rights claim issued  on  11
    June 2018 set out at part one and expressly within the decision  letter
    at paragraph 57. Therefore the first question posed  in  MA  (Pakistan)
    was addressed in the decision letter of 16 March 2018 and 11 June 2018.

114. As to the second question, this depended on whether  a  change  in  the
    law provide a proper foundation for the decisions made in March 2018 in
    June 2018 to deport the appellant.

115. The submissions made on behalf of the appellant, and some extent  those
    on behalf of the respondent in the letter which made reference  to  the
    transitional provisions relating to the 2007 Act, fail to  address  the
    issue that the law in relation to  deportation  change  in  the  period
    after the original decision to deport in the proceedings in  2010.  The
    new part 5A of the 2002 Act was in force from  28  July  2014  (see  YM
    (Uganda) v SSHD [2014] EWCA Civ 1292.

116. Whilst submitted on behalf of the appellant  that  there  had  been  no
    change in the appellant's circumstances since the decision in 2010  and
    that the decision letter wrongly  characterises  the  position  of  the
    appellant and his relationship with family members, in my judgement the
    respondent was entitled to review the appellant  circumstances  on  the
    evidence provided. He was no longer living with his wife  and  children
    as a family unit. The respondent did  make  reference  to  his  further
    offence committed in 2013 as part of the factual matrix and even if  it
    was not the "trigger" as Mr Adewoye submits, the change in the law  and
    the clarification made in that law of the public interest  did  justify
    the making of a fresh deportation decision.

117. The fact that the amendment to the law  was  made  a  number  of  years
    after his conviction on 2006 and after his appeal against the  decision
    to deport him was allowed in 2010, does  not  preclude  the  respondent
    from issuing a fresh decision.

118. As to the argument the appellant is not a foreign criminal  within  the
    requisite definition on the basis that he has not been sentenced  to  a
    period of 12 months imprisonment and on the finding of the FtTJ that he
    was not a "persistent offender", this fails to take  into  account  the
    definition of a foreign criminal in section 117D 2 and the  words  used
    in that section taken in their ordinary meaning. The appellant is not a
    British citizen and he has been convicted of an offence in the  UK  and
    additionally has been sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least
    12 months. The fact that the most recent  conviction  2013  was  for  a
    sentence of imprisonment which was suspended does not  alter  the  fact
    that in 2006 he was sentenced to a period of imprisonment of  4  years.
    Looking at the wording of section 117D2 (C) (i) it refers to  "has-been
    sentenced to a period of imprisonment of at least 12 months".  The  use
    of the word "has "is in the past tense and therefore the appellant does
    fall within the meaning of a "foreign criminal".

119. The FtTJ did make reference to the decision of Johnson  at  [38]  where
    the Upper Tribunal reached the conclusion that the  appellant  in  that
    appeal has been convicted of an offence for which he had been sentenced
    to at least four years imprisonment and that the Secretary of State was
    not precluded for relying on that. I can find no basis  to  distinguish
    Johnson from the present appeal as Mr Adewoye submits as  the  fact  he
    was a persistent  offender  does  not  impact  on  the  fact  that  the
    appellant has been I the past convicted of  a  qualifying  offence.  An
    issue referred to by the FtTJ was "the trigger" for  the  decision  and
    that in Johnson there was a later "trigger offence" which  had  led  to
    the decision to deport. At [39] the FtTJ found that on the facts of the
    appeal there was no link made  to  the  later  2013  offences  being  a
    trigger which led to the deportation proceedings and that the "trigger"
    appeared to be the change in the family circumstances of the appellant.
    At [40] the FtTJ observed that the appellant did not seek to  challenge
    the decision to deport him by way of an application for  permission  to
    apply for judicial review which the FtTJ considered to  be  the  proper
    course to have taken.

120. Mr Adewoye submits that in view of the lack of  the  "trigger"  as  set
    out above the decision was not lawfully  made.  I  cannot  accept  that
    submission and the answer lies in section 117C (7) which arguably makes
    reference to the consideration of the extent to which the  reasons  for
    the decision was the "offence or offences for which  the  criminal  was
    convicted". When looking at the decision to deport  made  on  16  March
    2018, I have already set out that the decision  expressly  referred  to
    the convictions for which he was sentenced to 4 years  imprisonment  in
    2006 and  referred  the  public  interest  being  further  strengthened
    because of his previous  and  subsequent  convictions  which  are  then
    listed. The subsequent conviction of 2013 was  also  listed.  Reference
    was also made to the position of the children and on the basis  of  the
    information that was currently available. The decision  made  it  clear
    that the human rights claims outstanding and that in this  respect  the
    appellant could provide further evidence. This led to the  decision  on
    11 June 2018 which was the appealable decision under section  82(1)  of
    the 2002 Act. In this respect, whilst I find that the FtTJ was wrong to
    say that there was "no trigger", I conclude that the argument  advanced
    on behalf of the appellant do not demonstrate that the FtTJ applied the
    wrong legal framework or that this was a simple human rights appeal  to
    which section 117B applied rather than that section alongside S117C.

121. In my judgement the  decision  was  lawfully  made  and  therefore  the
    consideration in Section 117C were  applicable.  I  find  no  error  in
    relation to ground one.

122. I now turn to ground 2. In this respect, whilst Mr  McVeety  on  behalf
    of the respondent stated that he could make no  formal  concession,  he
    recognised that there  was  inadequate  reasoning  in  the  conclusions
    reached by the FtTJ on the issue of whether there were "very compelling
    circumstances". Having considered the assessment made by the  FtTJ  and
    in the light of the grounds advanced, I  have  reached  the  conclusion
    that in this respect the submissions made on behalf  of  the  appellant
    made out.

123. The statutory provisions at s.117A-C  provide  a  "particularly  strong
    statement of public policy" - see NA (Pakistan) v SSHD [2017] 1 WLR 207
    at [22], such that "great weight" should generally be given to  it  and
    cases in which that public interest  will  be  outweighed,  other  than
    those specified in the statutory provisions and Rules themselves,  "are
    likely to be a very small minority" (see Hesham Ali v SSHD [2016]  UKSC
    60 at [38], i.e. will be rare - NA (Pakistan) at [33].

124. As set out at paragraphs [21] and [22] of KO (Nigeria) that exception
    1 is "self-contained" and "leaves no room for further balancing".  In
    other words, a foreign criminal sentenced to less than four years who
    is able to meet the three requirements in exception 1, is entitled to
    have his Article 8 appeal allowed.  There is no additional obligation
    to conduct a balancing exercise that attaches little weight to that
    appellant's private life in the UK or balances private life against the
    public interest, including the seriousness of the offending.

125. In the alternative,  the  position  is  different  where  an  appellant
    cannot meet Exception 1 or 2.   The  wide-ranging  evaluative  exercise
    required by s. 117C(6)  necessarily  includes  an  application  of  the
    public interest considerations in s. 117B and a balancing of the public
    interest,  including  the  seriousness  of  the  offending  -  see  the
    clarification provided by Lane J in MS.

126. In MS the President of the Upper Tribunal, Lane J (sitting in  a  panel
    with UTJs Gill and Coker) considered the correct approach to s. 117C(6)
    with the benefit of the guidance provided in KO (Nigeria) v SSHD [2018]
    UKSC 53 and NA (Pakistan) (supra), and said this:

         "16. By contrast, the issue of whether "there are  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2" is not in any sense a hard-edged question. On the  contrary,  it
         calls for a wide-ranging  evaluative  exercise.  As  NA  (Pakistan)
         holds, that exercise is  required,  in  the  case  of  all  foreign
         criminals, in order  to  ensure  that  Part  5A  of  the  2002  Act
         produces, in each such case, a result that is compatible  with  the
         United Kingdom's obligations under Article 8 of the ECHR.

         17.  Viewed in  this  light,  it  can  readily  be  seen  that  the
         ascertainment of what constitute "very  compelling  circumstances",
         such as to defeat the public  interest,  requires  a  case-specific
         analysis of the nature of the public interest. The strength of  the
         public interest, in any particular case, determines the weight that
         must then be found to lie on the foreign  criminal's  side  of  the
         balance in order for the circumstances to be  properly  categorised
         as very compelling. It would, frankly, be remarkable  if  a  person
         sentenced to four years' imprisonment for fraud had to  demonstrate
         the same circumstances as a person sentenced to  life  imprisonment
         for multiple murders.

         18.  To say this is not to seek to introduce a "balancing exercise"
         into Exceptions 1 and 2 and the test of "unduly harsh".  The  words
         "over and above", as interpreted by Jackson LJ  in  NA  (Pakistan),
         underscore the difference in the tasks  demanded  by,  on  the  one
         hand, section 117C(4) and (5) and, on the other, section 117C(6).

         19.  Furthermore, as Mr Pilgerstorfer pointed out,  the  effect  of
         the judgment in NA (Pakistan), in bringing  all  foreign  criminals
         within the ambit of section 117C(6), means that it is difficult  to
         see how the test  of  very  compelling  circumstances  can  operate
         differently, depending upon whether the foreign  criminal  has,  or
         has not, been sentenced to imprisonment of at  least  4  years.  In
         order for it to do so, yet further words would have to  be  assumed
         to be written into the section, over and above  those  mandated  by
         the Court of Appeal's judgment.

         20.  For these reasons, despite Ms Patyna's elegant submissions, we
         find the effect of section 117C is that a  court  or  tribunal,  in
         determining whether there are  very  compelling  circumstances,  as
         required by subsection (6), must take into account the  seriousness
         of the particular  offence  for  which  the  foreign  criminal  was
         convicted,  together  with  any  other  relevant  public   interest
         considerations.  Nothing  in  KO  (Nigeria)  demands   a   contrary
         conclusion."

127. As NA (Pakistan) holds, the s. 117C(6) exercise is required  to  ensure
    compatibility with the UK's obligations under Article 8  of  the  ECHR.
    In addition, the judgment in NA (Pakistan), given by Jackson LJ, reads:



         "29. ... The phrase used in section 117C (6), in para. 398  of  the
         2014 ... does not mean that a foreign criminal  facing  deportation
         is altogether disentitled from seeking to rely on  matters  falling
         within the scope of the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and
         2  when  seeking  to  contend  that  'there  are  very   compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2'. ... [A] foreign criminal is entitled to rely upon such matters,
         but he would need to be able to point to features of his case of  a
         kind mentioned in Exceptions 1 and 2 (and in paras. 399 or 399A  of
         the 2014 rules), or  features  falling  outside  the  circumstances
         described in those Exceptions and those paragraphs, which made  his
         claim based on Article 8 especially strong.

         30.  In  the  case  of  a  serious  offender  who  could  point  to
         circumstances in his own case which could be said to correspond  to
         the circumstances described in Exceptions 1 and  2,  but  where  he
         could only just succeed in  such  an  argument,  it  would  not  be
         possible to describe his situation  as  involving  very  compelling
         circumstances, over and above those described in Exceptions  1  and
         2. One might describe that as a bare case of the kind described  in
         Exceptions 1 or 2. On the other hand, if he could point to  factors
         identified in  the  descriptions  of  Exceptions  1  and  2  of  an
         especially compelling kind in support of an Article 8 claim,  going
         well beyond what would be necessary to make out a bare case of  the
         kind described in Exceptions 1  and  2,  they  could  in  principle
         constitute 'very compelling circumstances,  over  and  above  those
         described in Exceptions 1 and 2', whether taken by themselves or in
         conjunction with other factors relevant to application  of  Article
         8."

128. The point made by Jackson LJ in NA (Pakistan) as  above,  was  that  he
    explained that circumstances over  and  above  the  exceptions  do  not
    necessarily mean that the test can only be satisfied  where  there  are
    circumstances  or  considerations  which   are   independent   of   the
    exceptions. There may be cases where the circumstances  are  compelling
    because the exception is not merely  satisfied  but  is  engaged  in  a
    particularly robust way so as to provide a very strong article 8  claim
    capable on its own of amounting to compelling circumstances and a  wide
    -ranging evaluative exercise is required under section 117C(6).

129. This was not the test applied by the FtTJ in her  analysis  culminating
    in her conclusion at [66] and there were factors and evidence which was
    not either analysed or reasoned  and  were  therefore  not  taken  into
    account. Exception 1 refers to the matters relevant to private life  of
    the person concerned and in particular social and cultural  integration
    and whether there will be very significant obstacles to the appellant's
    reintegration to the country  to  which  they  would  be  deported.  No
    findings were made concerning those issues  relating  to  private  life
    established in the UK and they would have relevance to the  "pro"  side
    of the balance sheet.

130. As to the issue of his relationships in  the  United  Kingdom  and  his
    "family life", he relied upon his relationship with his children A  and
    C.

131. In KO (Nigeria)  at  [23],  the  Supreme  Court  held  that:  '...  the
    expression "unduly harsh" seems clearly intended to introduce a  higher
    hurdle than that of  "reasonableness"  under  section  117B(6),  taking
    account of the public interest in the deportation of foreign criminals.
    Further the word "unduly" implies an element of comparison. It  assumes
    that there is a "due" level of "harshness", that is a level  which  may
    be acceptable or justifiable in the relevant context. "Unduly"  implies
    something going beyond that level.

132. In so far as the  appellant  sought  to  rely  on  the  effect  of  his
    deportation on A and C (who, being British  citizens,  were  qualifying
    children) it would not be enough to show  that  that  effect  would  be
    "unduly harsh", in the  sense  explained  in  KO.  That  would  satisfy
    Exception 1, but because his case  fell  within  section  117C  (6)  he
    needed to show something over and above that, which meant showing  that
    the circumstances in his case were,  in  Jackson  LJ's  phrase  in  NA,
    "especially compelling".

133. However I am satisfied that there was a lack of reasoning and  analysis
    not only by reference to the law but also on the evidence.  Mr  Adewoye
    submitted that the appellant did not rely solely  on  the  relationship
    with the children but other considerations including the welfare of the
    children being affected in the event of  the  mother's  relapse.  Other
    relevant factors related to the  particular  factual  circumstances  of
    this appellant and his immigration history. In the  light  of  sections
    117(1)- (6), the FTT J was required to consider carefully the  offences
    committed by the appellant, which would include  the  later  conviction
    and the appellant's circumstances post-offending. The later  conviction
    in 2013 was not properly explained and it is unclear at paragraphs [63]-
    [64] what finding the judge made about that conviction in the light  of
    the oral given by the appellant's sister and niece. Mr Adewoye has also
    raised the consideration concerning A and whether he had a genuine  and
    subsisting relationship with her. Consequently, there were a number  of
    relevant factors that were not considered and a lack  of  reasoning  in
    the overall conclusion reached and  that  the  wide-ranging  evaluative
    exercise required under s. 117C(6) had not been carried out. For  those
    reasons, I accept that ground 2 is made out.

134. I have therefore had to consider how to proceed. I  have  rejected  the
    appellant's submission that S117B (6) applies and therefore the  appeal
    should be allowed based on his relationship with C. On the basis of the
    arguments advanced as to the error of  law  which  included  inadequate
    reasoning on material issues and failing to take into account  relevant
    factors, I do not consider that the decision can be  fairly  remade  in
    the Upper Tribunal on the evidence as it stands. There were a number of
    gaps in the evidence identified  by  the  FtTJ  and  I  note  that  the
    relationship with A was in its early stages.  It is likely that matters
    have moved on and in fairness to  the  appellant  who  has  to  satisfy
    section 117C (6), he is entitled to rely on further  evidence  that  he
    may wish to provide, both oral evidence documentary evidence.  To  that
    end, given that there is an ISW  report  it  is  not  necessary  for  a
    further report but an addendum setting out  the  position  which  would
    provide a better understanding of any changes in the  family  dynamics,
    including the position of the appellant's wife if the case relating  to
    her is being pursued. The provision of evidence is, of course, a matter
    for the appellant and his legal advisers. The FtTJ's  finding  that  at
    the date of the hearing the appellant was having regular contact with C
    and had a genuine and subsisting relationship with  her  and  that  the
    appellant's wife and C should not be expected  to  relocate  should  be
    preserved findings (at[59] and [61] of FtTJ's decision).

135. I have therefore considered whether it should be remade  in  the  Upper
    Tribunal or remitted to the FtT for a further hearing. In reaching that
    decision I have given  careful  consideration  to  the  Joint  Practice
    Statement of the First-tier Tribunal and Upper Tribunal concerning  the
    disposal of appeals in this Tribunal. That reads as follows:

         "[7.2] The Upper Tribunal  is  likely  on  each  such  occasion  to
         proceed to re-make the decision, instead of remitting the  case  to
         the First-tier Tribunal, unless the  Upper  Tribunal  is  satisfied
         that:-

         (a)  the effect of the error has been to deprive a party before the
             First-tier Tribunal of a fair hearing or other opportunity for
             that party's case to be put to and considered  by  the  First-
             tier Tribunal; or

         (b)  the nature or extent of any judicial  fact  finding  which  is
             necessary in order for the decision in the appeal  to  be  re-
             made is such that, having regard to the  overriding  objective
             in rule 2, it is appropriate to remit the case to  the  First-
             tier Tribunal."

136. In my observations set out in the earlier part of this decision, I  set
    out the did not been clear that the decision had in fact been withdrawn
    as they had been no formal communication of that and as it stood it was
    on the basis of the respondent seeking permission to do so (although in
    my view it is not necessary for permission to be given  to  withdraw  a
    decision), in the light of my assessment above that the decision was  a
    valid and lawful one, it does not need to be  withdrawn  on  the  basis
    that it was originally thought. I proceed therefore on the  basis  that
    as the decision has not been withdrawn and Mr Adewoye  has  not  stated
    that the decision has been formally withdrawn by way  of  service  upon
    his client, there remains an appeal outstanding. Given that it will  be
    necessary for the appellant to give evidence and his family members  to
    deal with the evidential issues, further fact-finding will be necessary
    alongside the analysis identified and in my view the best course is for
    it to be remitted to the FtT for a further hearing.



Notice of Decision

137. The decision of the First-tier  Tribunal  involved  the  making  of  an
    error on a point of law and is therefore  set  aside.   I  re-make  the
    appeal as follows; the appeal is  to  be  remitted  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

which states Unless and until a Tribunal or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
Appellant is granted  anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him or  any  member  of  his  family.   This
direction applies both to the Appellant and to the Respondent.   Failure  to
comply with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Signed
     Date 26/11/2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Reeds
