
[pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07761/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at the Royal Courts of Justice          |Decision & Reasons Promulgated|
|On 16 April 2018                              |On 4 May 2018                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     OO
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Ms E. Fitzsimons, Counsel
For the Respondent:    Mr I. Jarvis, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant,  a  citizen  of  Nigeria,  appealed  to  the  First-tier
    Tribunal against a decision of the respondent dated 10 August  2017  to
    refuse a protection claim. The claim is based on fear of persecution on
    return to Nigeria on the basis of his sexuality as a  bisexual  person,
    and a fear from Ogun religious people.

 2. His appeal came before First-tier Tribunal Judge Housego ("the FtJ") at
    a hearing on 27 October 2017 following which he  dismissed  the  appeal
    the appeal on all grounds.

    The grounds of appeal and submissions

 3. The grounds of appeal assert error on  the  part  of  the  FtJ  in  his
    assessment of the appellant's claimed sexual orientation, in particular
    with reference to the FtJ having found it adverse  to  the  appellant's
    credibility that he did not  disclose  his  claimed  sexuality  at  the
    screening interview. It is contended that in the light of authority, it
    was not permissible for the FtJ to have so concluded with reference  to
    the screening interview. The grounds rely in this respect on A, B, C v.
    Staatssecretaris van Veiligheid en Justitie, C-148/13 to C-150/13.

 4. It  is  further  argued  that  the  FtJ  erred  in  his  assessment  of
    credibility in that he decided against  the  appellant  on  credibility
    before considering the medical evidence. Thus, he  had  discounted  the
    expert medical evidence on the basis  of  earlier  adverse  credibility
    findings. The grounds refer to R  (Beqaraj)  v  A  Special  Adjudicator
    [2002] EWHC 1469 (Admin). In addition, it is  said  that  the  FtJ  had
    erred in his assessment  of  the  medical  evidence  in  terms  of  the
    development of his mental health problems.

 5. It is asserted that the FtJ failed to have regard  to  the  appellant's
    evidence when he concluded that the appellant had offered no reason  as
    to why Ogun worshippers would have attacked him until  the  age  of  15
    when he was not first, but second,  in  line  to  the  priesthood.  The
    appellant's evidence in his witness statement was that the attacks took
    place because of the family's Christianity and refusal to take part  in
    Ogun worship.

 6. As regards the appellant's failure to have provided supporting evidence
    of his relationship with a male 'P', in  the  form  of  any  record  of
    contact, it is argued that the FtJ failed to have regard  to  the  fact
    that both the  appellant  and  P  made  it  clear  that  theirs  was  a
    relationship that was conducted in secret.

 7.  In  submissions,  Ms  Fitzsimons  relied  on  the  grounds,   although
    recognising what was said in the grant of permission as to the relative
    strength (or not) of aspects of the grounds. As to  the  second  ground
    (erroneous approach to the medical evidence).  it  was  submitted  that
    although at [62] the FtJ had said that he had  considered  the  medical
    evidence of Dr Wootton, he had already found against the  appellant  on
    credibility.

 8. Similarly, reference was made to [75] of the decision. Dr  Wootton  had
    said that  the  appellant's  PTSD  and  depression  had  pre-dated  his
    detention, contrary to the FtJ's conclusion.

 9. It was accepted that there was no absolute bar on taking  into  account
    in relation to credibility that a person did not disclose their  sexual
    orientation at  a  screening  interview,  but  a  judge  needed  to  be
    conscious of the fact that there may be particular reasons as  to  that
    lack of disclosure.

10. In terms of the fear of persecution  from  Ogun  members  and  internal
    relocation, whilst there  was  no  objective  evidence  that  the  risk
    extended to all parts of the country, the appellant's vulnerability  in
    that context needed to be taken into account.

11. In his submissions Mr Jarvis relied on the decision in HH (Ethiopia)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home  Department  [2007]  EWCA  Civ  306  in
    relation to the limitations of the 'Mibanga' point (adverse credibility
    findings before assessment of medical evidence) in  the  assessment  of
    credibility. It was submitted that the FtJ here had merely stated  that
    there were points adverse to the appellant's credibility and he had not
    sidelined the medical evidence.

12. The FtJ had accepted that the appellant was  a  vulnerable  person.  At
    [40] he explained how he had dealt with  the  tone  in  the  Presenting
    Officer's questions of the appellant. Relevant "caveats,  measures  and
    protections" in relation to the appellant's vulnerability were  adopted
    by the FtJ. At [88] he said that the  appellant  did  not  struggle  to
    recollect matters at the hearing and he responded to questions  without
    difficulty in comprehension.

13. The FtJ gave sustainable reasons at [73] for finding  it  difficult  to
    accept the appellant's account of the causes of trauma in  relation  to
    his PTSD.

14. As to the late disclosure of his sexuality, it was submitted that A, B,
    C did not say that late disclosure could never be taken  into  account.
    In this case there were various factors  that  adversely  affected  the
    appellant's credibility such as the lack  of  a  death  certificate  in
    relation to the appellant's father in addition to the delay  in  making
    the claim. At [82] the FtJ had considered the issue of reticence  about
    disclosure. He was entitled to find  the  appellant's  account  of  his
    relationship with P incredible for the several reasons that he gave.

15. He had also given various reasons for  not  accepting  the  appellant's
    account of a fear of the Ogun, for example at [78.2]-[78.3].

    The FtJ's decision

16. A further summary of the FtJ's decision is necessary in order to put my
    conclusions into context.

17. The FtJ set out the basis of the appellant's claim which was  that  his
    father died after being threatened and attacked for refusing to  become
    an Ogun priest. The appellant claimed that he had been branded  by  the
    Ogun when he was a child and he had problems with them after his father
    died as they wanted the appellant to become an Ogun priest.  They  came
    to his home three or four times. The appellant  kept  moving  but  they
    followed him. The police had refused to help because they said that  it
    was a tribal matter.

18. The appellant's case was that he realised that he was bisexual in 2011.
    He had been in a sexual relationship with a woman, VA, but she was  now
    in Nigeria. He had had a same-sex relationship with P for  about  three
    or four years but had kept the  relationship  discreet  so  that  other
    Nigerians would not find out.

19. The FtJ set out the appellant's immigration history which included  his
    having been convicted  in  April  2017  of  possession  or  control  of
    identity documents with intent, for which he received a sentence of six
    months' imprisonment.

20. The screening interview in relation to his asylum claim took  place  on
    19 June 2017 and there he said that he feared persecution by  the  Ogun
    as the only reason for his claim. The substantive asylum interview took
    place on 29 June 2017.

21. The FtJ  cited  and  quoted  from  various  authorities  and  statutory
    provisions, and summarised the evidence that  he  had  before  him.  He
    noted that there was a document that the appellant signed when  he  was
    in Wormwood Scrubs prison stating that he had never seen a  GP  in  the
    seven years that he had been in the UK and that  he  had  two  children
    born in Nigeria in 2004 and 2008. In response to  the  question  as  to
    whether there were any reasons why he could not return to  Nigeria,  it
    stated that he has a religious problem and that his family wants him to
    become "a" but the document was incomplete.

22. The FtJ recorded in his decision the steps he took  to  accede  to  the
    request to treat the appellant as a vulnerable  person.  The  appellant
    and P gave evidence.

23. He made a number of detailed findings. He found that the appellant  was
    from the Yoruba tribe and has ritual scars inflicted when he was a boy.
    He had a wife and two children in Nigeria with whom he is in touch.  He
    came to the UK in 2009 on his own passport with a genuine visa  but  it
    had been obtained by deception. He had overstayed his visa  as  he  had
    always intended to do. He had obtained a false passport which bore  his
    photograph and he used the  passport  to  remain  in  the  UK  to  work
    illegally. He was imprisoned for that offence.

24. He claimed asylum on 10 April 2017 on the basis of a fear of  the  Ogun
    and on 29 June 2017 in the substantive interview on the  basis  of  his
    sexuality.

25. At [61] he concluded  that  there  was  no  contradiction  between  the
    screening interview and the asylum  interview  in  terms  of  when  his
    father died, having  interpreted  the  manuscript  screening  interview
    notes.

26. At [62] he said that he had  read  and  noted  carefully  Dr  Wootton's
    report to the effect that the appellant has PTSD and  depression,  "and
    borne in mind what he reported when considering the  evidence  in  this
    appeal".

27. He went on to conclude that there were several credibility issues  that
    arose. He found that the whole of the appellant's stay in  the  UK  was
    based on deceit from the very beginning when he paid an agent to obtain
    a visa for him on entirely false grounds.  He  had  then  intentionally
    overstayed and that that was his reason for obtaining the visa  in  the
    first place. His assertion that someone was kind enough  to  arrange  a
    false passport for him for nothing so that he could work illegally, was
    found to be highly implausible.

28. He noted that the appellant only claimed asylum on 10 April  2017  even
    though he was arrested on 14 March 2017 and given notice of removal  on
    16 March 2017. He referred to the fact that even then his claim was  on
    the basis of a fear of the Ogun and that he did not raise the issue  of
    his sexuality until the asylum interview on 29 June 2017.

29. He noted that the appellant's  claim  was  that  he  always  knew  that
    bisexuality was a problem in Nigeria and that the reason he could  give
    no external evidence of the relationship (with P) was that he  kept  it
    secret, because even in the UK it was a problem if  Nigerians  came  to
    know about it. He concluded at [66] that in those  circumstances  there
    was every reason to raise this in the screening interview if it  was  a
    genuine fear, with the question in the screening interview having  been
    very clear. The FtJ said that this was not a  case  where  caution  was
    required in  assessing  what  was  said  in  the  screening  interview,
    referring to the decision of YL (Rely  on  SEF  )  China  [2004]  UKIAT
    00145. In that context he said that he took into account the subsequent
    diagnosis of  PTSD,  anxiety  and  depression  and  noted  the  medical
    evidence that it was the detention  that  had  adversely  affected  his
    mental health. In that respect he said that the appellant had not  been
    detained long at the time of the screening interview.

30. At [67] he said that although the appellant's witness  statements  were
    to the effect that there were attacks by the Ogun until  the  appellant
    was aged 15, there  was  no  reason  as  to  why  that  should  be  so,
    particularly as the evidence was that the appellant was second in  line
    to the priesthood and so not a likely target for  attack.  He  observed
    that neither the s.120 statement of additional grounds nor  the  asylum
    interview mentioned attacks  up  to  the  age  of  15.  In  the  asylum
    interview in response to question 31 (he said '13' by mistake) he  said
    that those problems started  after  the  death  of  his  father  on  10
    February 2007. That answer, I note, was confirmed in answer to question
    48.

31. At [68] he referred to the appellant having changed his  account  about
    the attacks on him when asked how it was that the  Ogun  had  not  been
    able to kill him despite having followed him everywhere and  had  years
    to do so. He described this as "classic trimming of an account".

32. The FtJ then referred to what is in Dr Wootton's report about an attack
    on his father in 2006 when he defended his father and when he says that
    he was beaten and attacked with knives and machetes. He noted that  the
    witness statement omits the "surely memorable if true" event of  having
    to defend his father in that attack. He  referred  to  the  appellant's
    oral evidence that his father died three  or  four  months  after  that
    attack when asked about the absence of  a  death  certificate  for  his
    father. The FtJ concluded that the appellant's account varied depending
    on the question asked of him.

33. At [73] he referred to the appellant having said  to  Dr  Wootton  that
    there were three traumas that caused his PTSD. The first was  aged  six
    when three parallel marks were inflicted on his joints with a hot  iron
    to mark him out as an Ogun worshipper. He found that the appellant  has
    some such marks but not on every joint and said that in  oral  evidence
    it became clear that this was a Yoruba tribal custom inflicted on  many
    Yoruba boys. The second trauma was in 2001, being cut with cutlasses on
    his legs when he refused to bow down and pray, but that did not feature
    elsewhere in his account. The third was the attack on his  father,  but
    that was not a matter that was  in  his  witness  statement  or  asylum
    interview.

34. He concluded that the scars that the appellant has are tribal scars and
    nothing to do with Ogun worshippers.

35. He next observed that any  psychiatrist  is  highly  dependent  on  the
    account given by the patient. He noted that Dr Wootton opined that  the
    anxiety and depression only really developed whilst the  appellant  had
    been in prison. He said that there were issues with the reports of  the
    traumas that the appellant told Dr Wootton about. He said that  he  did
    not doubt  the  diagnosis  in  the  medical  report,  but  the  present
    diagnosis the doctor had said was  connected  with  his  detention.  He
    concluded that the diagnosis was not based on the traumas  reported  by
    the appellant to the doctor "as the traumas are largely  not  credible,
    and so could not be its cause."

36. The FtJ then said that:

         "Tribal scars were inflicted on the appellant as a child, and  that
         account is credibility (sic), and the Dr finds it to be  the  cause
         of the PTSD he diagnosed."

37. At [76] he referred to the appellant's account that he had fled Nigeria
    in fear of his life but had not claimed asylum  because  he  could  not
    afford the �1,500 fee that a solicitor was to charge  him  and  because
    fellow Nigerians told him just to stay and not claim otherwise he would
    be sent back. However, the FtJ also noted that the appellant knew  that
    he wanted to claim asylum but did not do so in the seven years that  he
    was in the UK until after his arrest, and even though he had a job  for
    much of that time and would have been able to pay for representation.

38. Although the appellant claimed that his father was killed by  the  Ogun
    he had not obtained a death certificate, claiming  that  there  was  no
    time. He had however said that he  knew  the  date  and  place  of  his
    father's death, and getting a certificate would not have been too  much
    to expect, it being a key fact in his claim. The FtJ said that this was
    "a TK (Burundi) v SSHD [2009] EWCA Civ 40 point". Further, although the
    appellant had said that his father died three or four months after  the
    last attack, this was not a matter that the appellant had said prior to
    his oral evidence.

39. He referred at [78.3] to the appellant having said that  he  had  moved
    repeatedly, then changing that to twice, with two attacks in each place
    that he moved to. Although he said in evidence that he had  received  a
    threat by telephone when he was in Lagos, that is not something that he
    had said previously.

40. As regards his relationship with  P,  the  FtJ  noted  that  there  was
    nothing to evidence that relationship which is said to have lasted  for
    three to four  years,  save  for  two  "anodyne"  photographs  of  them
    together. There were no text  messages  in  relation  to  any  arranged
    meetings. He concluded that even if their relationship was one that was
    secret for P as he had to conceal it from his wife, there was no reason
    for the appellant not keeping, and  perhaps  treasuring,  the  contacts
    with P with whom he wants to live and whom he  hoped  would  leave  his
    wife and children for him.  He  concluded  that  the  absence  of  such
    evidence damaged his credibility.

41. At [80] the FtJ said that P knew very little about the appellant's life
    or the problems  that  he  faced.  Whilst  it  was  possible  that  the
    appellant might not have wanted to talk about his  problems  to  anyone
    before his arrest, that  absence  of  knowledge  was  relevant  to  the
    credibility assessment. That was so because theirs was not said  to  be
    simply a physical relationship but one of love such that P  was  trying
    to summon up the courage to leave his wife to  be  with  the  appellant
    permanently. The FtJ concluded that in those circumstances it  was  not
    credible that the appellant would not share his life  experiences  with
    P.

42. At [84], after the bulk of the conclusions on credibility, the FtJ said
    that the appellant was able to  name  one  pub  where  he  and  P  went
    together, but said that plainly they were very good friends  and  would
    doubtless go to the pub together.

43. The FtJ went on to state that the other  (general)  credibility  issues
    were relevant to the claim, namely a false visa and passport,  as  well
    as the chronology of the claim. The credibility issues in  relation  to
    the Ogun claim were relevant to the assessment of credibility in  terms
    of the claim to be bisexual, he found,  although  noting  that  it  was
    possible to be untruthful about one aspect  of  a  claim  but  not  the
    other.

44. At [82], in relation to the submission that the appellant may have been
    reticent in discussing matters of his sexuality, he concluded  that  if
    the fear was genuine "that is not of great weight" with the more likely
    conclusion being that the appellant is not bisexual, or  if  he  is  he
    does not fear return on that account. The medical evidence was  not  to
    the effect that his PTSD affected his ability or willingness to  reveal
    his sexuality.

45. He dismissed the Article  8  ground  of  appeal.  He  referred  to  the
    'vulnerability guidance' in terms of an explanation of how his decision
    complied with it.

    Assessment and Conclusions

46. Although the FtJ said at [2] that a decision was  made  to  deport  the
    appellant pursuant to section 5(1) of the Immigration Act 1971, such  a
    decision is not apparent from the documents that were  before  him.  At
    the hearing before me, Mr Jarvis agreed to clarify that matter  and  to
    provide any information in that regard post-hearing. That has now  been
    done and it appears that no decision to make a  deportation  order  has
    been made by the respondent.

47. There is no distinct challenge to the FtJ's decision in  terms  of  its
    conclusions in relation to Article 8.

48. I am not satisfied that there is any error of law in the FtJ's decision
    in relation to his conclusion that the timing  of  the  claim  and  the
    appellant's failure to have mentioned his sexuality  in  the  screening
    interview were adverse to his credibility. As is clear from my  summary
    of the FtJ's decision at [29] above in this respect, the FtJ  was  well
    aware of the need for caution when considering  whether  a  failure  to
    disclose a relevant matter in a screening interview  adversely  affects
    credibility. He referred to relevant authority on the point. It is also
    worth reiterating that at [61] of  his  decision  he  resolved  in  the
    appellant's favour a suggested contradiction as between  the  screening
    interview and asylum interview.

49. He also referred at [49] to the decision in A, B, C  which  gives  some
    guidance on the issue of reticence in  disclosing  sexuality.  Although
    admittedly he did not  refer  in  detail  to  what  was  said  in  that
    decision, he did not need to.

50. It is also important to bear in mind in  this  context  that  even  the
    claim of a fear of persecution  by  the  Ogun  was  a  claim  that  was
    characterised by significant delay.

51. As to the timing of  the  asylum  claim  generally,  at  [48]  the  FtJ
    referred to the decision of  TP  (Credibility)  Zimbabwe  [2004]  UKIAT
    00159 in relation to circumstances where the lateness of a claim may of
    itself mean that a claim is incredible. He said that the chronology  in
    this appellant's case was such that his immigration  history  was  very
    unsatisfactory, but he concluded that he should not dismiss  the  claim
    on the basis only of the timing of the claim.

52. Prior to his conclusions about the adverse credibility of the appellant
    not mentioning his sexuality in the screening interview,  the  FtJ  had
    said at [63] that the appellant's whole stay in the  UK  was  based  on
    deceit from the very beginning (as set out in my [27] above).

53. In my judgement there is no merit in the complaint in relation  to  the
    FtJ's conclusions on credibility as to the lateness of  the  claim  and
    the fact that a very significant part of it was not  mentioned  in  the
    screening interview.

54. As to the FtJ's approach to the medical evidence, I do not  accept  the
    contention that the FtJ, in effect, sidelined the medical  evidence  by
    virtue of having dismissed the credibility of the  appellant's  account
    without taking into account  the  medical  evidence  as  part  of  that
    assessment. In the first place, it is important to note  what  the  FtJ
    said at [49] under the  subheading  "Approach  to  findings  of  fact",
    namely  that  he  had  bore  in  mind  the  diagnosis  of  PTSD.   More
    significantly in this context, under his "Findings"  he  said  at  [62]
    that he had read and noted carefully the  conclusions  of  Dr  Wootton,
    that the appellant has PTSD and depression "and borne in mind  what  he
    reported when considering the evidence in this appeal."

55. In my view it is clear from those preliminary observations that the FtJ
    did  take  into  account  the  medical  evidence  when  assessing   the
    appellant's credibility.

56. Furthermore, I have summarised what the FtJ  said  at  [75]  about  the
    medical report having been  dependent  on  the  account  given  to  its
    author. He was entitled to take into account what he described  as  the
    "issues with the reports of the traumas of which the appellant told the
    doctor". The appellant's account of the traumas  was  problematic,  for
    the reasons that the FtJ had earlier given.

57. At my [36] above I have quoted what the FtJ said in the final  sentence
    of his [75]. In that sentence it would seem that the FtJ meant  to  use
    the word 'credible' rather than "credibility". Thus, what he was saying
    was simply that the appellant did have scars  inflicted  on  him  as  a
    child, but they were  tribal  scars,  and  the  doctor  had  found  the
    infliction of those scars to be the cause of his PTSD.

58. There is furthermore, merit in the submissions made on  behalf  of  the
    respondent in terms of what was said on this issue in HH (Ethiopia)  at
    [16], which itself quoted from S v Secretary  of  State  for  the  Home
    Department [2006] EWCA Civ 1153. At [16] one finds the following:

         "In S this court also approved the passage which appears  in  the
         AIT's decision in the present case at paragraph 21. That  reads  as
         follows:


         'The Tribunal considers that there is a  danger  of Mibanga being
         misunderstood. The judgments in that case are not intended to place
         judicial fact-finders in a  form  of  forensic  straightjacket.  In
         particular, the Court of Appeal is not to  be  regarded  as  laying
         down any rule of law as to the order in which judicial fact-finders
         are to approach the  evidential  materials  before  them.  To  take
         Wilson J's 'cake' analogy, all its  ingredients  cannot  be  thrown
         together into the bowl simultaneously. One has to start  somewhere.
         There  was  nothing  illogical  about  the  process  by  which  the
         Immigration Judge  in  the  present  case  chose  to  approach  his
         analytical task.'


         Like this court in the case of S, I respectfully agree  with  that
         passage."

59. In relation to the appellant's  claimed  fear  of  the  Ogun,  the  FtJ
    highlighted various inconsistencies  in  his  account  of  the  adverse
    attention that he claims he and  his  father  were  subjected  to.  His
    account of the attack on, and the death of, his father was inconsistent
    or otherwise inherently implausible.

60. As regards his sexuality, other than the lateness  of  the  claim  even
    within the claim for asylum which was itself very tardy,  the  FtJ  was
    entitled to take into account the lack of supporting evidence from  the
    appellant of his relationship with P. He was aware that the appellant's
    claim was that the relationship was said  to  have  been  conducted  in
    secret. The FtJ was entitled to conclude that it was reasonable to have
    expected the appellant to have kept some evidence of his contacts  with
    P given what they both said was the depth of their relationship.


61. In addition, it was plainly relevant that on the  FtJ's  assessment  of
    the evidence, P knew very little about  the  appellant's  life  or  the
    problems that he claims to have faced, particularly in the  context  of
    their claimed feelings for each other.

62. In the appellant's grounds reference is made to the  'rule  35'  report
    that was before the FtJ which records scars  on  the  appellant's  body
    which are described as lacerations. It is argued that those  scars  are
    distinct from the ritual scarring of three parallel burn marks, yet the
    FtJ failed to deal with this evidence.

63. However, I cannot see that the FtJ's failure to  assess  this  evidence
    undermines his credibility assessment in any respect  bearing  in  mind
    the breadth of his analysis and the many and varied reasons he gave for
    rejecting the credibility of the appellant's account.


64. Similarly, in relation to what the FtJ said in terms of  the  appellant
    not having given any reason for the attacks on him  prior  to  age  15,
    given that the appellant claims to have been  second  in  line  to  the
    priesthood.  Although  it  is  argued  that  the  appellant's   witness
    statement states that the motivation for the attacks was  his  family's
    Christianity and refusal to participate  in  Ogun  worship,  the  FtJ's
    failure to consider that part of his evidence does  not  undermine  the
    adverse credibility assessment  either.  The  appellant's  evidence  in
    relation to those incidents was inherently unsatisfactory in any event.


65. I am not satisfied that the FtJ erred in law in his assessment  of  the
    appellant's claim in any respect. His decision to  dismiss  the  appeal
    must therefore stand.

    Decision

66. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal did not involve the  making  of
    an error on a point of law. His decision to dismiss the appeal stands.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 24/04/18



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Given the nature of the claim and the background to it, unless and  until  a
Tribunal or court directs otherwise, the  appellant  is  granted  anonymity.
No report of these proceedings shall directly or indirectly identify him  or
any member of his family.  This direction applies both to the appellant  and
to the respondent.  Failure to comply with  this  direction  could  lead  to
contempt of court proceedings.

