
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                        Appeal Number:
PA/07773/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Newport                         |  Decision & Reasons Promulgated    |
|On 4 October 2017                        |  On 30 October 2017                |
|                                         |                                    |


                                   Before

                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE GRUBB
                 DR H H STOREY, JUDGE OF THE UPPER TRIBUNAL


                                   Between

                                     b s
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     No appearance
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS


1.   The appellant, a national of Libya and member of  the  Tebu  tribe  has
    permission to challenge a decision of First-tier Tribunal  (FtT)  Judge
    Hussain  sent  on  15  March  2017  dismissing  his   application   for
    international protection.  Having found  that  the  appellant  had  not
    given a credible account of  past  difficulties  in  Libya,  the  judge
    turned to consider the "main plank" of the appellant's claim  based  on
    real  risk  of  serious  harm  contrary  to  Article   15(c)   of   the
    Qualification  Directive  (2004/83/EC).   The  judge  noted  that   the
    appellant contended that circumstances in Libya had changed  since  the
    country guidance case of FA (Libya: art 15(c))  Libya  CG  [2016]  UKUT
    00413 (IAC) which held that risk had to be determined on a case-by-case
    basis.  The judge stated at paragraph 16 that the  appellant  acted  on
    "the cessation of direct flights from the UK to Libya, the ebb and flow
    of fighting, the rise in Daesh and the issue of  numerous  reports  and
    advice by the Foreign and Commonwealth Office".  The judge proceeded to
    find that Tripoli International Airport reopened on  16  February  2017
    and in any case, Mitiga Airport was still a safe route in; and that the
    appellant had failed to substantiate his claim that there was a general
    risk to members of the Tebu tribe.  At paragraph 19 the judge stated:

     "In his witness statement, the appellant argues that he could not  stay
         in Tripoli because it is controlled by Libya Dawn  and  the  Zwayia
         tribe are a part of the alliance and because of the enmity  between
         them and the Tebu, that he would face certain death if returned  to
         Tripoli.  The appellant does not argue that  there  is  a  specific
         risk towards him but rather that there is a general risk to members
         of  the  Tebu  tribe.   This  is  mere  speculation  on  his   part
         unsupported by any credible evidence.   As  I  have  already  said,
         there is no credible evidence to show  that  members  of  the  Tebu
         tribe have been targeted in Tripoli nor that they  have  faced  any
         problems there.  Nor has the appellant  shown  that  the  level  of
         violence in Tripoli has reached or surpassed the test identified in
         Elgafaji.  In short, the appellant has  not  shown  that  there  is
         either a specific or general risk to him under Article 15(c) if  he
         is returned to Tripoli.  I am therefore satisfied that it would  be
         safe to return the appellant to Tripoli where he has lived for many
         years.  He is highly educated and from an affluent background.   He
         was able to live in Tripoli, on his evidence,  from  2007  to  2012
         before returning to the United Kingdom.   His  background  evidence
         shows that he supported himself in Tripoli whilst  he  lived  there
         and he has  not  put  forward  any  credible  evidence  to  suggest
         otherwise."

2.   The judge stated  that  the  latest  Home  Office  Country  Policy  and
    Information Note on Libya dated January 2017 had concluded there was no
    general Article 15(c) risk in Libya and "[s]uch objective evidence as I
    was referred to by the appellant from his  voluminous  bundle  did  not
    persuade me otherwise" and that "the Home Office Policy and Information
    Note is "specific to the task and carries more  weight  [than  the  FCO
    travel advice]".

3.   At the hearing before us there was no appearance by  or  on  behalf  of
    the appellant.  There was however a  letter  from  his  representatives
    explaining that they would not be attending and asking the UT  to  deal
    with the case on the papers.  Having considered the matter  we  decided
    to proceed with the hearing in the absence of one of the parties.

4.   The grounds of appeal contained three  grounds,  the  first  contending
    that the judge had failed to engage with the evidence showing the  Tebu
    tribe was targeted; the second contending that the  judge's  assessment
    that the appellant would have a safe route of return  was  contrary  to
    the evidence; and the third arguing that the judge had erred in failing
    to engage with what the judge  said  was  the  appellant's  "voluminous
    evidence"  demonstrating  a  general  Article  15(c)  risk  to   Libyan
    civilians.

5.   Prior to the hearing the respondent wrote to the appellant and  the  UT
    conceding that the judge materially  erred  in  law.   We  accept  that
    concession and consider it properly made  -  in  view  of  the  evident
    failure of the judge to state any reason for preferring the Home Office
    Country Information and Policy report to the various  reports  produced
    by the appellant indicating the level  of  indiscriminate  violence  in
    Libya was now so high as to demonstrate that there was an Article 15(c)
    general risk to Libyan civilians.  Furthermore, we note  that  much  of
    the contents  of  the  materials  produced  by  the  appellant  in  his
    "voluminous evidence" was the same as that relied on by the UT as short
    a time as two months later to find that there was now a general Article
    15(c) risk to civilians in Libya: see ZMM [2017] UKUT  91  (IAC)  which
    was heard on 3 May 2017.  The decision of the FtT judge is  hereby  set
    aside for material error of law.

Re-making the decision

6.   Having found a material error of law we turn to re-make  the  decision.
    We find that there is no evidence before us justifying a departure form
    the finding in ZMM that there is currently a general Article 15(c) risk
    to civilians in Libya and that the appellant is a civilian.  He is thus
    entitled to humanitarian protection  unless  he  can  establish  he  is
    entitled to asylum.

7.   In a letter explaining that neither the appellant  nor  anyone  on  his
    behalf would be attending, the appellant's representatives stated  that
    they still relied on the grounds  contending  that  the  appellant  was
    entitled to asylum status.

8.   We do not find the appellant has established that  he  is  entitled  to
    asylum.  His grounds fail to  raise  any  effective  challenge  to  the
    judge's adverse credibility findings as set out at  paragraph  14.   As
    regards the claim made in the grounds  that  there  is  clear  evidence
    establishing a general risk of harm to members of the  Tebu  tribe,  we
    find that claim to lack substantiation.  Whilst we have set  aside  the
    decision of the FtT judge on the issue of general Article  15(c)  risk,
    we see no basis for departing from his finding that the  appellant  had
    failed to substantiate his claim that members of  the  Tebu  tribe  are
    persecuted in Libya.  The grounds fail to identify any  report  stating
    that.  We have looked at the background evidence before the  FtT  judge
    and of course had also had regard to the evidential foundation for  the
    conclusions of the UT in ZMM.  The most the background  evidence  shows
    is that Tebu militias have  been  engaged  in  fighting;not  that  Tebu
    civilians have faced persecution.

9.   For the above reasons we conclude that:

     The decision of the FtT judge is set aside for material error of law.

     The decision we re-make is to dismiss the  appellant's  asylum  grounds
         of appeal but allow his appeal on humanitarian  protection  grounds
         only.


Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.






Signed   [pic]                      Date: 27 October 2017


Dr H H Storey
Judge of the Upper Tribunal


