
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07499/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                     |Decision & Reasons Promulgated     |
|On 7 January 2019                        |On 28 January 2019                 |
|                                              |                              |

                                   Before

                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION made)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr R Toal, Counsel instructed by Wilsons Solicitors
For the Respondent:    Mr J McGirr, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

 1. The appellant is a citizen of Somalia born in 1997.  On  24  July  2017
    the respondent made a decision to refuse a human rights claim  made  by
    the appellant, the effect of which was a decision to deport  him  as  a
    result of his criminal offending.  His appeal  came  before  First-tier
    Tribunal Judge Wyman ("the FtTJ") who allowed the appeal on Articles  3
    and 8 grounds.  In relation to humanitarian  protection,  her  decision
    was unclear.

 2. Both parties appealed against the FtTJ's decision and the  appeal  came
    before me and Yip J at a hearing on 12 June 2018. We decided that there
    was no error of law in the  FtTJ's  decision  allowing  the  appeal  on
    Article 8 grounds but that the FtTJ had  erred  in  her  assessment  of
    Article 3, having regard to the decision of  the  Court  of  Appeal  in
    Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA Civ  442.
    Our initial (error of law) decision is included as  an  annex  to  this
    decision on re-making and reference should be made to it for  the  full
    background to the appeal, including our assessment and  conclusions  in
    respect of the decision of the FtTJ.

 3. As is clear from our error  of  law  decision,  the  re-making  of  the
    decision is concerned with Article 3 and humanitarian  protection.   At
    this point it is useful to quote what we  said  in  our  error  of  law
    decision in respect of Article 3 and humanitarian protection.  At [33]-
    [38] we said as follows:

         "Ground 3: Article 3

         33.   The  Respondent  challenges  the  FtTJ's  decision  that  the
             Appellant's Article 3 rights would be breached on return.  The
             Respondent submits that the FtTJ failed to give clear  reasons
             for her conclusion.  The Respondent also  complains  that  the
             FtTJ failed to take account of assistance available  from  the
             Facilitated Returns Scheme or the possibility of clan support.
              It is also contended that, having found  that  the  Appellant
             was unskilled, she failed to take account of the  prospect  of
             unskilled work or self-employment, given the economic boom  in
             Mogadishu.  Mr Avery  suggested  that  an  able-bodied  person
             should not have a difficulty in reintegrating.

         34.  Mr Hoshi for the Appellant argues  that  this  aspect  of  the
             FtTJ's decision as well-reasoned.  He says that the FtTJ  went
             through the checklist in MOJ carefully, explaining her finding
             that he would be destitute on return.   He  contends  that  no
             error of law has been identified  and  that  Ground  3  is  in
             reality just a bare disagreement with the FtTJ's decision.

         35.  The FtTJ set out the County Guidance from the headnote of  MOJ
             in full.   However,  she  did  not  refer  to  the  subsequent
             decision of the Court of Appeal in Secretary of State for  the
             Home Department v Said  [2016]  EWCA  Civ  442,  to  which  we
             referred the parties.  It would appear that Said was  probably
             not drawn to her attention.  Indeed, it was not relied upon in
             the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal.

         36.  In Said, Burnett LJ said [28]:

                  "I am unable to accept that if a Somali national were able
                  to bring himself within the rubric of para 408,  he  would
                  have established that his removal to Somalia would  breach
                  article 3 of the Convention.  Such an  approach  would  be
                  inconsistent   with   the    domestic    and    Convention
                  jurisprudence ..."

             Paragraph 408 deals with the point  included  as  xi.  in  the
         headnote.

         37.  Although the FtTJ did carefully consider the checklist in  MOJ
             and, as we have  already  indicated,  made  important  factual
             findings, including that the Appellant would not  be  able  to
             rely on clan support, it appears from her  judgment  that  she
             regarded an assessment that  the  Appellant  fell  within  the
             category described at xi. in the headnote as the  end  of  the
             matter.  Having regard to Said, this represents  an  error  of
             law and we do not consider that the FtTJ's finding in relation
             to Article 3 can be maintained.

         38.  Having concluded that the FtTJ erred in law in her conclusions
             in relation to humanitarian protection and Article 3,  we  set
             aside those parts of her decision (in so far as it can be said
             that she made any decision on  humanitarian  protection).   We
             consider that there needs to be a further hearing in the Upper
             Tribunal for a re-making of the  decision  in  those  respects
             only. The FtTJ's decision to allow the  appeal  on  Article  8
             grounds on the basis that he came  within  para.  399A  is  to
             stand."

 4. At the resumed hearing before me sitting alone,  Mr  Toal's  focus  was
    solely in relation to Article 3.  He accepted that  the  appellant  had
    been convicted of a serious crime (the offences  having  been  robbery,
    attempted robbery, two counts of possessing an  imitation  firearm  and
    one of having a blade in a public place, for which he received a  total
    sentence of five years' detention).  Mr  Toal  said  that  he  was  not
    arguing that the appellant should not  be  excluded  from  humanitarian
    protection.

    Submissions

 5. Mr Toal relied on his skeleton argument which represents a detailed and
    comprehensive articulation of his reasons for  arguing  that  what  was
    said in said in Said by Burnett LJ was both obiter and indeed wrong  in
    law.

 6. I summarise the written  and  oral  submissions  as  follows.   In  the
    skeleton argument Mr Toal refers to existing country guidance decisions
    in relation to Somalia, namely NM and  Others  (Lone  women  -  Ashraf)
    Somalia  CG  [2005]  UKIAT  00076,  HH  and  others  (Mogadishu:  armed
    conflict: risk)  Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  0022,  AM  and  AM  (armed
    conflict: risk categories) Somalia  CG  [2008]  UKAIT  00091,  AMM  and
    others (conflict;  humanitarian  crisis;  returnees;  FGM)  Somalia  CG
    [2011] UKUT 00445 (IAC) and MOJ & Ors (Return to Mogadishu) Somalia  CG
    [2014]  UKUT  00442  (IAC).   What  was  said  in  those  cases   about
    humanitarian conditions and displaced persons, and the circumstances of
    those being forced to live in IDP camps was highlighted.

 7. It is argued that what was said in Said by Burnett LJ about MOJ  &  Ors
    failed to take into account  the  wealth  and  analysis  of  background
    material that was  before  the  Tribunals  that  issued  those  country
    guidance decisions, in particular the Tribunal in MOJ  &  Ors,  and  is
    thus wrong in law. It is further argued that in any event what was said
    in Said was obiter, as could be seen from, for example,  [32]  of  that
    decision.  It is pointed out that in Said there was no reference to the
    Tribunal's earlier country guidance concerning  the  issue  of  whether
    having to live in an IDP camp would breach  Article  3.   Thus,  it  is
    argued  that  what  was  said  in  Said  misunderstood  the  Tribunal's
    reasoning in MOJ & Ors.

 8. In contrast, the decision in MOJ & Ors was  "entirely  congruent"  with
    Article 15(b)/Article 3.  Furthermore, the suggestion at [28]  of  Said
    to the effect that [407(h)] of MOJ & Ors may have been  concerned  with
    internal relocation is not consistent with what was said in MOJ  &  Ors
    itself.

 9. The appellant relies on what was said in Secretary  of  State  for  the
    Home Department v AH (Sudan) [2007] UKHL 49 about an expert  Tribunal's
    assessment of the law in its specialised field and  the  caution  which
    should be exercised concerning appeals  from  such  Tribunals.   It  is
    argued that there is a presumption that the expert Tribunal  will  have
    correctly understood and applied the law unless it  is  clear  that  it
    misdirected itself in law.  Thus, Said should not have interfered  with
    the country guidance given by the specialist Tribunal in MOJ & Ors.

10. In his oral submissions Mr Toal amplified  his  arguments,  emphasising
    what I may describe as the 'chain  of  assessment'  in  the  Tribunal's
    country guidance cases of the  issue  of  IDP  camps  and  humanitarian
    conditions.  It was submitted that it is established  that  exceptional
    circumstances may lead to  a  breach  of  Article  3  as  a  result  of
    humanitarian conditions, as was in fact accepted in Said at [14].

11. The decision in AH (Sudan) was emphasised in terms of its applicability
    to the judgment of the  Court  of  Appeal  in  Said.   It  was  further
    emphasised that the panel of judges in MOJ &  Ors  was  a  particularly
    senior panel.  It was thus submitted that  it  was  inconceivable  that
    such an experienced Tribunal would have fallen into the error suggested
    by Burnett LJ in Said.

12. It was acknowledged on behalf of the appellant, as indeed it was in the
    skeleton argument, that the Court of  Appeal  itself  in  Secretary  of
    State for the Home Department  v  MA  (Somalia)  [2018]  EWCA  Civ  994
    considered itself bound by Said.  However, it was submitted to me  that
    the Court of Appeal was itself mistaken in  treating  Said  as  binding
    because what was said about Article 3 by Burnett  LJ  was  obiter.   In
    addition, Mr Toal submitted that MA merely adopted Said but did not add
    to it.

13. In his submissions Mr McGirr said that Said was good law and should  be
    applied.  It was also suggested that the appellant's submissions before
    me made no reference to Somaliland which is  where  the  appellant  was
    from. It was submitted that it may be possible to return the  appellant
    directly to Hargeisa.  As I understood the submission  it  was  to  the
    effect that that would avoid any possibility of the  appellant  finding
    himself in an IDP camp in or around Mogadishu.

14. In his reply Mr Toal referred me to aspects  of  the  FtTJ's  decision,
    submitting that it was clear  that  she  had  made  her  decision  with
    reference to Somaliland as well as Somalia itself.

    Assessment

15. So far as humanitarian protection is concerned,  as  indicated  at  the
    outset, it was not contested on behalf of the appellant but that he was
    excluded from humanitarian protection.  It is not necessary for  me  to
    consider that matter much further, except to refer to the error of  law
    decision at [12] which sets out the terms of paragraph  339D.   It  was
    accepted that the appellant has been convicted of a serious crime.   It
    is not necessary then, for me to analyse further the respondent's  case
    on this as set out in the decision letter, although noting what is said
    in the error of law  decision  about  the  respondent's  case  in  that
    respect as set out in the decision letter not being entirely clear.  To
    clarify however, I am satisfied that the appellant is  to  be  excluded
    from the grant of humanitarian protection with reference  to  paragraph
    339D(iv) on the basis that there are serious  reasons  for  considering
    that he has committed a serious crime.

16. On the Said point, I can express my conclusions very shortly.  I do not
    accept that what was said by Burnett LJ in Said at [26]  and  [28]  was
    obiter.  The court was considering whether the appellant's  removal  to
    Somalia would amount to a breach of his Article 3 rights.  Quite  apart
    from the detailed legal analysis given by the court on that  point,  at
    [1] the issue to be determined in the appeal was identified as  whether
    the Upper Tribunal was right to conclude that  the  deportation  of  Mr
    Said to Somalia would breach his Article 3 rights.  A factual and legal
    analysis of that issue was undertaken.  What was said at  [32]  in  the
    concluding section of the judgment is not a  basis  for  deciding  that
    what was said was obiter.

17. Furthermore, as was frankly accepted on behalf of the appellant  before
    me, the Court of Appeal in MA (Somalia) itself, at [63], said  that  it
    was bound by the analysis in Said.  It would be a bold step indeed  for
    me to decide that although the Court of Appeal itself said that it  was
    bound by what was said in Said, I should find that I was not  bound  by
    it. To come to such a conclusion the argument before me would  have  to
    be very compelling indeed, and I do not consider it to be so.

18. In any event, even if what was said in Said is obiter, I consider it to
    be of such persuasive authority that I should follow it.

19. The brevity of my conclusions in respect of the arguments  advanced  on
    behalf of the  appellant  plainly  do  not  reflect  the  industry  and
    endeavour involved in the submissions advanced  on  his  behalf.   That
    however, is because I consider it unarguable but that I am bound by the
    decision of the Court of Appeal in Said, just as the  Court  of  Appeal
    itself felt bound by that decision in MA (Somalia).

20. It was not suggested on behalf of the  appellant  that  there  was  any
    other basis by which he could  succeed  in  his  appeal  on  Article  3
    grounds other than that upon which the FtTJ based  her  decision  which
    has been found to be  wrong  in  law  and  set  aside.  The  inevitable
    conclusion is that the appellant's appeal on Article 3 grounds must  be
    dismissed.

    Decision

21. The decision of the First-tier Tribunal involved the making of an error
    on a point of law in its conclusions with reference to Article 3 of the
    ECHR and humanitarian  protection.   Its  decision  in  those  respects
    having been set  aside,  the  appeal  on  Article  3  and  humanitarian
    protection grounds is dismissed.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him or any  member  of  their  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.


Upper Tribunal Judge Kopieczek                                 21/01/19

                            ERROR OF LAW DECISION

                                    [pic]
IAC-AH-     -V1

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)    Appeal Number: PA/07499/2018


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Directions Promulgated    |
|On 12 June 2018                      |                                     |
|                                     |.....................................|
|                                     |..                                   |


                                   Before

                               MRS JUSTICE YIP
                       UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KOPIECZEK


                                   Between

                                     AM
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:
For the Appellant:     Mr B Hoshi, Counsel, instructed by Wilson Solicitors
LLP
For the Respondent:    Mr C Avery, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

 1. The parties are identified as Appellant and Respondent  as  before  the
    First-tier Tribunal.  Both have been granted permission to  appeal  the
    decision of First-tier Tribunal Judge Wyman ("the FtTJ") promulgated on
    22 March 2018  which  allowed  his  appeal  against  deportation  under
    Article 8 and Article 3  grounds  but  did  not  allow  the  appeal  on
    humanitarian protection grounds.

 2. The Appellant's appeal raises  a  single  simple  point,  namely  that,
    having found that the Appellant  was  not  excluded  from  humanitarian
    protection and that his appeal should be allowed on Article 3  grounds,
    the FtTJ ought to have formally  allowed  the  appeal  on  humanitarian
    protection  grounds  pursuant  to  s.  84(1)(b)  of  the   Nationality,
    Immigration and Asylum Act 2002.

 3. The Respondent contends that the  FtTJ  was  wrong  to  find  that  the
    Appellant was not excluded from humanitarian protection  and  that  she
    was wrong to allow the appeal under Article 8 or Article 3.

 4. It is agreed that the Appellant's  appeal  stands  or  falls  with  our
    conclusions on the Respondent's appeal in relation to the findings that
    the Appellant was not excluded from humanitarian  protection  and  that
    his Article 3 rights would be breached if he were returned.

    The background to the appeal

 5. The Appellant is a citizen of Somalia.  He is now aged 20.  He came  to
    the United Kingdom in 2001, aged 4.  The Appellant's mother was granted
    refugee status.  In 2002, the Appellant's brother was granted leave  to
    remain as he had been included on their  mother's  asylum  claim.   The
    Appellant's claim for leave was refused as supporting documentation was
    not provided for him.  In 2007, the Appellant's mother and brother were
    granted  British  citizenship  but  the  Appellant's  application   for
    naturalisation was refused as he did  not  then  have  valid  leave  to
    remain.  He was granted indefinite leave to remain in 2010.

 6. The Appellant began offending as a teenager and further  offending  led
    to a Youth Rehabilitation Order.  He breached the terms of  that  order
    and went on to commit further serious offences.  In July 2013, aged 15,
    he was convicted of two counts of robbery, one attempted  robbery,  two
    counts of possessing an imitation firearm and one of having a blade  in
    a public place.  He was sentenced to a total of five years'  detention.
    That sentence reflected the totality  of  his  offending,  the  longest
    sentence for an individual offence being 36 months on each of  the  two
    robberies.

 7. The Appellant was issued with a decision to deport.  In December  2015,
    he submitted representations as to why he should not be deported.   His
    protection and human rights claims were refused in April  2016.   There
    followed a series of appeals and fresh decisions, as  set  out  in  the
    FtTJ's decision, culminating in the Respondent's decision dated 24 July
    2017 to refuse the Appellant's protection and human rights  claims  and
    to maintain the decision to deport him.  It was against  that  decision
    that the FtTJ allowed his appeal on Article 8 and Article 3 grounds.

    The Respondent's grounds

 8. The Respondent's grounds contend that the FtTJ:

      i. failed to give adequate reasons for finding the Appellant  was  not
         excluded from humanitarian protection;

     ii. erred in law  in  finding  that  the  Appellant  was  socially  and
         culturally integrated in the UK and that he would face  significant
         obstacles to integration if returned to Somalia or Somaliland;

    iii. failed to give adequate reasons and erred in law  in  finding  that
         Article 3 would be breached if the Appellant was returned.

    Ground 1: exclusion from humanitarian protection

 9. The Respondent referred to the very brief reasons given by the FtTJ  at
    paragraphs 122 to 123.  Although the offences were committed while  the
    Appellant was a juvenile, the nature and seriousness  of  the  offences
    and evidence contained in the forensic psychology report of Dr Cordwell
    suggested he remained  a  danger  to  the  community.   Therefore,  the
    Respondent contended, the FtTJ should have found that he  was  excluded
    from humanitarian protection under para. 339D of the Immigration Rules.

10. Mr Hoshi acknowledged that the reasons given by the FtTJ were not  very
    clear.  However, he  defended  the  reasoning  on  the  basis  that  it
    adequately dealt with the submissions made by  the  Respondent  at  the
    hearing.  Mr Hoshi, who appeared below, told us  that  the  submissions
    now being made about the contents of the psychological report  and  the
    risk of re-offending were not made to the  FtTJ.   The  sole  basis  on
    which the Respondent gave for excluding the Appellant from humanitarian
    protection was  "In  view  of  the  sentences  passed  on  you,  it  is
    considered that your crime is serious enough to  justify  the  loss  of
    your protection."  The FtTJ dealt with the Respondent's  contention  on
    the basis of the submissions made to her by noting that  the  Appellant
    was only 15 when sentenced and that, according to the sentencing judge,
    he had been influenced by others.

11. In those  circumstances,  we  have  some  sympathy  for  the  FtTJ  and
    understand the brevity of her reasons.  However, we  do  consider  that
    there was an error of law in this part of her decision.

12. It was not entirely clear which sub-paragraph of para. 339D was  relied
    upon  by  the  Respondent.   Sub-paragraphs   iii   and   iv   required
    consideration.   A  person  will  be  excluded  from   the   grant   of
    humanitarian protection if:

        iii. there are serious reasons for considering that they constitute
             a danger to the community or to the  security  of  the  United
             Kingdom; or

         iv. there are serious  reasons  for  considering  that  they  have
             committed a serious crime;

    Sub-paragraph iv was inserted by an amendment made  in  November  2016.
    However, the Respondent's decision made in July 2017 continued to refer
    to the rule as it was before that amendment.  The Respondent  therefore
    referred to sub-paragraph iii but the reasoning referred  only  to  the
    seriousness of the crime(s) committed by the Appellant.

13. The FtTJ ought to  have  identified  the  relevant  sub-paragraphs  and
    considered all the material evidence with reference to  the  tests  set
    out there.

14. The test for what constitutes a "serious crime" within the  meaning  in
    sub-paragraph iv is not set out in the rules.  Mr Avery suggested it is
    to be decided by reference to s.72 of the Nationality, Immigration  and
    Asylum Act 2002.  Mr Hoshi contended that the presumption that  someone
    convicted of an offence for which they were sentenced to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least two years  shall  be  presumed  to  have  been
    convicted of a particularly serious crime and to constitute a danger to
    the public should not apply here.  The FtTJ  set  out  s.72(2)  in  her
    decision and said that she had taken it into account.  It is not clear,
    however, how she reconciles her conclusion at  paragraph  97  with  the
    conclusion at paragraph 123 that the Appellant  is  not  excluded  from
    humanitarian protection.

15. Some guidance as to the  principles  applicable  in  assessing  whether
    something constitutes a serious crime is to be found in AH (Algeria)  v
    Secretary of State for the Home Department [2012] EWCA Civ  395.   That
    was a case involving exclusion from refugee status  under  Article  1F.
    However, we consider that the reasoning may be applied  in  considering
    the loss of humanitarian protection.  In AH, Ward LJ said [52]:

         "Although an ordinary word, "serious" has shades of meaning and the
         appropriate colour is given by the context in  which  the  word  is
         used.  What may be serious for one purpose may not be  serious  for
         another.  The context here is that the crime which the refugee  has
         committed must be serious enough to justify the withholding of  the
         protection he would otherwise enjoy as  a  person  having  a  well-
         founded fear of persecution ..."

     He went on [54]:

         "Sentence is, of  course,  a  material  factor  but  it  is  not  a
         benchmark.  In deciding whether the  crime  is  serious  enough  to
         justify his loss of protection, the Tribunal must  take  all  facts
         and matters into account, with regard to the nature of  the  crime,
         the part played by the accused in its commission, any mitigating or
         aggravating features and the eventual penalty imposed."

16. It does not seem to us that the FtTJ did take all  material  facts  and
    matters into account in coming to the conclusion  that  she  did.   She
    referred to the mitigating factors that the Appellant was only  15  and
    had been influenced by others but does not appear to have balanced  the
    serious aggravating factors.  The  Appellant  committed  two  robberies
    armed with an imitation handgun.  In one case, he used it as a  weapon,
    "pistol whipping" the victim, causing a laceration to his  head.   This
    was plainly very serious offending, as the sentencing judge said.   The
    Appellant's age and the influence  of  others  were  reflected  in  the
    sentence, which otherwise would have been significantly longer.

17. Further, having set out the findings of Dr Cordwell that there remained
    a high risk of the Appellant reoffending with a moderate to high  level
    of future interpersonal violence, the FtTJ did not carry  this  through
    into her consideration of whether the Appellant was to be excluded from
    humanitarian protection.

18. In the circumstances, we are satisfied that the FtTJ fell into error in
    her conclusion that the Appellant was not  excluded  from  humanitarian
    protection, because she  failed  to  take  all  relevant  factors  into
    consideration.

19. It is not apparent that the FtTJ in fact made any  actual  decision  on
    the Appellant's claim for humanitarian protection.  In light of what we
    say below, such a decision will be required in due course.

    Ground 2: private life under para 399A IR

20. The parties were agreed that, as  the  longest  sentence  for  any  one
    offence was three years' detention, the Appellant's  case  fell  to  be
    considered under para. 399A.  The Respondent accepted  the  first  limb
    (lawful residence in the UK for most of his  life)  was  made  out  but
    challenged the FtTJ's findings on the other two limbs.  In relation  to
    social and cultural integration, the  Respondent  referred  to  Bossade
    (ss.117A-D interrelationship with Rules)  [2015]  UKUT  415  (IAC)  and
    stressed that integration in the UK should not be based  on  length  of
    residence alone.  The Respondent contended  that  the  pattern  of  his
    offending  demonstrated  that  he  was  not  culturally  and   socially
    integrated and that his detention from the age of 15 had  isolated  him
    from society.  The Respondent also contended that the  FtTJ  failed  to
    address the question of why a healthy,  young  single  male  could  not
    integrate into Somalia and failed to give  clear  reasons  for  finding
    that he could not form a private life on return.  The  Respondent  also
    challenges  the  FtTJ's  finding  that  there  were   very   compelling
    circumstances as set out under para. 398(c).

21. Mr Hoshi contended that this ground was wholly  devoid  of  merit.   He
    said that the FtTJ's decision on the second limb was clearly not  based
    on length of residence alone and that the challenge to the finding that
    he was socially and  culturally  integrated  into  the  UK  amounts  to
    nothing more than a  bare  disagreement  with  the  FtTJ's  conclusion.
    Further, he supported the FtTJ's conclusion that there  would  be  very
    significant  obstacles  to  his  integration  in   Somalia   as   being
    underpinned by detailed and careful reasoning.  He  pointed  out  that,
    even if the Respondent was successful  on  the  arguments  under  para.
    399A, the finding that there are "very compelling circumstances" within
    the meaning of para.398(c) would  mean  that  the  public  interest  in
    deportation would be outweighed and the FtTJ's decision  on  Article  8
    grounds must be preserved.   The  Respondent  had  not  identified  any
    separate grounds  for  challenging  that  finding,  although  Mr  Hoshi
    accepted that the grounds did contain a bare challenge to that finding.

22. At paragraphs 100 and 101 of the decision,  the  FtTJ  found  that  the
    Appellant was socially and culturally  integrated  into  the  UK.   She
    noted the Respondent's argument that the  Appellant's  offending  meant
    that he was not socially and culturally integrated.  Against this,  she
    noted that the Appellant had lived here since he was 4  years  old  and
    that he attended school here.  He speaks English fluently and had local
    friends.  Indeed, she noted that he was involved in offending behaviour
    with local contacts.

23. We do  not  think  that  the  involvement  in  offending  with  British
    criminals can  properly  be  relied  on  as  demonstrating  social  and
    cultural integration.  Offending behaviour cannot properly be  said  to
    evidence  social  integration.   However,  this  part  of  the   FtTJ's
    reasoning needs to be  read  in  light  of  the  observation  that  the
    Appellant was influenced by others.  Those others, it appears, were the
    "local contacts".  The FtTJ might have expressed herself better but  if
    paragraph 100 is read as a whole it is clear that she  understood  that
    the Appellant's offending counted against him in considering the  issue
    of integration but did not consider that  it  prevented  a  finding  of
    social and cultural integration in all the circumstances of the case.

24. We agree with Mr Hoshi's submission that it is  readily  apparent  that
    the FtTJ's decision was not based on length of residence alone.   While
    there are some similarities with the case of Bossade, equally there are
    differences.  Bossade was older  than  this  Appellant  and  had  spent
    significant periods of his residence in prison, excluded from  society.
    Even when not in prison, his  pattern  of  offending  showed  that  his
    lifestyle was anti-social.  Each case must,  of  course,  turn  on  its
    particular facts.  The Appellant had come to the UK at the age of 4 and
    was 15 when he committed the relevant offences.  He had  been  excluded
    from society through his detention  and  had  not  spent  time  in  the
    community as an adult.   His  behaviour  continued  to  be  anti-social
    during his first three years  in  custody,  but  he  then  became  more
    settled and compliant.  The FtTJ, who had the benefit  of  hearing  the
    Appellant give evidence, had to weigh the factors pointing towards  and
    away from social and cultural integration.  Having done that, she found
    in the Appellant's favour on this issue.

25. We do not say that all judges would have reached the  same  conclusion.
    However,  this  was  a  case  in  which  a   balancing   of   competing
    considerations was required, and we consider that the FtTJ was entitled
    to reach the conclusion that she did.

26. The FtTJ dealt with  the  question  of  whether  there  would  be  very
    significant obstacles to the Appellant's integration back in Somalia or
    Somaliland at paragraphs 102 to 111.  On any view, this involved fairly
    detailed reasoning.

27. The FtTJ properly cited the leading case, Kamara v SSHD [2016] EWCA Civ
    813 and also had regard to the Country Guidance in MOJ & Ors (Return to
    Mogadishu) Somalia CG [2014] 442 (IAC).  The FtTJ  therefore  correctly
    identified the legal framework within which she was to consider all the
    evidence placed before her.

28. The Respondent complains that the FtTJ "failed to give clear reasons as
    to why a healthy young single male who would have had the benefit of  a
    United Kingdom education where there are no language issues  would  not
    despite some difficulties and challenges not be able to form a  private
    life".  With  respect,  this  somewhat  misstates  what  the  FtTJ  was
    required to decide.  She was not considering whether "a  healthy  young
    single male" could form a private life but whether this young man  with
    his particular circumstances could.  She made important findings, which
    are not  challenged,  including  that  he  would  have  no  support  or
    financial provision from his family; he had very limited  understanding
    of his clan background and would not get support from a clan; he  would
    have no reasonable prospect of securing employment.  The Appellant  had
    not returned to Somalia at all since he left.  Mr Hoshi further pointed
    out that the Appellant's ties  to  Somaliland  were  in  practice  non-
    existent.  His paternal grandfather had been born there into a majority
    clan but had left when he  was  young.   The  Appellant  had  no  other
    connection to Somaliland.

29. It is true that the FtTJ did  not  refer  to  the  possibility  of  the
    Appellant taking advantage of the  reintegration  package  worth  �1500
    which  is  mentioned  in  MOJ.   It  is  not  clear  whether  this  was
    specifically raised before her.  However, even if it  was,  we  do  not
    consider the failure to specifically mention that amounts to  an  error
    of law given the thorough reasoning set out in the decision.

30. The FtTJ gave more than adequate reasons for  her  conclusion  on  this
    issue.  Her reasoning contains no error of law and she was entitled  to
    decide as she did.

31. Within Ground 2, the Respondent also challenges the FtTJ's finding that
    there were "very compelling circumstances"  in  the  Appellant's  case.
    The Respondent refers to paragraph 116 of the decision.  If  fact,  the
    finding and the reasoning for it comes earlier, see paragraphs  112  to
    113.  Given our conclusion that the FtTJ was entitled to find that  the
    Appellant's case fell within para. 399A, it is unnecessary  for  us  to
    consider this aspect further.

32. We reject Ground 2 of the Respondent's appeal  and  uphold  the  FtTJ's
    decision in relation to Article 8.

    Ground 3: Article 3

33.  The Respondent challenges the FtTJ's  decision  that  the  Appellant's
    Article 3 rights would be breached on return.  The  Respondent  submits
    that the FtTJ failed to give clear reasons  for  her  conclusion.   The
    Respondent also complains that the  FtTJ  failed  to  take  account  of
    assistance  available  from  the  Facilitated  Returns  Scheme  or  the
    possibility of clan support.  It is also contended that,  having  found
    that the Appellant was unskilled, she failed to  take  account  of  the
    prospect of unskilled work or self-employment, given the economic  boom
    in Mogadishu.  Mr Avery suggested that an able-bodied person should not
    have a difficulty in reintegrating.

34. Mr Hoshi for the Appellant  argues  that  this  aspect  of  the  FtTJ's
    decision as well-reasoned.  He says that  the  FtTJ  went  through  the
    checklist in MOJ carefully, explaining her finding  that  he  would  be
    destitute on return.  He  contends  that  no  error  of  law  has  been
    identified and that Ground 3 is in reality  just  a  bare  disagreement
    with the FtTJ's decision.

35. The FtTJ set out the County Guidance from the headnote of MOJ in  full.
    However, she did not refer to the subsequent decision of the  Court  of
    Appeal in Secretary of State for the Home Department v Said [2016] EWCA
    Civ 442, to which we referred the parties.  It would appear  that  Said
    was probably not drawn to her attention.  Indeed,  it  was  not  relied
    upon in the Respondent's Grounds of Appeal.

36. In Said, Burnett LJ said [28]:

         "I am unable to accept that if a Somali national were able to bring
         himself within the rubric of para 408, he  would  have  established
         that  his  removal  to  Somalia  would  breach  article  3  of  the
         Convention.  Such  an  approach  would  be  inconsistent  with  the
         domestic and Convention jurisprudence ..."

    Paragraph 408 deals with the point included as xi. in the headnote.

37. Although the FtTJ did carefully consider the checklist in MOJ  and,  as
    we have already indicated, made important factual  findings,  including
    that the Appellant would not be  able  to  rely  on  clan  support,  it
    appears from her judgment that she  regarded  an  assessment  that  the
    Appellant fell within the category described at xi. in the headnote  as
    the end of the matter.  Having regard to Said, this represents an error
    of law and we do not consider that the FtTJ's finding  in  relation  to
    Article 3 can be maintained.

38. Having concluded that the FtTJ erred  in  law  in  her  conclusions  in
    relation to humanitarian protection and Article 3, we set  aside  those
    parts of her decision (in so far as it can be said that  she  made  any
    decision on humanitarian protection).  We consider that there needs  to
    be a further hearing in the Upper  Tribunal  for  a  re-making  of  the
    decision in those respects only.  The  FtTJ's  decision  to  allow  the
    appeal on Article 8 grounds on the basis that he came within para. 399A
    is to stand.

39. The parties are to have careful regard to the following directions:


                               DIRECTIONS

      1) Any further evidence relied on by either party is to be  filed  and
         served no later than seven days before the next date of hearing.




      2) In respect of any person whom it is proposed to call to  give  oral
         evidence, there must be a witness  statement  drawn  in  sufficient
         detail to stand as evidence-in-chief such that there is no need for
         any further examination-in-chief.  Any such witness statement  must
         be filed and served no  later  than  seven  days  before  the  next
         hearing.

    (3)  All further evidence relied on by either party must  be  contained
         within a supplementary paginated and indexed  bundle  and  must  be
         filed and served no later than seven days before the  next  day  of
         hearing.

    (4)  There must be a skeleton argument on behalf of the appellant filed
         and served no later  than  seven  days  before  the  next  date  of
         hearing.

    (5)  The parties must at the next hearing be  in  a  position  to  make
         submissions as to what findings of fact made by  the  FtTJ  can  be
         preserved.



Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Because this is a protection claim, unless and until  a  Tribunal  or  court
directs otherwise, the appellant is granted anonymity.  No report  of  these
proceedings shall directly or indirectly  identify  him  or  any  member  of
their family.  This direction applies both  to  the  appellant  and  to  the
respondent.  Failure to comply with this direction could  lead  to  contempt
of court proceedings.


Mr Kopieczek                                          dated 16/07/18

