
                                    [pic]

Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)  Appeal Number: PA/07856/2017


                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS


|Heard at Field House                 |Decision & Reasons Promulgated       |
|On 21 November 2019                  |On 10 December 2019                  |
|                                     |                                     |

                                   Before

                        UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE CANAVAN
                         UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE KEITH


                                   Between

                                      A
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent

Anonymity
Rule 14: The Tribunal Procedure (Upper Tribunal) Rules 2008
Anonymity was granted at an earlier stage of  the  proceedings  because  the
case involves protection issues. We find that it is appropriate to  continue
the order. Unless and until a  tribunal  or  court  directs  otherwise,  the
appellant is  granted  anonymity.  No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall
directly or indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.  This
direction applies both to the appellant and to the respondent.


Representation:
For the appellant:     Ms C. Robinson, instructed by Bindmans LLP
For the respondent:    Mr D. Clarke, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer


                            DECISION AND REASONS

1.    This decision considers the relevance of  a  historic  conviction  for
    the  purpose  of  assessing  whether  an  appellant  has  rebutted  the
    presumption  that  he  constitutes  a  danger  to  the  community  with
    reference to section 72(6) of the Nationality, Immigration  and  Asylum
    Act 2002 ("NIAA 2002").

Background

2.    The appellant entered the UK illegally on 13 March  1995  and  claimed
    asylum in a false name claiming to be a Kenyan national  (MM).  He  was
    convicted of smuggling class A  drugs  on  05  February  1996.  He  was
    sentenced to seven years' imprisonment and recommended for deportation.
    He was served with a signed deportation order under the name of  MM  on
    10 February 1997. The protection claim was refused on  11  April  1997.
    After his real nationality was determined, he was deported to Uganda on
    04 July 1999. He remained there for a matter of days  before  returning
    to the UK on a false passport, and in breach of the deportation  order,
    on 23 July 1999.

3.    On 20 March 2003 the appellant applied for leave to  remain  on  human
    rights grounds. It is unclear whether the application was made  in  his
    own name. The application was refused. On 23 March 2005 he applied  for
    leave under the Family Indefinite Leave  to  Remain  exercise  but  was
    deemed ineligible. On 07 August 2006 he was encountered by  immigration
    officials and  was  notified  of  his  liability  to  removal.  Further
    submissions were refused with a  right  of  appeal.  Immigration  Judge
    Keane dismissed the appeal  on  Refugee  Convention  and  human  rights
    grounds in a decision promulgated on 12 October 2006.

4.    It is unclear whether the appellant was  required  to  report  or  was
    listed as an absconder after his appeal  rights  became  exhausted.  No
    action appears to have  been  taken  to  remove  him  pursuant  to  the
    deportation order. He came to the attention of the authorities again on
    18 July 2010 when he was arrested for shop lifting. The  appellant  was
    recorded as having several different aliases. On 18 July  2010  he  was
    served with illegal entry papers under the alias of  MM.  A  series  of
    subsequent events led to a decision dated 10 February 2011 to refuse to
    revoke a deportation order and to refuse a further protection claim.  A
    panel of the  First-tier  Tribunal  dismissed  the  appeal  on  Refugee
    Convention and human rights grounds in a  decision  promulgated  on  24
    June  2011.  Subsequent  attempts   to   appeal   the   decision   were
    unsuccessful.  The  summary  of  the  appellant's  immigration  history
    indicates that the respondent attempted to remove the appellant in 2011
    and 2012. Several applications were made  for  judicial  review  during
    that period although the  subject  matter  and  the  outcome  of  those
    applications are unclear.

5.    During an attempted removal on 24 December 2011 the appellant  claimed
    that he was assaulted by staff and suffered injuries. Some years later,
    a High Court judge found that he suffered trespass to  the  person  and
    awarded a large sum in damages.

6.    No further attempts to remove him are recorded after  2012.  It  seems
    that the  appellant  made  a  series  of  further  submissions  to  the
    respondent who declined to treat them as  fresh  protection  and  human
    rights claims. Further submissions were made on 20  July  2015  on  the
    ground that the appellant had developed a public profile as a result of
    the publicity surrounding the civil claim which was likely to bring him
    to the attention of the Ugandan authorities.

7.    No action appeared to be taken in response to those submissions  until
    22 March 2016 when the respondent wrote to the appellant asking him  to
    complete a Statement of  Reasons  under  section  120  NIAA  2002.  The
    respondent referred to section 72 of  the  same  Act  and  provided  an
    opportunity for the appellant to rebut the presumption that  he  was  a
    danger to the community. A further asylum interview process took  place
    during 2016.

8.    In a decision dated 07 August 2017 the respondent  refused  to  revoke
    the deportation order, refused the protection and human  rights  claims
    and certified the protection claim under  section  72  NIAA  2002.  The
    decision is the subject of the current appeal.

9.    First-tier Tribunal Judge Ross ("the judge") dismissed the  appeal  in
    so far as it relied on the ground that his  removal  would  breach  the
    United Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention  but  allowed
    the appeal on human rights grounds in  a  decision  promulgated  on  26
    February 2019. The judge heard evidence from the  appellant  and  other
    witnesses. He also considered the expert medical  evidence.  The  judge
    began his consideration of the protection claim by considering  section
    72 NIAA 2002. He found that the appellant had  been  convicted  in  the
    United Kingdom  of  an  offence  and  was  sentenced  to  a  period  of
    imprisonment of at least two years. He  had  regard  to  the  Court  of
    Appeal decision  in  EN  (Serbia)  v  SSHD  [2009]  EWCA  Civ  630.  In
    considering whether the appellant had rebutted the presumption that  he
    was a danger to the community for the purpose of section 72(6) he  made
    the following findings:

         "39.     The appellant was convicted of  a  very  serious  criminal
         offence which was reflected  in  the  long  sentence  he  received.
         Whilst the appellant, since his conviction in 1995,  has  not  been
         subsequently convicted of similar serious  offences,  he  has  been
         convicted of other criminal matters. Of concern to the Tribunal  is
         that having returned to the UK in breach of his deportation  order,
         rather than keeping his  head  down,  the  appellant  continued  to
         commit criminal offences. Between 1996 and 2015, the appellant  has
         received 6 convictions for  11  offences.  The  offences  committed
         subsequent to the index offence includes an  offence  of  violence,
         namely  common  assault  for  which  [he]  was  given  a   two-year
         conditional discharge in December 2013. There is no OASYS or  other
         report which measures the appellant's risk to the community  or  of
         reoffending.

         40.      It is for the appellant to rebut the presumption  that  he
         is a danger to the community. Given  his  continued  commission  of
         criminal offences after his return to the UK, albeit that [he  has]
         not been convicted of any matter since September 2015, I find  that
         the appellant has not rebutted the presumption that he is a  danger
         to the community."

10.   Having dismissed the  appeal  in  so  far  as  it  relied  on  grounds
    relating to the Refugee  Convention  the  judge  went  on  to  consider
    whether the appellant was at real risk of serious harm for the  purpose
    of Article 3 if he was removed to Uganda. The  judge  gave  sustainable
    reasons to explain why he accepted the appellant's claim that he is  an
    openly gay man who would be at risk if returned to Uganda. He concluded
    that the appellant would be at risk of  serious  harm  amounting  to  a
    breach of Article 3 of the European Convention. The respondent did  not
    apply  for  permission  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    relating Article 3 of the European  Convention.  Those  findings  shall
    stand.

11.   The  appellant  seeks  to  appeal  the  First-tier  Tribunal  decision
    relating to the Refugee Convention on the following grounds:

      i) The First-tier Tribunal failed to identify and apply  the  material
         distinction between more and less serious crime: failing to  direct
         itself  to  the  requirement  that  future  offences  must  pass  a
         particular threshold of seriousness before they amount  to  such  a
         danger as to remove a person from the  protection  of  the  Refugee
         Convention; alternatively

     ii) The First-tier Tribunal failed to determine the question of whether
         offences which the appellant was likely to commit were sufficiently
         serious to amount to "a danger to the community" in the meaning  of
         Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention; and

    iii) Expressly or impliedly required that the appellant submit  positive
         evidence about the risk  of  reoffending  in  order  to  rebut  the
         presumption; and

     iv) Reached a  conclusion  that  was  outside  a  range  of  reasonable
         responses to the evidence.

Decision and reasons

12.   The Refugee Convention provides surrogate international protection  to
    a person who has a well-founded fear of persecution for one of the five
    reasons outlined in Article 1A(2). A protection claim is assessed  with
    reference to a low standard of proof because of the serious  nature  of
    the potential harm that a person might face.

13.   The prohibition of refoulement  contained  in  Article  33(1)  of  the
    Refugee Convention is a cornerstone  of  the  international  system  of
    protection. No Contracting State shall expel or return a refugee in any
    manner whatsoever to the frontiers of territories  where  his  life  or
    freedom  would  be  threatened  on  account  of  his  race,   religion,
    nationality, membership of  a  particular  social  group  or  political
    opinion.

14.    Article  33(2)  provides  an  exception  to  the  principle  of  non-
    refoulement. Where the  Contracting  State  considers  that  there  are
    reasonable grounds for regarding as a danger to  the  security  of  the
    country in which he is, or  who,  having  been  convicted  by  a  final
    judgment of a particularly serious crime, constitutes a danger  to  the
    community of that country, it may remove a person even though they  are
    a refugee. Because of the serious  consequences  of  such  action,  the
    nature of the threat posed to the host state by the refugee must  reach
    a  minimum  level  of  seriousness  in  order  to   justify   permitted
    refoulement.

15.   A similar provision is contained in Article 21  of  the  Qualification
    Directive (2004/83/EC), but the two provisions contrast in effect.

16.   Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention  does  not  exclude  a  person
    from recognition as a refugee. There is no principle of  revocation  of
    'Convention status'. A person remains a refugee, but the host state  is
    permitted to remove them if they constitute a danger to the host state.



17.   Article 21 of the Qualification Directive states that a  Member  State
    can revoke, refuse to renew or to grant a residence permit  recognising
    'European refugee status' under the  Directive  if  a  person  poses  a
    danger to the host Member State. A grant  of  European  refugee  status
    comes to an end and a person becomes liable to removal. But because  of
    the declaratory nature of Convention status, as opposed to  the  status
    granted by a Member State under the Qualification Directive,  a  person
    might retain Convention status even though European refugee status  has
    been revoked: see Essa (Revocation of protection  status)  [2018]  UKUT
    244. In such circumstances, a Convention refugee may still  be  subject
    to permitted refoulement under Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention.



18.   The overall burden of proof is on the host state to justify  permitted
    refoulement.

19.   Section 72 NIAA 2002 is said to reflect  the  principles  outlined  in
    Article 33(2) of the Refugee Convention. It was introduced  before  the
    Qualification Directive came  into  effect.  It  provides  a  statutory
    mechanism  by  which  the  Secretary  of  State  seeks  to   define   a
    'particularly serious crime' for the purpose of  Article  33(2),  which
    then gives rise to a  rebuttable  presumption  that  the  person  is  a
    'danger to the community'. A court or tribunal  considering  an  appeal
    against the refusal of a protection claim  must  begin  by  considering
    whether the person has rebutted the presumption that he is a danger  to
    the community. If the court or tribunal considers that the  person  has
    failed to rebut the presumption, then it must dismiss the appeal in  so
    far as it relies on Refugee Convention grounds.

20.   Despite the inaccurate description of section 72  as  "exclusion  from
    protection", when there is no such principle with reference to  Article
    33(2), the reason why the appeal must be dismissed if a person fails to
    rebut the presumption that they are  a  danger  to  the  community,  is
    because a person's removal would not amount to a breach of  the  United
    Kingdom's obligations under the Refugee Convention  if  refoulement  is
    permitted under Article 33(2).

21.   In EN (Serbia) v SSHD [2009] INLR 459 the Court of Appeal conducted  a
    detailed  analysis  of  section  72.  The  court  emphasised  that  the
    provision must be read to comply with  Article  33(2)  of  the  Refugee
    Convention [75]. In so far as section 72 relates to similar wording  in
    the Qualification Directive, it should also be  read  to  conform  with
    European law [80].

22.   If a state wishes  to  remove  a  refugee  it  must  demonstrate  both
    elements of the test i.e. that the  person  has  been  convicted  of  a
    particularly serious crime and that they constitute  a  danger  to  the
    community [39]. Both presumptions are rebuttable [80].

23.   The court found that there is no need to place a gloss on the  express
    words of Article 33(2). The  words  'particularly  serious  crime'  are
    clear, and themselves restrict drastically the types of  offences  that
    might  justify  permitted  refoulement.  So  far  as  'danger  to   the
    community' is concerned, the danger  must  be  real.  If  a  person  is
    convicted of a particularly serious crime, and there is a real risk  of
    its repetition, then they are likely to  constitute  a  danger  to  the
    community [45]. The court recognised that the danger would normally  be
    demonstrated by proof of a particularly serious offence, and  the  risk
    of its recurrence, or of the recurrence of a similar  offence,  but  it
    was not a requirement for there to be a causal connection  between  the
    two elements [46].

24.   The statutory scheme presumes  that  the  fact  of  conviction  for  a
    particularly serious crime is likely to  demonstrate  that  the  person
    constitutes a danger to the community. The assumption is that  the  two
    elements are likely to be close in time and that the conviction  itself
    is enough to make out the second  element  of  the  test  in  order  to
    justify permitted refoulement.

25.   But what happens in a case such as this, where a period  of  23  years
    elapsed between the appellant's conviction for a  particularly  serious
    crime  and  the  date  the  First-tier  Tribunal  assessed  whether  he
    continued to pose a danger to the community? It is  not  disputed  that
    the relevant date for assessment of section 72  was  the  date  of  the
    hearing.

26.   At that date, the overall burden of proof remained  on  the  Secretary
    of State to show that the appellant still constituted a danger  to  the
    community. The fact of  his  earlier  conviction  for  an  indisputably
    serious crime gave rise to a presumption that he was a  danger  to  the
    community under the statutory mechanism, but after such a  long  period
    of time, what did the  appellant  need  to  produce  to  discharge  the
    evidential burden to show that he no longer constituted a danger to the
    community?

27.   We learn from EN (Serbia) that the risk posed  by  a  person  must  be
    real. In practice, a person must still pose a risk of reoffending in  a
    similarly serious way. The assessment under Article 33(2) is not to  be
    approached in the same way  as  public  interest  considerations  under
    Article 8 of the European Convention, where  the  public  interest  may
    still justify deportation even if a person no longer poses  a  risk  of
    reoffending.  Because  of  the  potentially  serious  consequences   of
    refouling a refugee, the danger a person poses under section 72,  which
    must be read to comply with Article 33(2), must reach a  minimum  level
    of seriousness before refoulement is permitted.

28.   It is  not  disputed  that  the  appellant  committed  a  particularly
    serious crime. In addition to that, he returned to the UK in breach  of
    the deportation order, which is also an offence. Although it  was  open
    to the judge to note  that  the  appellant  was  convicted  of  further
    offences, he recognised that they were not of the same character as the
    earlier offence. He also  noted  that  the  appellant  had  no  further
    convictions for a period of at least three years preceding the date  of
    the hearing.

29.   None of the more recent convictions  attracted  a  custodial  sentence
    and did not come close to showing a repetition of the  earlier  serious
    offence. Since 2015 the appellant had not  even  been  convicted  of  a
    petty offence. At the date of the hearing, there  was  no  evidence  to
    suggest, and had not been for many years, that the appellant was likely
    to reoffend  in  the  same  way  as  he  had  done  in  1996.  In  such
    circumstances, it was unreasonable to expect the appellant to produce a
    risk assessment in the form of an OASys report when none  of  his  more
    recent convictions would have  attracted  such  an  assessment  by  the
    National Probation Service. Although  it  was  open  to  the  judge  to
    observe that the further convictions showed a disregard  for  the  law,
    that was not the test he was required to consider. It was only  if  the
    appellant continued to constitute a danger  to  the  community  of  the
    required level of seriousness that section 72 could  apply  to  justify
    permitted refoulement.

30.   We conclude that the First-tier Tribunal applied too high  a  standard
    of proof in requiring the appellant to produce further evidence in  the
    form of a formal risk assessment to rebut the presumption that he still
    constituted a danger to the community. The fact that  he  had  shown  a
    disregard  for  the  law  by  committing  further  minor  offences  was
    insufficient reason to justify a finding that he constituted  a  danger
    to the community given the  stringent  threshold  required  to  justify
    permitted refoulement under  Article  33(2).  Insufficient  weight  was
    placed on the fact that he  had  not  been  convicted  of  any  further
    offences since September  2015.  The  serious  nature  of  the  initial
    offence gave rise to a presumption  that  he  posed  a  danger  to  the
    community, but the long passage of time between that  offence  and  the
    date of the hearing demonstrated  that  the  presumption  that  he  was
    likely to reoffend in a similar manner was illusory. There  was,  as  a
    matter of fact, no evidence to show that the appellant  still  posed  a
    risk of reoffending  in  a  sufficiently  serious  way  to  engage  the
    operation of Article 33(2). In our  assessment,  the  facts  spoke  for
    themselves and were enough  to  discharge  the  appellant's  evidential
    burden in the unusual circumstances of this case.

31.   We set aside the First-tier Tribunal's findings  relating  to  section
    72. In the absence of any up to date evidence from the respondent,  who
    bears the overall burden of proving that refoulement would be justified
    under Article 33(2), we find  that  the  factual  circumstances,  taken
    alone, are enough for the appellant to rebut the  presumption  that  he
    constitutes a danger to the community at the date of the hearing.

32.   The First-tier Tribunal found that the appellant is an openly gay  man
    who would be at real risk of serious harm for the purpose of Article  3
    if returned to Uganda. This finding is  sufficient  to  show  that  the
    appellant also has a well-founded fear of  ill-treatment  amounting  to
    persecution for the purpose  of  the  Refugee  Convention.  It  is  not
    disputed that his well-founded fear of persecution would be for reasons
    of his membership of a particular social group.

33.   For these reasons, we conclude that the  appellant  has  rebutted  the
    presumption that he constitutes a  danger  to  the  community  for  the
    purpose  of  section  72(6)  NIAA  2002.  The  appellant's  removal  in
    consequence  of  the  decision  would  breach  the   United   Kingdom's
    obligations under the Refugee Convention.



DECISION

The First-tier Tribunal decision involved the making of an error of law

The decision is remade and the appeal ALLOWED on Refugee Convention grounds


Signed      [pic]      Date 05 December 2019
Upper Tribunal Judge Canavan

