
[pic]
Upper Tribunal
(Immigration and Asylum Chamber)                           Appeal Number:
PA/07291/2016

                            THE IMMIGRATION ACTS

|Heard at Columbus House, Newport          | Decision & Reasons Promulgated   |
|On 26 February 2018                       | On 20 March 2018                 |
|                                          |                                  |

                                   Before

                    DEPUTY UPPER TRIBUNAL JUDGE MCGEACHY


                                   Between

                                     KJN
                         (ANONYMITY DIRECTION MADE)
                                                                   Appellant
                                     and

               THE SECRETARY OF STATE FOR THE HOME DEPARTMENT
                                                                  Respondent


Representation:

For the Appellant:     Mr S Sidhu of Messrs Harbans Singh & Co
For the Respondent:    Mr I Richards, Senior Home Office Presenting Officer



                           DECISION AND DIRECTIONS

1.   The appellant appeals with permission against a decision  of  Judge  of
    the First-tier Tribunal Ghani, who in a determination promulgated on 19
    May 2017, dismissed the appeal of the appellant against a  decision  of
    the Secretary of State to refuse to grant asylum.

2.    The appellant's claim was based on a fear of ISIS because he  asserted
    that he had injured a member of ISIS when he was working  as  a  prison
    guard.  The appellant had stated that he had been born and had lived in
    Kirkuk and that  he  had  worked  as  a  prison  guard  in  Badush  and
    Chamchamal between January 2011 and October 2015.  It was  accepted  by
    the respondent that he had worked in those prisons.  The judge did  not
    find the appellant's claim to be credible and that issue  was  not  one
    which was before me.

3.   The judge considered whether or not the  appellant  would  be  able  to
    relocate either to Baghdad or to the  IKR.   In  paragraph  27  of  the
    determination he set out the submissions made to him but it is  unclear
    from the determination what conclusions the judge came to  with  regard
    to the issue of relocation either to Baghdad or to  the  IKR.   It  was
    accepted by Mr Richards that that was a material error of  law  in  the
    judge's determination.

4.   The fact that the judge did not find that  the  appellant's  claim  was
    credible was not an issue before me.  The sole issue was the fact  that
    there had been no clear finding on the  area  to  which  the  appellant
    could safely be returned.  It was accepted by both representatives that
    that exercise needed to be carried out.  There was also an issue of the
    exact chronology of the appellant's  movements  between  2011  and  his
    departure for Britain.  In that  regard  Mr  Sidhu  undertook  to  take
    further instructions from the appellant as there was a uncertainty   as
    to whether or not he had moved from Kirkuk to  Chamchamal  in  2011  or
    later or in 2015.

5.   There needs to be  a  finding  of  fact  on  this  point.   I  consider
    therefore that it would be appropriate for this appeal to  be  remitted
    on the sole issue of the area to which the appellant  can  be  returned
    (if any), such issue to be determined before a Judge of the  First-tier
    Tribunal.

Notice of Decision and Directions

This appeal is remitted to the First-tier Tribunal on  the  sole  issue  set
out in paragraph 4 above.

Direction Regarding Anonymity - Rule 14 of  the  Tribunal  Procedure  (Upper
Tribunal) Rules 2008

Unless and until a Tribunal or court directs  otherwise,  the  appellant  is
granted anonymity.   No  report  of  these  proceedings  shall  directly  or
indirectly identify him  or  any  member  of  his  family.   This  direction
applies both to the appellant and to  the  respondent.   Failure  to  comply
with this direction could lead to contempt of court proceedings.



Signed: [pic]                           Date: 17 March 2018

Deputy Upper Tribunal Judge McGeachy
